---
title: Letters, 1507-1532, etc.
description: Dr. Martin Luther's Letters together with the most important letters addressed to him and some other strikingly interesting documents. Letters from the year 1507 to 1532 incl.
---

This page is under construction and what you see and read is the first step or the beginning of a process to get the best responsive websites for mobile phones and devices, which until now (2024) has not been created yet with Lutheran writings and books.

The main reason to publication of step one (or version 0.1.0) is the search functionality that can be used to searching for words or phrases (to find where Luther was writing it and reference to it).

## Important letters, 1507-1532, etc.

**Dr. Martin Luther\'s**

**Complete Writings.**

published by

**Dr. Joh. Georg Walch.**

Twenty-first volume.

First part.

**Dr. Luther\'s letters.**

(First section.)

New revised stereotype edition.

**St. Louis, Mo.**

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE

1903

**Dr. Martin Luther\'s letters**

together with

the most important letters addressed to him and some other striking
interesting writings.

Letters from the year 1507 to 1532 incl.

**Published anew on behalf of the Ministry of the German Lutheran
Evangelical Synod**

**of Missouri, Ohio and other States.**

St. Louis, Mo.

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

1903

**\
Foreword**.

The volume in which Walch published the letters of Luther known to him
was published in 1749, more than 150 years ago. Since then, this
epistolary literature has experienced such an increase that it has not
been possible to include the newly discovered letters in one volume in
addition to the existing ones. There were now two ways open to us, in
order to counteract this unfortunate state of affairs:

First. We were able to print in one volume the material offered by
Walch, revised of course, and in a [second]{.underline}, a
[supplementary volume, the]{.underline} writings that have become
accessible so far; and no one could have complained about the division
into two volumes, because, according to the original plan of our
edition, it was not intended to increase Walch\'s, but only to revise
it.

Secondly. We were able to insert the newly added material into the
already existing material in a suitable place, and thus produce [a few,
chronologically ordered letters collection,]{.underline} which, however,
had to be distributed over two buildings because of its large volume.

The choice could not be difficult for us, and so we have divided the
twenty-first volume into two sections, which, however, receive
consecutive pagination and consecutive numbers.

The most important collections of Luther\'s letters, which appeared
after Walch, namely those of D. [Gottfried Schütze]{.underline},
\"Martin Luthers bisher ungedruckte Briefe\", 3 volumes, Leipzig 1780
and 1781, 8th, furthermore: [Karl Faber]{.underline}, \"D. Martin
Luthers Briefe an Albrecht, Herzog von Preußen\", from the originals in
the secret archive at Königsberg. Königsberg 1811, 8th, and the *D. Mar-
tini Lutheri Epistolae, studio et opera b.* edited by Christoph Ranner.
*G. Th. Strobelii, Past. olim Woehr- densis, collecta. Norimberg. 1814,
8.*, marked as *Strobel-Ranner,* have already been used in the work,
which has the title: \"Dr. Martin Luthers Briefe, Sendschreiben und
Bedenken, vollständig aus den verschiedenen Ausgaben seiner Werke und
Briefe, aus andern Büchern und noch unbenutzten Handschriften gesammelt,
kritisch und historisch bearbeitet von Dr. [Wilhelm Martin Leberecht de
Wette]{.underline}, Pro-

VI Foreword.

fessor of theology at Basel.\" 5 vols, Berlin 1825 to 1828, 8. To this
has been added a sixth volume: \"Die in den fünf Theilen \[De Wette\'s\]
fehlenden Briefe und Bedenken Luthers nebst zwei Registern. Collected,
edited, and published using de Wette\'s estate by [*Lic. theol.* Johann
Karl Seidemann]{.underline}, pastor at Eschdorf near Dresden.\" Berlin
1856, 8.

After De Wette\'s edition, a reprint of Luther\'s German letters from De
Wette first appeared in the so-called Erlanger Ausgabe der Werke
Luthers: \"Deutsche Briefe. After the oldest editions critically and
historically edited by D. [J. K. Irmischer.]{.underline}\" Frankfurt a.
M. and Erlangen, 4 volumes, 1853 and 1854. This collection is a mere
reprint, without all self-activity, without all criticism, with
retention of all De Wette\'s errors, for incorrect letters, incorrect
readings, incorrect punctuation, incorrect time determinations,
incorrect superscriptions, incorrect proofs are retained with the
greatest fidelity, while De Wetter\'s indications of content are
omitted; hence it is of no value to us, with the exception of the second
supplement to the 56th volume. The first volume of the book is the first
volume of the book, but it has already been included by Seidemann in De
Wette, vol. VI, and therefore does not provide us with any information.

Since then [Seidemann]{.underline} published his Lutherbriefe in 1859,
[Burkhardt]{.underline} in 1866 \"Dr. Martin Luthers Briefwechsel\" and
[Kolde]{.underline} in 1883 the *Analecta Luthe*

*rana*, which will be discussed below.

The latest edition of Luther\'s letters, which is still being published,
is: \"Dr. Martin Luthers Briefwechsel. Edited and annotated by Dr. th.
[Ernst Ludwig Enders]{.underline}, pastor at Oberrad near Frankfurt am
Main.\" Vol. 1 to 8, Frankfurt a. M. 1884-1898. This collection forms a
part of the Erlangen edition of Luther\'s complete works. According to
the original plan of this edition, to bring only Luther\'s writings, one
would have had to limit oneself to Luther\'s letters written in Latin,
without any further addition, but one has preferred instead, as already
Burkhardt and Kolde did, an \"exchange of letters\". Now it cannot be
denied that in many cases Luther\'s letters can only be understood
through the letters addressed to him; therefore, we have also followed
this example to some extent by including many foreign letters. The work
of D. Enders is thorough, industrious, and worthy of thanks, and we have
used it as a basis for the preparation of the greater part of our first
section. Enders did not reprint the German letters in the Erlangen
edition, but only referred to them and made the necessary improvements.

The letters of Luther, which Walch has assigned to the twenty-first part
of Luther\'s complete writings, are divided by him into three classes.
The first includes those that have already been published in

Foreword. . VII

The second contains the letters which, originally written in Latin, were
not yet part of any collection of Luther\'s writings, but were first
published by Walch in German translation; the third contains Luther\'s
letters which had never been printed before. Each of these sections is
arranged chronologically. The many letters that have already been
included in earlier volumes, namely in the catechetical writings, vol.
X, and in the reformätion writings, vol. XV to XX, Walch has not
reprinted in this volume, but only referred to them. Foreign letters,
which are found in large numbers in other volumes, have not been
included by Walch in this volume, nor has a record of them been given.

Understandably, we could not follow Walch\'s arrangement, but, as all
recent editions have done, we have included the letters in chronological
order, including those that are not by Luther. In the selection of the
latter, we have limited ourselves to the more important ones, the most
important ones have been given unabridged, of others only a registry,
unimportant and uninteresting ones have been omitted. We have referred
to those already printed in other volumes.

First of all, we thought to give the dear reader only the largest part
of the first section of these letters, as far as they are contained in
the Erlangen correspondence, from

The reason for this is that, as already stated in the preface to the
17th volume of our edition, p. VII^b^ , we are completely dependent on
the editions published in Germany for the reproduction of the letters,
since we do not have the sources at our disposal here, and also the
Erlangen correspondence, which has been in publication since 1884, has
only now reached the year 1531 in its eighth volume. But the
consideration that about as much time, namely again eighteen years,
would pass until the completion of this German edition, and for us about
two more years would be necessary to edit and publish this material, has
led us to the decision to tackle the rest immediately, and, as well as
we are able, to add it to our edition already now, whereby it achieves
its completion. We have been encouraged in this by the fact that the
edition of Luther\'s letters by [De Wette]{.underline} is, to this day,
the best and most complete and a treasure worth owning. Secondly, that
many corrections, explanations and additions have been added by
[Seidemann]{.underline} in the sixth volume of De Wette\'s edition. From
the *[Corpus Reformatorum]{.underline}* we have many additions.

The first part of the book is a collection of letters.
[Burkhardt\']{.underline}s \"Dr. Martin Luther\'s Correspondence with
Many Unknown Letters\" has given us (besides his many corrections, more
precise references

VIII Foreword.

and explanations of De Wette) [yielded]{.underline} a [rich
harvest]{.underline}. Similarly, [Kolde,]{.underline} \"*Analecta
Lutherana*. Briefe und Actenstücke zur Geschichte Luthers. At the same
time a supplement to the previous collections of his correspondence\".
We were able to take a number of letters from Seidemann\'s
\"[Lutherbriefe]{.underline}\" and [Krafft\'s]{.underline} \"Briefe und
Documente aus der Zeit der Reformation\" (Letters and Documents from the
Time of the Reformation) 2c. We hope that the thus enriched De
Wette\'sche edition (which we take as a basis) will be welcome to the
purchasers of our edition.

However, we have not only been concerned with enriching Walch\'s and De
Wette\'s editions, but primarily with correcting both the chronology and
the text itself, and we believe that we have succeeded in the former in
a few cases, but in the latter in many, even in texts supplied by
Burkhardt and Kolde.

In this volume, too, we have translated the originally Latin letters
(with very few exceptions) [into German]{.underline}. To show how highly
necessary this was, we leave here some samples of Walch\'s translation,
to which we could add many more. Walch, Vol. XXI, 521: *parce verbis* ==
give me credit for my words. Walch: \"und schweiget\". - Col. 644:
*carnem mean quoque valere cupio* == I also wish my relatives good
welfare. Walch: \"I also want my flesh to be healthy.\" - Col.

646: *De autoritate* Ecclesiast*. super purgatorio nihil scio* \-- I
know nothing about a saying of the preacher Solomon about purgatory.
Walch: \"What the church is able to say about purgatory, I do not
know.\"-Col. 658: *Jejunus est, sensum scripturae magis quam verba
retinens* **==** He \[the Sermon\] is sober, and keeps more the sense
than the words of Scripture. Walch: \"He is a dry miserable man who\"
2c. - Col. 672: *Ecce Tessaradeca tuam, imo nostram, mi Spalatine.
Responsionem meam adversus Stolpensem, tolpensem et talpensem schedulam
non mireris animosiorem etc.* - See, there you have your, 1) yes, our
Tessaradecas, my dear Spalatin. Don\'t be surprised that my answer to
the Stolpian, doltish and foolish note is somewhat vehement and proud.
Walch: \"Behold your, yes, my Four Tenths, dear Spalatin, namely the
answer to the Stolpish, Doltish and Talpish d. i. blind mole note: do
not be surprised\" rc. Walch has thus identified Luther\'s delicious
consolation for the Elector in fourteen chapters **(***Tessaradecas
consolatoria*) (St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1816) with \"Luther\'s answer
to the note, which went out under the official\'s seal at Stolpen\" (St.
Louis edition, vol. XIX, 462). - Col. 674: *ut observatori meo naso vix
illudant* == that they can hardly fool my observing nose. Walch: \"that
they can hardly fool my

1\) This is what Luther calls this writing because Spalatin was supposed
to translate it into German for the Elector.

Foreword. . IX

thin noses may mock.\"-Col. 719: *ut locum tuum non dimittas* - that you
do not leave your place. Walch: \"that he \[Satan\] find no quiet place
with you\". - Col. 743: *ut etsi non audeant asserere, non tamen possint
dissuaderi* == that although they dare not assert \[my stay at
Wartburg\], yet they cannot be dissuaded. Walch: \"that, though I may
not affirm it, yet I may not dissemble or deny (*sic*) it: so\" 2c. -
Col. 745: *a papistis ferior* == I have peace before the papists. Walch:
\"and am beaten by the papists\". - Col. 780: *Nam et Principis ut
christiani fratris, etiam Principis nomine, interest ==* For it is also
to the prince as a Christian brother, also because he is a prince.
Walch: \"For it is also the prince and the brother Christian, because of
the prince\'s interest.\" - Col. 921: *[Miserere mei]{.underline} jam
**praedestinatus fieri ***- \[the 51st Psalm\] \"GOtt, sei mir gnädig\"
is already ordered to be made \[into a German chant\]. Walch: \"Have
mercy on me, that I am thus erwählet before.\" But this may be enough.

We have devoted the same effort and care to the German letters as to the
Latin ones. Some of these offer no less a challenge to the editor.

The first part of the book is a book that presents more difficulties
than the most difficult Latin ones, which we have set ourselves the task
of overcoming.

Where we have departed from De Wette and the Erlangen correspondence in
the determination of time, we have given a detailed account of it.

We have often taken notes and explanations from the Erlanger
Briefwechsel, without giving credit to it each time. However, we have
been very limited in the use of the notes compared to the Erlanger
Briefwechsel, because there the notes sometimes take up more space than
the text.

It should also be noted that from then on, following De Wette, we no
longer use the designation of the Erlangen correspondence for
Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection at the library in Wolfenbüttel:
\"Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108\", but like De Wette: \"Aurifaber,
Bd. Ill\"; likewise, although we know that the Anhalt archive has been
moved from Dessau to Zerbst, with De Wetternd Burkhardt, when indicating
where the originals are, the designation: \"The original is in Dessau.\"

Now, may the merciful God give His blessing and prosperity also to the
course of this volume. Praise, glory and thanks be to Him that He has
helped us to this point.

> St. Louis, circa Pentecost 1903.

**A. F. Hoppe.**

**Index of Luther\'s letters,**

**which indicates both the letters contained in this volume and those in
other volumes to which reference is made here.**

**According to the time sequence.**

> **Column**

1\. to Joh. Braun, Vicarius in Eisenach. April 22, 1507 1

2 To Joh. Braun, priest in Eisenach. March 17, 1509 3

3\. to the prior Andreas Lohr and the convent of the Augustinians at
Erfurt. Sept. 22, 1512 5

4\. receipt of Luther. Oct. 9, 1512 7

5\. to Georg Spalatin, court preacher of Chur. Early 1514. 8

6 To the prior Andreas Lohr and the elders of the Erfurt Augustinian
convent. June 16, 1514 10

7\. to Spalatin. Aug. 5, 1514 13

8\. to the dean and the doctors of the theologi

The first year of the program. 21 Dec. 1514 15

9\. to Spalatin. Dec. 26, 1515 18

1V. To Georg Spenlein, Augustinian at Memmingen.

8 April 1516 . 19

11 To Georg Leister, Augustinian at Erfurt. 15 Apr. 1516 22

12 Air Joh. Bercken, Augustinian prior in Mainz. May 1, 1516 23

13 To Conrad Mutianus Rufus, Canonicus in Gotha. May 29, 1516 25

14 To Joh. Lang, prior in Erfurt. May 29, 1516 26

15\. \" Georg Spalatin. June 8, 1516 29

16\. \" Michael Dressel, Augustinian prior in Neustadt. June 22, 1516 31

17\. to Joh. Lang. June 30, 1516 33

18\. \" Spalatin. August 24, 1516 35

19\. \" Joh. Lang. August 30, 1516 36

20\. \" Michael Dressel and the Augustinian Chapter at Neustadt. 25
Sept. 1516 38

21\. to Joh. Lang. October 5, 1516 41

22 \" Spalatin. Around October 5, 1516 43

23 \" Joh. Lang. Around mid-October 1516 44

24\" Spalatin. 19 Oct. 1516. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, appendix,
no. 3.

25\. to Joh. Lang. 26 Oct. 1516 49

26\. \" Joh. Lang. 29. Oct. 1516 53

27 Spalatin. 14 Dec. 1516 53

28\. \" the provost at Leitzkau, Georg Mascov. Late 1516 (?) 57

29 To the provost at Leitzkau, Georg Mascov. Late 1516 58

30 Christoph Scheurl to Luther. January 2, 15l7 58

**Column**

31\. to Christoph Scheurl. January 27, 1517 60

32 To Joh. Lang. February 8, 1517, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 16.

33 To Joh. Lang. March 1, 1517, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, appendix,
no. 4.

34\. to Spalatin. Spring 1517 63

35 Scheurl to Luther. I. April 1517 65

36 To Spalatin. April 3, 1517 66

37\. \" Spalatin. April 9, 1517 66

38\. \" Christoph Scheurl. May 6, 1517 67

39\. the provost at Leitzkau, Georg Mascov.

May 17 1517 69

40 To Joh. Lang. May 18, 1517, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, appendix,
no. 1.

41 To Joh. Lang. July 16, 1517, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, appendix,
no. 2.

42\. to Joh. Lang. Aug. 6, 1517 71

43\. \" Spalatin. End of August 1517 71

44\. Sept. 4, 1517, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 26.

45\. to Christoph Scheurl. Sept. 11, 1517 72

46 Scheurl to Luther. Sept. 30, 1517 74

47 To Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz. 31 Oct.

1517\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 390.

48 Scheurl to Luther. Nov. 3, 1517 76

49 To Spalatin. In the first days of November 1517. St. Louis edition,
vol. XV, appendix, no. 11.

50: To the Elector Frederick of Saxony. Before Nov. 11, 1517 77

51 To Joh. Lang. Nov. 11, 1517, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 394.

To Spalatin. Nov. 11, 1517. St. Louis

Vol. XVIII, 28.

53\. to Christoph Scheurl. Dec. 11, 1517 79

54\. \" Spalatin. 20 Dec. 1517 81

55\. \" Spalatin. Dec. 31, 1517 84

56\. \" Johannes Aesticampianus in Wittenberg.

Beginning 1518 87

57 To Spalatin. January 18, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII;
appendix, no. 5.

58 To Hieronymus Scultetus, Bishop of Brandenburg. Probably Feb. 6,
1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 405.

59 To Spalatin. Feb. 15, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
4.

XII

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

60\. to Joh. Lang. 19 Feb. 1518 88

61 To Spalatin. Feb. 22, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
10.

62\. to Christoph Scheurl. March 5, 1518 90

63\. \" Spalatin. March 11, 1518 92

64\. March 21, 1518, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, annex, No. 3.

65\. to Wencesl. Link. March 23, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII,
536.

66 To Joh. Sylvius Egranus. March 24, 1518.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 42.

67\. to Staupitz. March 31, 1518 93

68 To Spalatin. End of March 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 1.

69 To Spalatin. Shortly before Easter \[Apr. 4\] 1518 95

70\. \" Spalatin. After April 4, 1518.. 95

71\. \" Joh. Sylvius Egranus. Beginning of April 1518 96

72\. April 15, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 418.

73 To Spalatin. April 19, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 420.

74 To Jodocus Trutfetter at Erfurt. May 9, 1518.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 410.

75 To Spalatin. May 18, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
7.

75a. To Joh. Eck. May 19, 1518. 98

76 To Staupitz. May 30, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 414.

77 To Pope Leo X (May 30) 1518. St. Louis

Vol. XV, 400.

78\. to Spalatin. June 4, 1518 100

79\. to Joh. Lang. June 4, 1518 101

80\. to Scheurl. June 15, 1518 102

81 Silvester Prierias to Luther. Second half of June 1518. St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII, 312.

82\. to Wenc. Link. July 10, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex,
no. 2.

To Spalatin, Aug. 8, 1518; St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 430.

84\. on New Year\'s Eve Prierias. At 10 Aug. 1518.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 344 and 411.

85 To Spalatin. Aug. 21, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 432.

86 To Spalatin. Aug. 31, 1518 105

87 To Staupitz. Sept. 1, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
8.

88 To Spalatin. Sept. 2, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
9.

89 Wolfgang Fabricius Capito to Luther. Sept. 4.

1518 107

90 Spalatin to Luther. Sept. 5, 1518 110

91 Staupitz to Luther. Sept. 14, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 15b.

92 To Joh. Lang. Sept. 16, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 15a.

92a. Joh. Eck to Luther. Sept. 20, 1518. (Regest.) 112

93\. to the Wittenberg friends (?). 3. or

Oct. 4, 1518 113

94 To Spalatin. Oct. 10, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
16.

95 To Melanchthon. Oct. 11, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 554.

96 To Spalatin. Oct. 14, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
17.

97 To Carlstadt. Oct. 14, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 565.

98 To Cardinal Cajetan. Oct. 14, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 571.

99 To Cardinal Cajetan. Oct. 17, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 589.

100\. to Cardinal Cajetan. 18 Oct. 1518.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 592.

101: Cajetan to Churf. Oct. 25, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 634.

102 To Spalatin. Oct. 31, 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 14.

103 Silvester Prierias to Luther. Beginning of Nov.

1518\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 412.

104 To Spalatin. Nov. 5, 1518 \... 114

105: To Spalatin. Nov. 12, 1518. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 19.

106 To Spalatin. Nov. 13, 1518 115

107\. to D. Joh. Eck. Nov. 15, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 809.

108 To Spalatin. Nov. 19, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 18.

109: To the Elector Frederick. Nov. 19, 1518.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 637.

110 To Melanchthon. Nov. 22, 1518 116

111 To Spalatin. Nov. 25, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 22.

112 To Christoph Langenmantel. Nov. 25, 1518 117

113 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 687.

114 Elector Frederick to Cajetan. 8 Dec. 1518.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 654.

115 To Spalatin. 9 Dec. 1518 120

116 To Spalatin, Dec. 9, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
26.

117 To Link. Dec. 11, 1518, St. Louis edition,

Vol. XV, Annex, No. 24.

118 To Staupitz. Dec. 13, 1518, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 23.

119 To Joh. Reuchlin. Dec. 14, 1518 121

120 To Spalatin. 20 Dec. 1518. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
25.

121 Scheurl to Luther. Dec. 20, 1518 124

122 To Spalatin. Dec. 21, 1518 129

123 Scheurl to Luther. Dec. 22, 1518 131

124 Scheurl to Luther. Jan. 1, 1519 133

Luther\'s transcript for the negotiations with Miltitz. St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 691.

126 To the Elector Frederick. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 696.

127 To the Elector Frederick. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 698.

128 To Spalatin. Jan. 7, 1519 135

128a. To Joh. Eck. 7 Jan. 1519 135

129 To Spalatin. Jan. 10, 1519 138

130\. \" Scheurl. 13 Jan. 1519 139

131\] Spalatin. Jan. 14, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
5.

132 Dungersheim to Luther. Jan. 18, 1519 (1st letter). St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII,462.

133 Au Dungersheim. After January 18, 1519. St. Louis Edition, Vol.
XVIII, 470.

134 To Spalatin. Jan. 19, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 708.

135 To the Elector Frederick. On or after 19 Jan. 1519. St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 1726.

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

xliii

> **Column**

136 To Spalatin. Jan. 20, 1519 141

137 To Spalatin. Jan. 24, 1519 142

138 Dungersheim to Luther. End of Jan. (?) 1519

(2nd letter). St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 472.

139 To Andreas Carlstadt. End of Jan. or Ans.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 810.

140 To Joh. Sylvius Egranus. 2 Feb. 1519.

St. Louis ed., vol. XV, anh.,-no. 30.

141 To Joh. Lang. Feb. 3, 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 43.

142 To Spalatin. Feb. 7, 1519 144

143 To Spalatin. 12 Feb. 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XV, Annex, No. 6.

144 To Spalatin. 12 Feb. 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. VIII, 258.

145 Joh. Frobenius to Luther. Feb. 14, 1519.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1374.

Capito to Luther. 18 Feb. 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 689.

146a. To Joh. Eck. Feb. 18, 1519 146

147 The University of Leipzig to Luther. 19 Feb.

1519\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 836.

148 To Duke George of Saxony. Feb. 19, 1519 147

149 Joh. Eck to Luther. 19 Feb. I519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 842.

150\. to Staupitz. 20 Feb. 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 31.

151 Au Scheurl. 20 Feb. 1519 149

152\. \" Wilibald Pirkheimer. Feb. 20, 1519 150

153\. \" the Elector Frederick. Feb. 23, 1519 152

154\. \" Dungersheim. Feb.(?) 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XVIII, 498.

155 To Pope Leo X. Prob. End of Feb. 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 705.

156\. Duke George of Saxony to Luther. March 4

1519 154

157 To Spalatin. March 5, 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 32.

158: To the Elector Frederick. March 13, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 720.

159 To Spalatin. March 13, 1519 155

160 Dungersheim to Luther. March? 1519 (3rd letter).

St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 502.

161 To Dungersheim. March? 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XVIII, 528.

162 To the Elector Frederick. March 27, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. IV, 206.

163 To Erasmus. March 28, 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XVIII, 1582.

164 Pope Leo X to Luther. March 29, 1519 157

165 To Spalatin. After 24 Feb. 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 835.

166 To Spalatin. After 24 Feb. 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 831.

167 To Spalatin. April 5, 1519 159

167a. To Joh. Eck. April 5, 1519 160

168 To Joh. Lang. April 13, 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 44.

169 To Duke George of Saxony. April 28, 1519 161

170 Miltitz to Luther. May 3, 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 724.

171 Miltitz to Spalatin. May 3, 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 733.

172 Miltitz to Elector Frederick. May 3, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 730.

> **Column**

173 Duke George of Saxony to Luther. May 7, 1519 163

174 To Spalatin. May 8, 1519 163

175\. \" Elector Frederick. Mid-May 1519 165

176\. \"The Franciscans at Jüterbock. May 15, 1519. St. Louis edition,
vol. XVIII, 1362.

177 To Spalatin. May 16, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
33.

Of the priests\' way of life 166

178 To Joh. Lang. May 16, 1519. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 34.

179 To Duke George of Saxony. May 16, 1519 169

180 To Carl von Miltitz. May 17, 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 727.

181 To Spalatin. May 22, 1519 170

182 Duke George of Saxony to Luther. May 23

1519 172

183 To Spalatin. May 24, 1519 172

184 To Martin Glaser, Augustinian Prior at Ram-

sau. May 30, 1519 174

185 Erasmus to Luther. May 30, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII,
1586.

186 To Joh. Lang. June 6, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 45.

187th Contract between Eck, Carlstadt and Luther.

June 26, July 4 and 14, 1519 175

188\. note. July 15, 1519 177

189 Joh. Poduschka to Luther. July 16, 1519.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1370.

190\. wenc. Rosdalowsky to Luther. July 17, 1519.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1373.

191 To Spalatin. July 20, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1162.

192 Joh. Eck to the Elector Friedrich. July 22, 1519, St. Louis edition,
vol. XV, 1286.

193 Prince Frederick to Eck. July 24, 1519.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1289.

194 To Joh. Lang. July 26, 1519 179

195: Carlstadt to the Elector. July 31, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1290.

196 Scheurl to Luther. Aug. 3, 1519 180

197 To Spalatin. Aug. 15, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1142.

198\. to Spalatin. Before Aug. 18, 1519 180

199 Luther and Carlstadt to the Elector.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1291.

200: Luther and Carlstadt to the Elector.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1306.

201 To Spalatin. Aug. 18, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 54.

To Spalatin. Aug. 20, 1519 182

203 Dungersheim to Luther (4th letter). Beginning

St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 528.

204 To Dungersheim. Early September 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 530.

205\. to Peter Lupinus and Carlstadt. Ans. Sept.

1519\. St. Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1352.

206 To Joh. Lang. Sept. 3, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 35.

207\. to Spalatin. Sept. 22, 1519 184

208: To the Elector Frederick. Sept. 22, 1519.

St. Louis ed., vol. X, 1816.

209 Miltitz to Luther. Sept. 26, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 749.

210 Churf. Friedrich to Spalatin. Sept. 30, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 750.

XIVRegister of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

211 To Franz Günther. Sept. 30, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII,
1418.

212 To Dungersheim. St. Louis edition, vol. X VIII, 530.

213 To Hieronymus Emser. End of Sept. 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 1212.

214 To the Elector Frederick. Oct. 1, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 751.

215 To Staupitz. Oct. 3, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
36.

216 To Spalatin. 10 \[?\] Oct. 1519. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 752.

217 Miltitz to the Elector. Oct. 10, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 753.

218\. Churf. Friedrich to Miltitz\.... 12 Oct. 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 754.

219 Churf. Friedrich to Eck. Oct. 12, 1519 187

220 To Spalatin. Oct. 13, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 37.

221\. to Martin Seligmann. Oct. 14, 1519 188

222 Miltitz to the Elector\^ Oct. 14, 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 755.

223 To the Elector Frederick. Oct. 15, 1519.

St. Louis ed., vol: XV, 757.

224\. to Spalatin. Oct. 15, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 50.

225 To Spalatin. Oct. 15, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 48.

226 To Duchess Marg. of Brunswick. Mid-Oct. 1519. St. Louis edition,
vol. X, 1230.

227 To Joh. Lang. Oct. 16, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 49.

Crotus Rubianus to Luther. Oct. 16, 1519 191

229: Churf. Friedrich to Miltitz. 17 Oct. 1519.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 758.

230 Crotus Rubianus to Luther. Oct. 31, 1519 197

231 To Spalatin. October? 1519 199

232 To Spalatin. Nov. 1, 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
46.

233\. an corner. Ans. Nov. 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1170.

234: To Spalatin. Nov. 7, 1519, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
47.

235\. to Spalatin. Nov. 7, 1519 200

236 Eck an den Churf. 8. Nov. 1519. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1308.

237 To Spalatin. Nov 19, 1519 203

238\. to Spalatin. 20. stov. 1519 204

239\. to Spalatin. Before Nov. 29, 1519206

240\. to Spalatin. 2st. Nov. 1519 207

241\. to Spalatin. Dec. 3, 1519. St. Louis Aus-

gabe, vol. XV, annex, no. 53.

242 To Spalatin. Dec. 7, 1519 208

243\. to Spalatin. 8 Dec. 1519. . 209

244 To Spalatin. After December 8, 1519 .

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 51.

245 Thomas Fuchs to Luther. Dec. 12, 1519. 211

246\. to Spalatin. 18 Dec. 1519 212

247\. \" Joh. Lang. 18 Dec. 1519 214

248\. \" Thomas Fuchs. 23 Dec. 1519 216

249\. to Spalatin. Dec. 25, 1519. 218

250 To Spalatin. Dec. 31, 1519 219

251\. to Spalatin. 1519? 220

252 To Spalatin. Jan. 10, 1520 221

253 To Spalatin. 14 Jan. 1520. St. Louis

Ausg., vol. XIX, 1774, annex, no. 4.

> **Column**

254 To Spalatin. Jan. 18, 1520 223

255\. \" Joh. Lang. 26 Jan. 1520 224

256\. \" Spalatin. 31 Jan. 1520 225

257\. \" Archbishop Albrecht. February 4, 1520.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1382.

258 To Bishop Adolph of Merseburg. Feb. 4.

1520\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1388.

259 To Spalatin. Feb. 5, 1520 226

260 To Spalatin, Feb. 8, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
55.

261 To Spalatin. Feb. 11, 1520 229

262 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1778, annex, no. 5.

263 To Spalatin. Between 12 and 18 Feb. 1520.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 482.

264 To Spalatin. Feb. 18, 1520. 230

265 To Spalatin. 24 Feb. 1520\.... 233

Bishop Adolph of Merseburg to Luther.

Feb. 25, 1520; St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1391.

267 Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz to Luther.

Feb. 26, 1520; St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1385.

268 To Spalatin. Feb. 26, 1520 235

269 To Spalatin. Feb. 27, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 52.

270 To Spalatin. Feb. 29, 1520 236

271 To Spalatin. February 1520 238

272\. to Spalatin. March 2, 1520 239

273 To Jos. Levin Metzsch. March 12 (1520) 1530.

See Col. 1420, Nix 1519, in this volume.

274 Conrad Pellican to Luther. March 15, 1520 \... 240

275 To Spalatin. March 19, 1520 246

276\. to Joh. Lang. March 21, 1520. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 56.

277 To Alexius Chrosner. March 21, 1520 247

278 To Spalatin. March 25, 1520. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 29.

279\. to Martin Seligmann. March 25, 1520 249

280 To Spalatin. March 26, 1520 250

281 To Duke John of Saxony. March 29, 1520.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1298.

282\. to Christ. Blank. End of March 1520. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV , 1346.

283 Augustin Alveld to Luther. Beginning of April 1520

St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1002. 284. To Spalatin. April 13, 1520
252

285 To Spalatin. April 16, 1520. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 12.

286\. to Joh. Hess. April 27, 1520 254

287 To Spalatin. May 1, 1520 256

288\. to Spalatin. May 5, 1520 257

289 To Spalatin. May 5, 1520, St. Louis edition,

Vol. XV, annex, No.38.

290 To the Elector Frederick of Saxony. May 7

1520 258

291 To Spalatin. May 13, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
63.

292\. to Spalatin. May 17, 1520 260

293\. to Heinr. von Bünau. May 30, 1520 261

294\. to Spalatin. May 31, 1520 262

295\. \" Spalatin. May? 1520 263

296 Ulrich von Hütten to Luther. June 4, 1520.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1633.

297 To Joh. Hess. June 7, 1520264

298 To Spalatin. Before June 8, 1520 265

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XV

> **Column**

299 Silvester von Schaumburg to Luther. June 11, 1520, St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 1631.

300 To Spalatin. June 13, 1520 266

301\. \" Georg Kunzelt. June 15, 1520 267

302\. \" Justus Jonas. June 21, 1520 268

303\. \" Nicolaus von Amsdorf. June 23, 1520.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 266.

304 Caspar Hedio to Luther. June 23, 1520.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1377.

305\. to Spalatin. June 25, 1520 270

306 To Spalatin. June 29, 1520 271

307 To Spalatin. June or July? 1520 272

308 To Spalatin. July 9, 1520. St. Louiser Aus-

gabe, vol. XV, 1408.

309 To Spalatin. July 10, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 62.

310 Münzer to Luther. July 13, 1520 274

311 To Spalatin. July 14, 1520 278

312\. \" Spalatin. July 17, 1520 279

313\. \" Wenc. Link. July 20, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex,
no. 64.

314 To Spalatin. July 22, 1520 281

315 To Joh. Thurzo, Bishop of Breslau. July 30, 1520 283

316 To Mich. Wittiger, canon in Breslau.

July 30 1520 284

317 To Joh. Heß in Breslau. July 30, 1520285

318 To Peter Mosellanus at Leipzig. July or

Aug. 1520 286

319 To Joh. Voigt at Magdeburg. Aug. 3, 1520 287

320\. to Spalatin. Aug. 5, 1520 289

321 To Spalatin. Aug. 10, 1520 290

322\. to Spalatin. Aug. 14, 1520 291

323\. to Joh. Lang. Aug. 18, 1520. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 1638. \'

324\. to Wenc. Link. 19 Aug. 1520 292

325\. to Spalatin. Aug. 23, 1520. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 57.

326\. to Spalatin. Aug. 24, 1520 293

327 Miltitz to Luther. Aug. 29, 1520. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 776.

328 To Emperor Carl V. Aug. 30, 1520. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 1378.

329\. to Spalatin. Aug. 31, 1520 294

330 To Spalatin. Sept. 1, 1520. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 39.

331 To Spalatin. Sept. 11, 1520. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 13.

332\. to Günther von Bünau. Sept. 28, 1520 295

333\. \" Conrad Saum. Oct. 1, 1520 297

334\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 40.

335\. to Mr.. Tulich. Oct. 6, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 4.

336\. to Spalatin. Oct. 11, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 41.

337\. to Spalatin. Oct. 12, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 782.

338 To Pope Leo X. After October 13, 1520.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 783.

339\. to Michael Mäurer (*Muris*). 20 Oct. 1520 300

340 Duke Barnim of Pomerania to Luther.

20 Oct. 1520 303

341 To Duke John Frederick of Saxony.

Oct. 30, 1520 303

342\. to Joh. Greffendorf. Oct. 30, 1520 305

> **Column**

343 To Hermann Mühlpfort in Zwickau. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 986.

344: Franz von Sickingen to Luther. Nov. 3, 1520.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1636.

345\. to Spalatin. Nov. 4, 1520, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 27.

346\. to Spalatin. Nov. 13, 1520 306

347\. To Laz. Spengler in Nuremberg. Nov. 17, 1520 308

348\. To Joh. Lang. Nov. 28, 1520 310

349\. to Spalatin. Nov. 29, 1520 311

350\. To Fabian von Feilitzsch. Dec. 1, 1520 312

351\. Wolfgang Capito to Luther. Dec. 4, 1520.

(Regest.) 314

352\. Crotus Rubianus to Luther. Dec. 5, 1520 \... 315

353\. to Spalatin. Dec. 7, 1520 318

354\. Ulrich von Hütten to Luther. 9. Dec. 1520 \... 319

Luther\'s call to the student body in Wittenberg to appear for the
burning of the ecclesiastical law books. Dec. 10, 1520 \... 323

356\. to Spalatin. Dec. 10, 1520 324

357\. to Spalatin. Dec. 15, 1520 325

Duke John Frederick of Saxony to Luther.

20 Dec. 1520 326

359\. to Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1884.

360 To Bugenhagen. 1520 or beginning of 1521 327

361\. to Staupitz. Jan. 14, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 20.

362\. to Wenc. Link. Jan. 14, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex,
no. 66.

363\. to Spalatin. Jan. 16, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 65.

364 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 58.

365\. to Spalatin. Jan. 22, 1521 328

366 To the Elector Frederick. Jan. 25, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1887.

367\. to Spalatin. Jan. 29, 1521 329

368 To Haugold von Einsiedel. End of Jan. or beginning of Feb. 1521. St.
Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1256.

369\. to Wenc. Link. End of Jan. or Ans. Feb.

1521\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1710.

370 To Spalatin. Feb. 3, 1521 330

371 To Staupitz, Feb. 9, 1521; St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
21.

372\. to Spalatin. Feb. 17, 1521 332

373.\" Spalatin. Feb. 27, 1521 334

374\. \" Conrad Pellican in Basel. End Feb.

1521\. St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 1224.

375 To Elector Frederick of Saxony. March 3, 1521 336

376 To Spalatin. March 6, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 59.

377 To Joh. Lang. March 6, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 67.

378\. Carl V\'s Citation to Luther. March 6, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1786.

379: Carl V\'s letter of safe conduct to Luther. March 6, 1521, St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 1787.

380\. to Wenc. Link. March 7, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex,
no. 60.

381 To Spalatin. March 7, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 61.

382 Duke George\'s escort letter for Luther. March 8, 1521. St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 1790.

XVI

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

383\. to which Joh. Friedrich. March 10, 1521.

St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 1372.

384 Prince Frederick to Luther. March 11, 1521 342

385: Letter from the Elector Frederick escorting Luther.

March 12, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1789.

386 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1724.

387\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 22, 1521 343

388\. to an unnamed person. March 24, 1521 345

389\. To Joh. Lang. March 29, 1521 346

390\. To Duke John Frederick. March 31, 1521 346

391\. to Wenc. Link. April 1, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1436
and 1580.

392 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1827.

393 To Joh. Cuspinianus. April 17, 1521 348

394 Ulrich von Hütten to Luther. April 17, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1845.

395: Luther\'s transcript of his interrogation at Worms. April 17, 1521
349

396 Ulrich von Hutten to Luther. April 20, 1521.

St. Louis ed., vol. XV, 1846.

397: Landgrave Phil of Hesse\'s escort letter.

April 26, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1791.

398\. to Luc. Cranach. April 28, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1935.

399 To Emperor Carl V. April 28, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1893.

400: To the Electors, Princes and Estates of the Empire. April 28, 1521,
St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1899.

401 To Spalatin. April 29, 1521 350

402 To Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld. May 3, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1912.

403 To Melanchthon. Before May 12, 1521 351

404 To Melanchthon. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 69.

405 To Amsdorf. May 12, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
70.

406 To Agricola, May 12, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
72.

407 To Spalatin. May 14, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
68.

408 To Melanchthon. Around the middle of May 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1906.

409\. Gerbel to Luther. May 18, 1521 353

410 To Melanchthon. May 26, 1521. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 79.

411\. to Franz von Sickingen. June 1, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 814.

412 To Justus Jonas. June 8 and 20, 1521.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1056 and 1199.

413 To Spalatin. June 10, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 74.

414 To Melanchthon. July 13, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 75.

415 To \'Amsdorf. July 13, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 81.

416 To Spalatin. July 15, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 77.

417 To Spalatin. Soon after July 15, 1521 356

418\. \" Spalatin. Soon after July 15, 1521357

419\. July 31, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 78.

> **Column**

420 To Melanchthon. August 1, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 99.

421 To Melanchthon. August 3, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 100.

422\. to Spalatin. August 6, 1521 358

423 To the Christians of Wittenberg. Before Aug. 12.

1521\. St. Louis edition, vol. V, 306.

424 To Spalatin. August 15, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 73.

425 To Melanchthon, Sept. 9, 1521; St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1794.

426 To Spalatin, Sept. 9, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
76.

427 To Amsdorf, Sept. 9, 1521. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
97.

428\. to Spalatin. Sept. 17, 1521 360

429 To Haugold von Einsiedel, Hans von Dolzk and Bernh von Hirschfeld.
Sept. 17, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XII, 1438.

430 To Spalatin. Oct. 7, 1521 363

431\. to Nie. Gerbel. Nov. I. l52I. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 71.

432\. to -Spalatin. I. Nov. 1521 364

433 To the Augustinians in Wittenberg. In Nov.

1521\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1068.

434 To Melanchthon. November (?) 1521 365

435\. to Spalatin. II. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 80.

436 To Albrecht, Count of Mansfeld. Nov. 19.

1521 St. Louis edition, vol. XI, XXXIV.

437\. to his father Hans Luther. Nov. 21, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 1500.

438 To Spalatin. Nov. 22, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1800.

439 To Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 548.

440\. to Spalatin. Between Dec. 5 and 8, 1521.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 560.

440a. To Spalatin. Mid-December 1521 367

441\. to Joh. Lang. Dec. 18, 1521, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 82.

442\. to Wenc. Link. 20. Dec. 1521 370

443 Capito to Luther. Dec. 20 and 21, 1521 372

444 Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz, to Luther.

St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 552.

444a. To an unnamed person. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1732.

445\. to Amsdorf. January 13, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 83.

446\. to Melanchthon. Jan. 13, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 103.

447\. to Capito. Jan. 17, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 554.

448\. to Spalatin. Jan. 17, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 104.

449\. to Spalatin. Jan. 22, 1522 378

450 To the Wittenbergers, dated late February 1522, is not a letter but
a summary of what Luther preached March 9-13. St. Louis edition, vol.
XV, 1979.

451 To Elector Frederick. End of February 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1984.

452 Instruction of the Elector for John Oswald. St. Louis edition, vol.
XV, 1985.

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XVII

> **Column**

453 To Churf. March 5, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1989.

454 Instruction of the Elector to Hier. Prospect.

March 7, 1522. St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1994.

455 To Churf. March 7, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1998 ff.

456 To Spalatin. A forged letter, dated March 7, 1522. Walch, old
edition, vol. XXI, 14.

457 Hieron. Schürf an den Churfürsten. March 9

1522\. St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 1995.

458 Des Churfürsten Antwort an Schürf. March 11, 1522, St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 2002.

459 To Churf. March 12, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2005.

460 To Spalatin. March 13, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2003.

461 Hieron. Schürf an den Churfürsten. March 15, 1522, St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 2008.

462\. to Hartm. von Kronberg. Mid-March 1522.

St. Louis ed., vol. XV, 1662.

463\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. March 17, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2011.

464\. to Nic. Gerbel. March 18, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2013.

465\. to Duke John Frederick. March 18, 1522.

is. Louis edition, vol. X, 2226.

466\. to Wenc. Link. March 19, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 107.

467\. to Spalatin. March 24, 1522 384

468 To Joh. Hess. March 25, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2015.

469\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 26, 1522 385

470\. \" Spalatin. March 28, 1522 387

471\. \" Elector Frederick. March 28, 1522 388

472\. March 28, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 101.

473 To Spalatin. March 30, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 83.

474\. to Caspar Güttel. March 30, 1522. St. Louis Edition, vol. XV,
2016.

475\. to Spalatin. April 12, 1522 390

476\. to Joh. Lang. April 12, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 105.

477\. to Wenc. Link. April 12, 1522 392

478: The City Council of Altenburg to Luther. At

April 12, 1522 393

479 Hartmuth von Kronberg to Luther. April 14, 1522, St. Louis edition,
vol. XV, 1672.

480: To the Altenburg City Council. April 17, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2018.

481\. to Gabr. Zwilling. Apr. 17, 1522. St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2019.

482 To Spalatin. April 21, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 111.

483\. to Joh. Brismann. April 24, 1522 \... 395

484 To Spalatin. April 24, 1522 396

485 To Count Ludw. of Stolberg. April 25

1522\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 194.

Luther\'s draft for the council at Altenburg.

April 28 1522 397

487\. to Spalatin. May 5, 1522 400

488: The Council of Altenburg to Luther. May 6

1522 402

489 To Churf. Friedrich. May 8, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2020.

> **Column**

490 To the Altenburg City Council. May 8, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2023.

491\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2024.

492\. to Spalatin. May 10, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 84.

493\. to Spalatin. May 15, 1522 405

494\. \" Paul Speratus. May 16, 1522 408

495\. \" Spalatin. After May 16, 1522 410

496\. After May 16, 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 86.

497\. to Nic. Hausmann. May 19, 1522 411

498\. to Spalatin. May 20, 1522 412

499: The Council of Altenburg to Luther. May 22

1522 413

500\. to Heinr. Oldenburg. May 26, 1522 415

501\. to Gabr. Zwilling. May 27, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2025.

502 To the Altenburg City Council. May 27, 1522 \..... 416

503 To Caspar Börner in Leipzig. May 28, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 1978.

504 To Spalatin. May 29, 1522, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no.
109.

505\. to Joh. Lang. May 29, 1522 417

506 To Spalatin. After May 29, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 88.

507 To Spalatin. About the beginning of June 1522.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 87.

508 To Volkmar Stolz. June 2, 1522 419

509 To Spalatin. June 5, 1522 420

510\. to Spalatin. June 7, 1522 421

511\. to Joh. Lang. June 11, 1522 421

512\. to Paul Speratus. June 13, 1522 422

513\. to Claus Sturm. June 15, 1522 427

514\. to Joh. Lang. June 26, 1522 429

515\. to Staupitz. June 27, 1522. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 607.

516 Duke Carl von Münsterberg to Luther.

June 29 1522 431

517\. to Nic. Hausmann. June 30, 1522 433

518\. to Spalatin. July 4, 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 91.

519\. to Wenc. Link. July 4, 1522 434

520\. to Gabr. Zwilling. July 10, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 110.

521\. to Joh. Lang. July 10, 1522435

522\. To the congregation at Erfurt. July 10, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 962.

523 To the Bohemian Estates. July 15, 1522 436

524\. to Sebastian Schlick, Count of Passun. 15 July

1522\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 280.

525\. to Joh. Lang. July 16, 1522 440

526 To Spalatin. July 26, 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 92.

527\. to Adam Kraft. July 28, 1522 441

528\. to Joh. Riedtesel. July 29, 1522 442

529 To Melanchthon. July 29, 1522. St. Louis

Ed., vol. XIV, 172.

530\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 3, 1522 443

530a. Concerns about prohibited degrees of marriage. Aug. 3.

1522\. St. Louis edition, Bd/X, 628.

531\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 6, 1522 445

532\. to Spalatin. Aug. 11, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 89.

533\. to Hans von Rechenberg. August 18, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2002.

XVIII

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged by chronological order.

> **Column**

534\. to Spalatin. Aug. 20, 1522. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 90.

535\. to an unnamed person. August 28, 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 350.

536\. to Spalatin. Sept. 4, 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 93.

537 To Spalatin. Sept. 20, 1522 446

538\. \" Spalatin. Sept. 21, 1522 447

539\. \" Johann, Baron von Schwarzenberg.

21 Sept. 1522 448

540\. to Nic. Hausmann. Sept. 23, 1522 450

541\. to Spalatin. 25 Sept. 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 28.

542\. to Spalatin. Oct. 4, 1522- 451

543\. to Spalatin. Oct. 13, 1522 453

544\. Lohmüller to Luther. 20 Oct. 1522. (Regest.) 453

545\. to Elector Frederick. Nov. 2, 1522 454

546 To Spalatin. Nov. 2, 1522 455

547\. to Spalatin. Nov. 3, 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, Anh, No. 94.

548 Prince Frederick to Luther and A. Nov. 5.

1522 456

549: The Council of Altenburg to Luther. At

Nov. 9, 1522. (Regest.) 457

550 To Spalatin. Nov. 11, 1522 457

551\. to Joh. Lang. First half of November 1522.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 1772.

552\. to Spalatin. Nov. 15, 1522 458

553\. to Henning Teppen. Nov. 21, 1522 458

554\. to Wolfg. Stein. Dec. 11, 1522. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XVIII, 1428.

555\. To Spalatin. Around II Dec. 1522, 459

556\. to Joh. Heinrich, Count of Schwarzburg.

12 Dec. 1522. 461

557\. to Spalatin. 12(?) Dec. 1522. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 96.

558\. to Wenc. Link. 19 Dec. 1522. st. louiser

Vol. XV, annex, No. 95.

559\. to Spalatin. Dec. 20, 1522 462

560\. to Wolfg. Stein. Dec. 20, 1522 464

561\. to Joh. von Dolzig. 20 Dec. 1522 465

562\. to Spalatin. Before 25 Dec. 1522 466

563\. to Spalatin. Dec. 25, 1522 467

564\. to Spalatin. Dec. 26, 1522 468

565\. Duke George of Saxony to Luther. Dec. 30.

1522\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 490.

566\. to Christoph Hofmann. Towards the end of 1522.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 114.

567\. to Joh. von Dolzig. Between 1522 and 1524 469

568\. to Duke John of Saxony. Jan. 1, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 374.

569 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 112.

570 To Duke George of Saxony. 3 Jan. 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 492.

Margrave George of Brandenburg to Luther.

5 Jan. 1523. (Regest.) 470

572\. to Wenc. Link. 7 Jan. 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1780.

573 To the City Council of Stettin. Jan. 11, 1523 471

574\. to Spalatin. Jan. 12, 1523 473

575\. to Spalatin. Jan. 14, 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1782.

576\. to Wenc. Link. 16 Jan. 1523. 474

577 To Spalatin. Jan. 22, 1523 475

578\. to Nic. Gerbe. 22 Jan. 1523 477

> **Column**

579: Räch and Gemeinde zu Leisnig an Luther.

Jan. 25, 1523. (Regest.) 477

580\. to the council of Leisnig. Jan. 29, 1523 478

581 To the community of Leisnig. Soon after the

29 Jan. 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 954.

582\. to Spalatin, second half of January 1523\.... 479

583 To Hans von der Planitz. Feb. 4, 1523 480

584: Concerns of Luther, Melanchthon, and Bugenhagen: whether a prince
can oppose his subjects.

The Emperor and other princes may protect persecution for the sake of
the faith with war. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 572.

585 To Spalatin. 9 Feb. 1523 482

586 To Wilh. Nesen. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 580.

587\. to Spalatin. Feb. 25, 1523. 483

588 To the provost and canons of Wittenberg. March 1, 1523. St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, 1180.

589\. to Spalatin. March 1, 1523 484

590\. to Wolfgang Stein. March 2, 1523 485

591\. to Spalatin. Early March 1523 486

591a. To Joh. Schwanhausen. March 7, 1523 487

592 To Spalatin, March 8, 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
124.

593\. to Spalatin. March 10, 1523 488

594\. to Spalatin. Before March 12, 1523. 489

595\. v Joh. Brismann. Around March 17, 1523.

St, Louis ed, vol. XIX, 564.

596\. to Esban Hesse. March 29, 1523 491

597\. \" Spalatin. (March?) 1523 493

598\. The Brethren in Bohemia and Moravia. First months 1523. St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, 1308.

599 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1784.

600 To Spalatin. April 4, 1523 494

601 To Spalatin. April 4, 1523 495

602\. to Wenc. Link. April 8, 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex,
no. 113.

603\. to Spalatin. April 10, 1523 496

603a. To Spalatin. Around April 10, 15W 498

604\. to Leonh. Koppe. April 10, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX,
1666.

605\. to Wolfg. Stein. April 16, 1523 499

606 To Spalatin. April 21, 1523 499

607 To Spalatin. April 21, 1523 500

608\. to Spalatin. April 22, 1523. 501

609\. to Spalatin. April 22, 1523 502

610\. to Spalatin. April 25, 1523. St. Louis

Ausg., vol. XIX, 1782.

611 To the Elector Frederick. May 3, 1523\... 503

612 Spalatin to Luther. May 13, 1523 504

613\. to Wolfg. Stein. May 17, 1523 505

614 To Spalatin. Around May 20, 1523 506

615 To Spalatin. Around May 23, 1523 506

616\. to Nic. Hausmann. May 24, 1523 507

617 To Spalatin. May 27, 1523 508

618\. to Churf. May 29, 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2187.

619 To Bernhard, a converted Jew. About May 1523. St. Louis edition,
vol. XX, 1822.

620\. to Nic. Gerbel. About the beginning of June 1523\... 509

621 To Count Albrecht of Mansfeld. June 3, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2210.

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XIX

> **Column**

621a. To the scribes and printers of his sermons. St. Louis edition,
vol. XIV, 456.

622 To Spalatin. June 9, 1523 512

Directory of the Leimbach Brothers 513

623 Grand Master Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.

624\. to Count George II of Wertheim. June 17, 1523 516

625: To Three Expelled Court Maidens. June 18, 1523. St. Louis edition,
vol. X, 1930.

626\. to Jhan von Schleinitz. June 18, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 706.

627\. to Joh. Oekolampad. June 20, 1523 517

628\. to Spalatin. June 24, 1523 519

629\. Spalatin to Luther. July 10, 1523 520

630 To the imperial governors and estates of the Governors and Estates
of the Imperial Regiment at Nuremberg. Regiment at Nuremberg. Shortly
before July 11, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2208.

631 To the Canons of Wittenberg. July 11

1523\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1178.

632 To Spalatin. July 11, 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 102.

633 To Jakob Montanus. July 26, 1523 521

634\. to Joh. Crotus. End of July or Auf. August

1523\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 258.

635\. to Spalatin. July 29 or 30, 1523 522

636\. to the reader. About the end of July 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIV, 260.

637 To the Christians of Holland, Brabant and

Flanders. Ans. August 1523 524

a\. Actus of degradation and combustion

of the three martyrs at Brussels 525

b\. Articles for which the two Augustinians are burned 527

c\. Luther\'s Epistle to the Christians in Holland 2c. 528

638\. To the Christians in Liefland. August 1523.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1760.

639\. To Johann Löser. August 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1026.

610\. to Spalatin. August 3, 1523, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 125.

641\. Elector Frederick to Luther. Aug. 7, 1523 530

642\. Instruction of the Elector for digging rc. to Luther. Aug. 7,
1523\^ (Regest.) 531

643\. to Justus Jonas. Before Aug. 10, 1523 531

644\. to Elector Frederick. Aug. 11, 1523 534

645\. Schürf, Schwertfeger and Melanchthon to the Elector. Aug. 13, 1523
536

646\. to Spalatin. Aug. 14, 1523 537

647\. \" Georg Romer. 15\'. Aug. 1523 537

648\. \" Elector Frederick. Aug. 19, 1523 538

649\. \"The provost, the canons and the chapter of Wittenberg. St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, 1184.

650\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 19, 1523 539

651 To the Christians at Worms. Aug. 24, 1523.

St. Louis ed., vol. X, 1758.

652 To the City Council of Regensburg. Aug. 26.

653\. to Joh. Heß. 27 Aug. 1523 542

654\. to Spalatin. Sept. 2, 1523 542

655 To Duke Carl III of Savoy. Sept. 7, 1523 545

656 To Theobald Billicanus. 17 Sept. 1523, 551

> **Column**

687\. to Staupitz. Sept. 17, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 610.

658 To Spalatin. Sept. 19, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 123.

659\. to Conrad Pellican. 1 Oct. 1523 553

660\. testimony for Gregor Morgenstern. Oct. 3, 1523 555

661\. to Spalatin. Oct. 4, 1523 556

662\. to Joh. Ruck. 4. Oct. 1523 557

663\. to Spalatin. Oct. 5, 1523 558

664: The Leimbach brothers to Luther. Oct. 6.

1523 (Regest.) 558

665\. to the community of Esslingen. Oct. 11, 1523 559

666\. to Spalatin. Oct. 12, 1523 564

667\. to Spalatin. Oct. 12, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1188.

668\. to Michael von der Straßen. 16 Oct. 1523.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2094. 669. To Spalatin. Oct. 16, 1523 565

670\. to Greg. Brück. 18 Oct. 1523. St. Louis

Ed. vol. X, 912.

670a. To Jakob Strauß. The letter inserted here in all editions (as to
Brück) is a part of the letter of April 25, 1524.

671\. to Spalatin. Oct. 18, 1523 567

672\. to the mayor and council of Zerbst. 20 Oct.

1523 568

673\. to Spalatin. Around 20 Oct. 1523 568

674\. to Spalatin. End of October 1523 569

675\. to Nic. Hausmann. October 1523 570

676\. To Nic. Hausmann. Oct. or Nov. 1523. 571.

677 To Spalatin. Nov. 6, 1523 572

678\. council and people of the city of Prague. Before

Nov. 13, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1548.

679\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 13, 1523 574

680\. to the mayor and council of Zerbst. Nov. 17.

1523 575

681\. to Nic. Hausmann. Before 4 December 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2232.

682\. to Nic. Hausmann. Dec. 4, 1523 576

683\. to Nic. Gerbe. 4. Dec. 1523\... 577

684\. The City Council of Oelsnitz. December 4, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2092.

685\. to Michael von der Straßen. Dec. 5, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2096.

686 To the Christians of Augsburg. Dec. 11, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1916.

687\. to Leonh. Puchler. Dec. 11, 1523. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX,
1338.

688 To the Lords of the Teutonic Order. 12 Dec.

1523\. St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 1730.

689\. to Hanna von Spiegel. December 14, 1523.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 708.

690\. to Spalatin. 1523 579

691\. to Spalatin. 1523 579

692\. to Spalatin. 580

693\. to Spalatin. 1523 581

694\. \" the scribes and printers of his sermons.

1523\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 456.

695 Joh. Lohmüller to Luther. 1523. (Regest.) 581 696. AnSpalatin .
Early1524 582

697 To Chancellor Brück. Jan. 7, 1524 583

698\. to Chancellor Brück. Jan. 13, 1524 585

699\. to Wolfg. Stein. Jan. 14, 1524 587

700 To Spalatin. Jan. 14, 1524. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 115.

XXRegister of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

701 To Spalatin, Jan. 18, 1524 \... 588

702 To Lambert Thorn. Jan. 19, 1524. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1924.

703\. to Johann Hess. Jan. 27, 1524 589

704 To Duke Albrecht of Prussia. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 728.

705\. to Joh. Brismann. Jan, 1524 590

706 To Spalatin. Feb. 1, 1524, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1792.

707 To Hans von Minkwitz. Feb. 6, 1524 592

708 To Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz. Feb. 14.

1524 593

709 To the Miltenbergers. Around 14 Feb. 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. V, 1272.

710\. to Spalatin. Feb. 23, 1524. 595

711\. to Georg Raudt. I March 1524 596

712 To the Counts of Mansfeld. March 2, 1524.

St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1674.

713 To Spalatin. March 8, 1524 597

714\. to Wolfg. Stein. March 9, 1524 598

715\. to Joh. Heß. March 12, 1524 598

716 To Spalatin. March 14, 1524, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 116.

717\. to Nie. Hausmann. March 14, 1524 599

718\. to Joh. Heß. March 21, 1524 601

719 To Churf. Friedrich zu Sachsen. March 23, 1524 601

720\. to Spalatin. March 23, 1524 602

721\. to Spalatin. Before March 26 (?) 1524\.... 603

722\. to Spalatin. March 26 (?) 1524 605

723 Staupitz to Luther. April 1, 1524 606

724\. to Spalatin. April 4, 1524 608

725 To Duke John of Saxony. April 5, 1524 609

726\. to Erasmus. Around April 15, 1524.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1596.

727 To Oekolampad. Around April 15, 1524\... . 610

728\. to Jakob Strauß. Around April 15,1524611

729\. to Spalatin. April 24, 1524 612

730\. to Jakob Strauß. April 25, 1524 613

731 To Chancellor Brück. April 25, 1524 615

732\. to Nic. Hausmann. April 26, 1524 616

733 To Spalatin. April 29, 1524 617

734\. to Hans Schott. April 1524. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 712.

735\. an. May 2, 1524 618

736\. to. Gerbel. May 6, 1524 619

737\. to Spalatin. May II, 1524 620

738\. to Capito. May 25, 1524 622

739\. to Spalatin. June 2, 1524 624

740\. to Capito. June 15, 1524 626

741\. to Nic. Hausmann. June 15, 1524 627

742 To Spalatin. June 18, 1524 627

743 To Duke John Frederick of Saxony. June 18

1524\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 354.

744\. Concerns about Mosaic Law. 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 356.

745\. Duke John Frederick to Luther. June 24, 1524. St. Louis edition,
vol. X, 352.

746\. to Joh. Brismann. July 4, 1524 629

747 To Joh. Lang. July 6, 1524 632

748 To the Elector Frederick of Saxony. July 8, 1524 633

749: Elector Frederick to Luther. July 10, 1524.

(Regest.) 634

750 To Spalatin. July 10, 1524. 635

751\. to Joh. Steenwyck. July 17, 1524 636

> **Column**

752 Wolfgang von Saalhausen to Luther. July 27, 1524, St. Louis edition,
vol. XVII, 2181.

753 To Spalatin. July 31, 1524 637

754 To Churf. Frederick and Duke John of Saxony. St. Louis edition, vol.
XVI, 4.

755\. to Wolfg. von Saalhausen. Aug. 3, 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVII, 2182.

756\. To some convent virgins. Aug. 6, 1524\... 638

757\. council and municipality of Orlamünde to Luther.

Aug. 16, 1524. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2037.

758 To the City Council and the Mühlhausen community. Aug. 21.

1524 St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2.

759\. to Barthol. von Staremberg. I. Sept. 1524 640

760\. to Heinrich von Zütphen. I. Sept. 1524 643

761\. to Spalatin. Sept. 13, 1524 645

762\. to Wolfg. Stein. Mid Sept. 1524 647

763\. to Nie. Gerbel. 18 Sept. 1524. (Fragment.) 648

764\. to Duke John Frederick of Saxony. Sept. 22.

1524 649

765\. to Spalatin. Sept. or Oct. 1524 650

766 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2036.

767\. to the mayor and council of Zerbst. 8 Oct.

1524 650

768\. to Wolfg. Stein. Oct. 11, 1524 651

769\. to Hieran. Baumgärtner. Oct. 12, 1524 652

770\. to Otto Braunfels. Oct. 17, 1524, St. Louis edition, vol. XIV,
264.

771\. to Spalatin. Oct. 17, 1524 653

772\. to Nic. Gerbel. Oct. 22, 1524, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2045.

773\. to Nie. Amsdorf. Oct. 27, 1524. St. Louis Edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 117.

774\. to Burian von Kornitz. 27 Oct. 1524 654

775\. to Spalatin. Oct. 30, 1524. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 118.

776\. to Gottschalk Crusius. Oct. 30, 1524 655

777 To Spalatin. Nov. 1, 1524, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, appendix,
no. 7.

778\. to Nie. Hermann. Nov. 6, 1524 657

779\. to Gallus Czahera. Nov. 13, 1524 658

780\. to Spalatin. Nov. 14, 1524 659

7YI. To Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 17, 1524. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XVIII, 1984.

782 To the Chapter at Wittenberg. Nov. 17, 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 1190.

783\. to Spalatin. Nov. 18, 1524 660

784 Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther. Nov. 22, 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2053.

785: The Strasbourg Preachers to Luther. Nov. 23.

1524\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2055.

786\. AnSpalatin . Nov. 24, 1524 662

787\. to Spalatin. Nov . 27, 1524. 663

788\. to Spalatin. Nov. 30, 1524 665

789\. to Nic. Amsdorf. Dec. 2, 1524 667

790\. to Spalatin. Dec. 12, 1524 668

791\. to Spalatin. 14 Dec. 1524 669

792 To the Christians of Strasbourg. Dec. 15, 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2047.

793\. to Catharina Zell. Dec. 17, 1524 670

794\. to Johanns Freiherr von Schwarzenberg.

Dec. 21, 1524 671

795\. to Churf. Friedrich zu Sachsen. Before 24 Dec.

1524 671

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

796\. to Spalatin. 24 Dec. 1524 673

797 To Spalatin. After 24 Dec. 1524 674

798\. to Spalatin. 29 Dec. 1524. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 119.

799\. to Spalatin. 1524 675

800\. marriage certificate for Joh. Gülden (Cursus). 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 730.

801\. to Spalatin. 1524? \[After June 15

1535.\] 677

802\. concerns about whether a forced marriage is valid.

1524\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 710.

803: To the Christians of Riga and Liefland. 1524.

St. Louis ed. vol. V, 1284.

804\. book inscription about Joh. 12,32.1524. St. Louiser

Ed. vol. IX, 1830.

805\. to Urban \[Rhegius?\]. 1524 678

806\. to Joh. Brismann. Jan. 11, 1525 679

807\. to Amsdorf. Jan. 11, 1525 681

808\. to Spalatin. Jan. 13, 1525 681

809\. to Amsdorf. Jan. 18, 1525 683

810\. Glatz to Luther. 18 Jan. 1525. (Regest.) 684

811\. to Spalatin. Jan. 22, 1525 684

812\. to Joh. Lang. Jan. 22, 1525 685

813\. to Spalatin. Jan. 29, 1525 686

814\. to the christians of Bremen with interpretation of the

9th Psalm and the story of the martyr

death of Heinrich von Zütphen. Beginning 1525 687

815\. to Hans von Minkwitz. Jan. or Feb. 1525 709

816 To Albrecht, Count of Mansfeld. First months

1525711

817\. to Nic. Hausmann. Feb. 2, 1525 714

818\. to Lazarus Spengler. Feb. 4, 1525 715

819\. to Joh. Brismann. Feb. 4, 1525 716

820\. to Wenc. Link. Feb. 7, 1525 717

821\. to Amsdorf. Feb. 10, 1525 718

822\. To Spalatin. Feb. 11, 1525. 719

823\. to Spalatin. 16 Feb. 1525. 720

824 Carlstadt to Luther. Feb. 18, 1525. (Regest.) 721

825\. to Abbot Paul Lemberg. Feb. 20, 1525. \... 721

826\. to Joh. Lang. Feb. 22, 1525 722

827\. to Spalatin. Feb. 25, 1525 723

828\. to Churf. Friedrich zu Sachsen. March 4, 1525 724

829\. to Spalatin. March 4, 1525. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XV, 2066.

830\. to Theobald Billican. march 5, 1525 725

831 To Spalatin. March 11, 1525. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 129.

832\. to Spalatin. March 12, 1525 727

833\. to Amsdorf. March 12, 1525 728

834\. Spalatin to Luther. March 20, 1525 728

835\. to Spalatin. March 23, 1525. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 120.

836\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 26, 1525. St. Louis

Ed. vol. X, 2256.

837\. to Wolfgang Reißenbusch. March 27, 1525.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 674.

838\. to Spalatin. March 27, 1525 730

839\. to the Guild of Goldsmiths in Nuremberg.

April 1 1525 731

840 To the Christians of Antwerp. Ans. April

1525\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1526.

841\. to Spalatin. April 3, 1525 732

842 To Spalatin. April 10, 1525 733

843\. nic. Gerbel to Luther. April 10 and 11, 1525 734

844\. to Amsdorf. April 11, 1525. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 126.

XXI

> **Column**

845\. To Spalatin. April 15, 1525 735

846\. to Spalatin. April 16, 1525 736

847: To Georg von Polenz, Bishop of Samland. April 1525. St. Louis
edition, vol. ill, 1370.

848\. to Friedrich Myconius. May 3, 1525 738

849\. to Joh. Rühel. May 4, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, IM.

850\. to the Council of Gdansk. 5 (?) May 1525 739

Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s report on the funeral of the Elector. St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 177.

852 Gabriel Zwilling\'s expert opinion on the same, ca. May 7, 1525. St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 178.

853\. to Spalatin. May 7, 1525 743

854\. To the Regensburg City Council. May 8, 1525\.... 743

855: The Council of Erfurt to Luther and Melanchthon. May 10, 1525. St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 113 f.

856 To Elector John of Saxony. May 15, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. X,
2050.

857 To Duke John Frederick of Saxony. May 15, 1525, St. Louis edition,
vol. X, 2045.

858\. to Spalatin. May 15, 1525 745

859\. to Duke John Frederick of Saxony. May 20, 1525 745

860\. to Spalatin. May 20, 1525 746

861 King Christian II of Denmark to Luther.

May 20 1525 747

862\. D. Johann Rühel to Luther. May 21, 1525.

(Two fragments.) 748

863\. to D. Joh. Rühel. May 23, 1525. St. Louis

Ausg., vol. XVI, IM.

864\. to Duke Albrecht of Prussia. May 26, 1525 749

865\. D. Johann Rühel to Luther. May 27, 1525.

(Fragment.) 751

866\. to D. Joh. Rühel. May 30, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 131.

867\. to Amsdorf. M. May 1525. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 133.

868 To the Council of Frankfurt a. M. May 1525 751

869: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

June 1 1525 752

870: Duke John Frederick of Saxony to Luther.

June 1 1525 753

871 To the Elector Albrecht of Mainz. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 678.

872\. to Christoph Jörger. June 3, 1525 754

873\. to D. Joh. Rühel. June 3, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 682.

874\. June 5, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 684.

875\. to Spalatin. June 10, 1525 755

876\. Paul Speratus to Luther. June II, 1525.

(Fragment.).: 756

877\. to Nic. Amsdorf. June 12, 1525. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 135.

878 Carlstadt to Luther. June 12, 1525 757

878a. To Joh. Rühel, Joh. Thür and Casp. Müller.

June 15, 1525. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 726.

879\. Joh. Brismann to Luther. June 15, 1525.

(Fragment.) 759

880\. To Spalatin. June 16, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol.

881 To the Christians in Liefland. June 17, 1525.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 258.

XXII

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

882\. to Mich. Stiefel. June 17, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 672.

883\. to Leonh. Koppe. June 17, 1525 760

884\. to Wenc. Link. June 20, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. x, 728.

885\. to. Joh. von Dolzig. June 21, 1525\.... 761

886\. to Leonh. Koppe. June 21, 1525 761

887\. to Spalatin. June 21, 1525 762

888\. to Amsdorf. June 21, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix,
no. 127.

889\. to Spalatin. June 25, 1525 763

890\. to Caspar Müller. June or July 1525.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 77.

891\. To Joh. Heß in Breslau. July 19, 1525\.... 764

892\. to Elector John of Saxony. July 20, 1525 765

893\. to Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz. July 21, 1525 766

894\. to Wenc. Link. July 22, 1525 768

895\. to Wenc. Link. July 31, 1525 768

896\. to Amsdorf. July 31, 1525 769

897\. to Wenc. Link. Aug. 1, 1525. 770

8W. To Joh. Brismann. After 15 Aug. 1525 771

899\. to the council and preacher at Domitsch. 18 Aug.

1525\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 748.

899a. Admonition to the printers. Sept. 1525.

St. Louis edition, vol. XI, XLVI.

900 To King Henry VIII of England. September 1, 1525. St. Louis edition,
vol. XIX, 378.

901\. to Spalatin. Sept. 6, 1525 774

902\. to Leonhard Beier. Sept. 6, 1525\... 774

903 To Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 6.

1525 775

904 The Council of Erfurt to Luther. 9 Sept.

1525\. (Regest.) 777

905 Carlstadt to Luther. Before Sept. 12, 1525 777

906 To Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 12.

1525 779

907 To Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 15.

1525 780

908 Instruction of the Elector for Spalatin to Luther. Sept. 17, 1525
781

909 To the Erfurt City Council. 19 Sept. 1525 \... 783

910 To the Mayor and City Council of Nuremberg.

26 Sept. 1525 789

911\. to Nic. Hausmann. September 27, 1525.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 1986.

912\. to Spalatin. Sept. 28, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1986.

913\. to me. Stiefel. Sept. 29, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 800.

914\. to Nic. Hausmann. End of Sept. 1525 792

915\. to Leonh. Beier. Oct. 8, 1525792

916\. the Strasbourg preachers to Luther. 8 Oct.

1525\. (Regest.) 793

917\. to Nic. Hausmann. 11 Oct. 1525 793

918\. to Joh. Agricola. 21 Oct. 1525 794

919\. to Gottschalk Crusius. Oct. 27, 1525 795

920\. to Joh. Lang and the rest of the preachers at

Erfurt. 28 Oct. 1525 797

921 To the City Council of Plauen. Oct. 30, 1525 798

921a. To Spalatin. 30 Oct. 1525. St. Louis

Edition, vol. XVII, 1538 ß

922\. to Elector John of Saxony. Oct. 31.

1525 . : 798

923\. to the council of Torgau. Oct. 31, 1525 801

> **Column**

924 Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Oct. 31.

1525 801

925 To the Preachers of Strasbourg. Nov. 5, 1525.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1533.

W6. To Gregor Casel. Nov. 5, 1525, St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1534.

927\. to Lazarus Spengler. 7. Rome 1525 803

928: Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Nov. 7.

1525 804

929\. to Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 11.

1525805

930\. to Spalatin806

931 Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Nov. 12.

1525 808

932: Elector John of Saxony to Luther 2c.

Nov. 25, 1525 . .. 809

933\. to Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 30.

1525 812

934\. Caspar von Schwenkfeld to Luther. 2 Dec.

1525\. (Regest.) 813

935\. to Spalatin. Dec. 6, 1525. 813

936\. to Spalatin. 9 Dec. 1525 815

937\. to Duke George of Saxony. Dec. 21, 1525.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 504.

938\. to Marquard Schuldorp. 22 Dec. 1525 816

939\. Duke George of Saxony to Luther. Dec. 28.

1525\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 508.

940\. to Michael Stiefel. Dec. 31, 1525 818

941\. to the parish in Penza. 1525. st. louis

Vol. X, 1920.

942\. to a woman. Boron 1526 819

943 Gerbet to Luther. Early 1526. (Regest.). - 820

944\. to Amsdorf. January 2, IM6. St. Louiser

Ausg., vol. XIX, 1786.

945\. to Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 3, 1526 821

946\. to Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 3.

947\. to Matthew Alber. Jan. 4, 1526 823

948 To the Christians of Reutlingen. Jan. 4, 1526.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVII, 1539. .

949\. to Marquard Schuldorp. 5 Jan. 1526 824

950 Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Jan. 6.

1526 828

951\. to Amsdorf. Jan. 7, 1526 828

952\. to Leonhard Beier. Jan. 9, 1526 829

953 To Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 12.

1526 830

954 Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Jan. 15.

1526 831

955 Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Jan. 17.

1526 832

956\. to Nic. Hausmann. Jan. 20, 152L St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 514.

957 To Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 25.

1526 833

958 To Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 25.

1526 834

959 King Christian II of Denmark to Luther.

28 Jan. 1526. (Regest.) 835

960\. to Justus Menius. Feb. 2, 1526. 835

961\. to Elector John of Saxony. 9 Feb.

1526\.... 837

962\. to Elector John of Saxony. feb. 9.

1526 838

963\. to Eberhard Brisger. Feb. 12, 1526 839

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XXIII

> **Column**

964: Churf. Johann zu Sachsen to Luther. Feb. 13.

1586 840

965\. to Johann Agricola. 18 Feb. 1526 841

966\. to Elector John of Saxony. Feb. 21.

1526 842

967\. to Amsdorf. Feb. 25 (?) 1526 843

968 To Elector John of Saxony. March 9.

1526 . 844

969: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

March 16 1526 845

970 Duke Albrecht of Prussia to Luther. At

March 24, 1526. (Regest.) 846

971: Elector John of Saxony to Luther. At

March 27, 1526 846

972\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 27, 1526 847

973 To Spalatin. March 27, 1526. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 128.

974 To Elector John of Saxony. After the

March 27 1526 848

975 To Elector John of Saxony. April 8.

1526 848

976 To Elector John of Saxony. April 14

1526 849

977\. to Valentin Krautwald. April 14, 1526 850

978\. to Caspar Schwenkfeld. April 14, 1526.

St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1660.

979\. to Chancellor Brück. April 14, 1526 851

980\. to Joh. Agricola. 18 April 1526 852

981\. to Joh. Rühel. April 20. 1526 853

982: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

April 21, 1526. (Regest.) 854

983\. to Joh. Hess. April 22, 1526. St. Louis

Vol. XVII, annex, No. 5.

984 To Elector John of Saxony. April 23

1526 854

985\. to Vincentius Obsopöus. April 25, 1526. . 855

986\. to Nic. Gerbel. April 26, 1526 857

987 To Elector John of Saxony. April 26

1526 858

988\. To Frederick Myconius. End of April 1526\... 859

989: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

May 1 1526 860

990 To Elector John of Saxony. After the

May 1, 1526. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 688.

991\. To Spalatin. May 2, 1526 861

992\. to Georg Mohr. May 8, 1526 862

993 To Joh. Agricola. May 11, 1526 863

994\. To Duke John Frederick of Saxony. May 14

1526 864

995\. to Duke John Frederick of Saxony. May 18

1526\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1684.

996\. to Caspar Müller. May 26, 1526 865

997 To Elector John of Saxony, May 26.

1526 865

998\. to Johann Gülden. May 29, 1526. 866

999\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. June 2, 1526 867

1000\. Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther. June 5, 1526.

(Regest.) 868

1001\. to Joh. Rühel. June 8, 1526 868

1002\. to Nic. Hausmann. June 13, 1526 869

1003\. to Spalatin. June 17, 1526 870

1004 To Elector John of Saxony. June 20

1526 871

1005: Elector John of Saxony to Luther,

June 22 1526 872

1006 To Joh. Agricola. June 27, 1526 873

> **Column**

1007\. to Andreas Kaugisdorf. June 29, 1526 874

1008\. to Spalatin. Towards the end of June 1526 875

1009\. to Spalatin. July 3, 1526 875

1010\. To Nicolaus Hausmann. July 3, 1526 876

1011\. Nic. Gerbel to Luther. July 10, 1526 877

1012 The Electoral Councils to Luther. July II

1526, 878

1013\. Nic. Gerbel to Luther. End of July 1526 879

1014\. to Joh. Rühel. July or August 1526.

(Fragment.) 881

1015 To the City Council of Mulhouse. Aug. 8, 1526 881

1016\. to Mich. Boots. Aug. 11, 1526. St. Louis

Vol. XVII, 1544.

1017\. to Wenc. Link. 28 Aug. 1526 882

1018\. to Spalatin. End of Aug, 1526 883

1018a. To Thomas Neuenhagen. Sept. 3 (1526 ?)

1524\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1018.

1019\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. 13 Sept. 1526.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII. 1544 f.

1020\. to Johann Herwagen and Johann Secerius.

Sept. 13, 1526. St. Louis edition, vol. XVII,

1578 s.

1021\. to Spalatin. Sept. 19, 1526. 885

1022\. to Agricola. 20 Sept. 1526 886

1023\. to Joh. Walther. Sept. 21, 1526 887

1024\. to Nic. Hausmann. 14. oil. 1526 888

1025\. to Mich. Boots. Oct. 25, 1526. St. Louis

Vol. XVII, 1545.

1026\. to Joh. Frosch. Oct. 28, 1526. 888

1027\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. October 29, 1526.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1546.

1028\. to Queen Mary of Hungary. I. Nov.

1526\. St. Louis edition, vol. V, I.

1029\. to Wolfgang Fueß. November 14, 1526.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 710.

1030 To Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 15.

1526 890

1031 To the Electoral Councils. Before Nov. 16.

1526 891

1032\. Carlstadt to Luther. Nov. 17, 1526 892

1033 To Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 22.

1526 894

1034\. to Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 23.

1526 896

1035: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

Nov. 26, 1526 897

1036\. to Conrad Cordatus. Nov. 28, 1526 899

1037\. to the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.

Nov. 28, 1526. (Fragment.) 900

1038 King Henry VIII of England to Luther. Last months of 1526. St.
Louis edition, vol. XIX, 382.

1039\. to Joseph Levin Metzsch. 9 Dec. 1526901

1040\. Duke George of Saxony to Luther. 21 Dec.

1526 902

1041\. to Amsdorf. Dec. 22, 1526 903

1042 To Assa von Kram. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 488.

1043\. to Phil. Gluenspies. End of 1526, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX,
1016.

1044\. to Wenc. Link. End 1526 or Ans. 1527.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 1786.

1045\. To a parish priest. 1526. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 688.

1046 Concerns about how to counter the peasants\' revolt. 1526 904

XXIV

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

1047\. to Joh. Agricola. 1 Jan. 1527. 909

1048\. to Spalatin. Jan. 1, 1527. 909

1049\. to Mich. Boots. Jan. 1, 1527. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1792.

1050\. to Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 690.

1051\. To Churf. Joh. of Saxony. Jan. 7, 1527. 913

1052\. to Landgrave Philip of Hesse. Jan. 7.

1527 914

1053\. To Nic. Hausmann. Jan. 10, 1527 916

1054\. to Spalatin. Jan. 13, 1527 917

1055\. to the Zerbst City Council. Jan. 17, 1527 918

1056\. to Wenc. Link. 23 Jan. 1527 918

1057\. to Conrad Cordatus. Jan. 29, 1527 919

1058\. to Justus Menius. End of Jan. 1527 920

1059 To the Christians of Erfurt. End of Jan. 1527.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1524.

1060\. to Eberh. Brisger. Feb. 1, 1527 921

1061\. to Spalatin. Feb. 1, 1527, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1774.

1062\. to Joh. Draco. Feb. 2, 1527 922

1063\. to Churf. Johann zu Sachsen. 3, Feb. 1527 923

1064\. to Joh. Lang. Feb. 4, 1527. St. Louis

Ausg., vol. XIX, 1772.

1065\. to Hans Ottenfaß. Feb. 5, 1527 924

1066 To Elector John of Saxony. March 1, 1527925

1067 To Spalatin. Before March 11, 1527926

1068\. to Spalatin. March 11, 1527. St. Louis

Vol. XVII, annex, No. 1.

1069\. to Hans von Dolzig. 17 March 1527 926

1070\. to Clemens Ursinus. March 21, 1527 927

1071\. nic. Hausmann. March 29, 1527 929

1072\. Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther. April 2, 1527.

(Regest.) 930

1073 To Justus Menius. April 9, 1527 930

1074\. to Friedrich Pistorius. April 22, 1527 931

1075 To Elector John of Saxony. April 28, 1527932

1076\. to Spalatin. April 29, 1527933

1077\. to Justus Menius. April or later 1527 933

1078\. to Spalatin. May 4, 1527 934

1079\. to Wenc. Link. Around May 4, 1527. 935

1080\. to Mich. Boots. Around May 4, 1527 936

1081\. to Joh. Agricola. Around May 4, 1527 937

1082\. to Andreas Kaugisdorf. 5 May 1527 938

1083\. to Joh. briDmann. may 6, 1527 938

1084\. to Amsdorf May 17, 1527\... 939

1085\. to Wenc. Link. May 19, 1527. 940

1086 Thorough report on the martyrdom of Leonhard Kaiser941

In it you will find the following letters:

Leonhard Kaiser to unnamed friends.

After June 9, 1527 945

Leonhard Kaiser to Mich. Stiefel. March 9, 1527 953

Leonhard Kaiser to an unnamed person. Before 16 Aug. 1527 954

Leonhard Kaiser to one of his friends. \.... 964

Elector John of Saxony to the Bishop of Passau. May 24, 1527 969

Luther to Leonhard Kaiser. May 20, 1527. 969

1087\. to Spalatin. 20, May 1527. 974

1088\. to Friedrich Pistorius. May 20, 1527. 975

1089\. to Spalatin. May 31, 1527 975

1090\. nic. Gerbel to Luther. End of May 1527. 976

> **Column**

1091\. to Elisabeth Agricola. 10 June 1527 978

1092\. to Spalatin. June 12, 1527 979

1093 To the Mayor and City Council of Coburg.

June 14, 1527. 980

1094\. to Elector John of Saxony. June 16

1527 980

1095\. to Elector John of Saxony. June 16, 1527. 981

1096\. to Friedr. Myconius. June 18, 1527 982

1097 To Joh. Agricola. Beginning of July 1527 983

1098\. to Wenc. Link. July 5, 1527 984

1099\. to Spalatin. July 10, 1527 985

1100 Report by Bugenhagen and Jonas on Luther\'s severe bout of illness
on July 6, 1527 W5

1101\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. July 13, 1527. \... 996

1102: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

July 22 1527 997

1103 To Elector John of Saxony. July 26, 1527. 998

1104\. to Melanchthon. Aug. 2, 1527 998

1105: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

Aug 10 152k 999

1106\. To Justus Menius. Aug. 12, 1527 1000

1107\. to Spalatin. Aug. 19, 1527 1001

1108\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 20, 1527. \..... \.... 1003

1109\. to Joh. Agricola. 21 Aug. 1527 . 1004

1110\. to Else von Kanitz. 22 AÜg. 1527 1005

1111\. to Joachim von Weißbach. Aug. 23, 1527.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 811.

1112\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 26, 1527. 1006

1113\. to Joh. Rühel. Aug. 26, 1527, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1980.

1114 Gerbel to Luther. Aug. 29, 1527. (Regest.) 1007 1115. To Johann
Agricola. Aug. 31, 1527.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2227, annex, no. 3.

1116\. to Gerhard Wilskamp. Sept. 2, 1527 1008

1117\. to Nic. Hausmann. Sept. 2, 1527 1009

1118 To Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 10.

1527 1009

1119\. to Spalatin. Sept. 13, 1527 1010

1120\. to Elector John of Saxony. 16 Sept.

1527 1011

1121\. to Joh. Agricola. 17 Sept. 1527 1013

1122\. to Joh. Agricola. 19 Sept. 1527 1013

1123 Urban Sprecher to Luther. Sept. 26, 1527 1014

1124 The Zerbst City Council to Luther. 29 Sept.

1527\. (Regest.) 1015

1125 To Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 30.

1527 1015

1126: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

30 Sept. 1527 1016

1127 To the Christians of Halle. End of September

1527\. St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1960.

1128\. To Joh. Hess and the other preachers at Breslau. Sept. 1527. St.
Louis Edition, Vol. X, 2008.

1129\. to Joh. Agricola. Oct. 3, 1527 1017

1130\. to Severinus. Oct. 6, 1527 1018

1131\. to Mich. Boots. 8 Oct. 1527 1022

1132\. to Elector John of Saxony. 9 Oct.

1527 1023

1133 To Elector John of Saxony. 12 Oct.

1527\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2185.

1134\. to Justus Jonas. 19 Oct. 1527 1024

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order. xxv

> **Column**

1135\. to Mich. Boots. 22 Oct. 1527 1025

1136\. to Melanchthon. 27 Oct. 1527. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 121.

1136a. To Elector John of Saxony. Oct. 27, 1527 1027

1137\. to Nic. Amsdorf. Nov. 1, 1527 1027

1138\. to Justus Jonas. Nov. 4, 1527 1029

1139\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 7, 1527 1030

1140\. to Andreas Kaugisdorf. 9 Nov. 1527 1031 1141. to Justus Jonas. 11
Nov. or shortly thereafter.

St. Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 130.

1142 To Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 12, 1527 1032

1143\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 17, 1527 1033

1144\. to Friedr. Pistorius. Nov. 21, 1527 1034

1145\. to Wenc. Link. 22 Nov. 1527 1035

1146\. to Eberhard Brisger. - 27 Nov. 1527 \... 1036

1147\. to Joh. Brenz. Nov. 28, 1527. St. Louis

Vol. XV, annex, No. 122.

1148\. to Justus Jonas. Nov. 29, 1527 1037

1149\. to Carlstadt. End of Nov. 1527. St. Louis

Vol. XX, 324.

1150\. to Elector John of Saxony. Dec. 2, 1527 1039

1151\. to the Zerbst City Council. Dec. 5, 1527 1040

1152\. Margaretha Blankenfeld to Luther. 7 Dec.

1527 1040

1153\. to Justus Jonas. 10 December 1527.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2228, annex, no. 4.

1154\. to Spalatin. 13 Dec. 1527 1041

1155 To the mayor and council of Zerbst.

13 Dec. 1527. 1042

1156\. to Nic. Hausmann. Dec. 14, 1527 1043

1157 To Elector John of Saxony. 16 Dec.

1527 1044

1158\. to Johann Walther. Dec. 21, 1527 1045

1159 To the mayor and council of Zerbst.

24\. Dec. 1527 1047

1160\. anSpalatin . 28 Dec. 1527 1049

1161\. to the lords of Einsiedel, together with

Bugenhagen. 28. Dec. 15271050

1162\. to Justus Jonas. 29 Dec. 1527 1052

1163\. to Wenc. Link. 29 Dec. 1527 : 1053

1164\. to Amsdorf. Dec. 30, 1527 1054

1165\. to Justus Jonas. Dec. 30, 1527 1055

1166\. to Nic. Hausmann. Dec. 31, 1527 1056

1167\. to Jakob Probst. Dec. 31, 1527. St. Louis

1169 To Paul Speratus. St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 274.

1170 To Chancellor Brück, jointly with Jonas

and Bugenhagen. 1527 1057

1171\. to Gerhard Wilskamp. Jan. 1, 1528 1058

1172 Justus Jonas to Luther. 2 Jan. 1528 \... 1059

1173 To the mayor and council of Zerbst.

3 Jan. 1528 1063

1174: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

3 Jan. 1528 1064

1175\. concerns to Elector John of Saxony.

After 3 Jan. 1528 1071

1176 Luther and Bugenhagen to Spalatin. January 5, 1528 1076

> **Column**

1177 To Christ. Jörger in Tolleth. Jan. 6, 1528 1078

1178\. to Dorothea Jörger. Jan. 6, 1528 1079

1179\. to Justus Jonas. 6 Jan. 1528 1079

1180\. to Marg. Blankenfeld. Jan. 7, 1528. 1081

1181\. to Cath. Hornung. Jan. 7, 1528 1082

1182 To the mayor and council of Zerbst. January 8, 1528 1083

1183: Elector John to Luther. Before 16 Jan. 1528 1084

1184 To the Elector John of Saxony. 16 Jan.

1528\. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2095.

1185\. Martin Landmann to Luther. January 20

1528\. (Regest.) 1085

1186\. to Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 21, 1528 1085

1187\. to Spalatin. Jan. 24, 1528 1086

Luther and Bugenhagen to Heinr. von Einsiedel. Jan. 24, 1528 1087

1189\. Luther\'s Attached Concern. Jan. 24, 1528 1087

1190\. to Joh. Hess. Jan. 27, 1528. St. Louis Edition, vol. XVII,
appendix, no. 6.

1191\. to Nic. Hausmann. 27 Jan. 1528 1092

1192 To Spalatin, jointly with Bugenhagen. Jan. 31, 1528 1092

1193 Luther\'s misgivings about the Einsiedel case. Jan. 31, 1528 1093

1194: Luther\'s misgivings about the Einsiedel case. Without date 1095

1195\. to Johann Secerius. First months 1528. St. Louis edition, vol.
XIV, 164.

1196 To two parish priests, about rebaptism. St. Louis edition, vol.
XVII, 2187 f.

1197 To Spalatin. St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, appendix, no. 11.

1198 To the mayor and council of Zerbst.

5 Feb 1528 1096

1199\. to Amsdorf. 8 Feb. 1528 1096

1200\. to Nic. Hausmann. Feb. 10, 1528 1097

1201\. to Paul Lindenau. 10 Feb. 1528 1098

1202 Wilhelm Pravest to Luther. 21 Feb. 1528 1100

1203\. to Spalatin. Feb. 22, 1528 1102

1204 Luther and Bugenhagen to the von Einsiedel. 22 Feb. 1528 1103

1205\. to Wenc. Link. 24 Feb. 1528 1105

1206\. to Nic. Hausmann. 25 Feb. 1528 1106

1207\. to Heino Gottschalk. 28 Feb. 1528 1107

1208\. to Joh. Rühel. March 2, 1528. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2214.

1209\. To Joh. Agricola. March 2, 1528 1109

1210\. to Conrad Cordatus. March 6, 1528 1110

1211\. to Leonhard Beier. March 7, 1528 1111

1212\. to Gabriel Zwilling. March 7, 1528 1112

1213\. to an unnamed nobleman. March 10

1528\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 814.

1214\. To Spalatin. March 10, 1528 1113

1215\. to Wilhelm Pravest. March 14, 1528.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, annex, no. 7.

1216\. to Dorothea Jörger. March 14, 1528 1115

1217\. to Spalatin. March 18, 1528 1116

1218\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 23, 1528 1117

1219\. to the electoral councils. March 26, 1528 1117

1220\. to the chancellor Brück. March 28, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 548.

1221\. concerns. 1526 or later. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 362.

XXVI

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

1222\. to Wenc. Link. 28 March 1528 1120

1223\. to Felicitas von Selmenitz. April 1, 1528 1121

1224\. to Duke John Frederick of Saxony.

April 1 1528 1122

1225\. to Nic. Hausmann. April 7, 1528 1123

1226\. To Joseph Levin Metzsch. April 9, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 814.

1227\. to Nic. Hausmann. April 11, 1528 1123

1228 Philip of Hesse\'s response to Luther\'s expert opinion. April 11,
1528 1124

1229\. to Stephan Roth. April 12, 1528. 1130

1230\. To Spalatin. April 12, 1528. .. 1132

1231 Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s concerns in the

Pack\'s thing. Around April 16, 1528 \... 1133

1232 To the Christians of Halle. April 26, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2218.

1233 To Esban Hesse. April or May1528 1135

1234\. to Justus Menius. May 1, 1528 1137

1235\. to Joh. Lang. May 1, 1528 1138

1236 Luther\'s rc. Concerns in Pack\'s Case.

Between May 6 and 12, 1528. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 387.

1237\. to Wilh. Pravest. 9 May 1528 1139

1238\. to Paul Heuqe. may 9, 1528 1140

1239\. to Conrad Gulf. May 9, 1528 1142

1240\. to Wenc. Link. May 12, 1528. St. Louis edition, vol. XVII,
appendix, no. 9.

1241\. to Friedrich Pistorius. May 12, 1528 1143

1242 Luther and Melanchthon to Churf. Johann

to Saxony. May 15, 1528 1144

1243 Luther and Melanchthon to Duke Joh.

\- Frederick of Saxony. May 15, 1528 1145

1244\. to Nic. Hausmann. May 15, 1528 1146

1245 Luther and Melanchthon to Churf. Johann

to Saxony. May 16 or 17, 1528 1147

1246\. to Spalatin. May 16, 1528 1150

1247 Carlstadt to Krautwald and Schwenkfeld.

May 17, 1528. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2074.

1248 Luther and Melanchthon to Churf. Johann zu Sachsen. May 18, 1528
1152

1249 Luther and Melanchthon to Duke Joh.

Frederick of Saxony. 18th time 1528.. 1153

1250 To Margrave George of Brandenburg.

May 21 1528 1154

1251\. to Spalatin. May 22, 1528 1154

1252 To the Lords of Einsiedel. May 22, 1528 1155

1253\. to Friedr. Myconius. May 23, 1528 1157

1254\. to Justus Menius. May 23, 1528 1158

1255\. to Stephan Zwels. May 26, 1528 1158

1256\. to Paul Lemberg. May 27, 1528 1159

1257 To Elector John of Saxony. June 6

1528 1161

1258\. to Spalatin. June 6, 1528 1162

1259\. to Nicolaus von Amsdorf. June 8, 1528.

St. Louis edition, vol.XIX, annex, no.14.

1260\. Elector Johann to Luther, Melanchthon and Hans Metzsch. 9 June
1528 1162

1261\. to Hans tzonold. June 13, 1528 1164

1262\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. June 13, 1528 1164

1263\. to Friedr. Pistorius. June 14, 1528 1165

1264\. to Wenc. Link. 14 June 1528 1166

1265\. to Johann Heß. Before mid-June 1528.

St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, annex, no. 13.

1266 To Elector John of Saxony. June 15

1528 1167

> **Column**

1267\. to Elector John of Saxony. June 20, 1528 1168

1268\. to Nic. Hausmann. June 29, 1528 1169

1269 To Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt. June 30

1270\. to Urban Rhegius. July 7, 1528 1171

1271 To Elector John of Saxony. July 8.

1528 1172

1272: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

July 12 1528 1173

1273\. to Wenc. Link. July 14, 1528. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1532.

1274: Prince John of Saxony to Luther and Melanchthon. July 17, 1528
1174

1274a. To an unnamed person. July 20, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1736.

1275\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. July 20, 1528 1175

1275a. To Christian, Crown Prince of Denmark.

July 24 1528 1176

1276 The Elector John of Saxony to Luther, Schürf 2c. July 25, 1528 1177

1277\. to Nicolaus Gerbet. July 28, 1528. 1180

1278\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. July 31, 1528 1181

1279\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 5, 1528 1182

1280 To Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.

Aug. 8, 1528 1182

1281 Wolf Hornung to the Electoral Brandenburg Councils. 8 Aug. 1528
1184

1282\. Carlstadt to Chancellor Brück. Aug. 12, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2076.

1283\. to Balthasar Thüring. Aug. 14, 1528 1188

1284\. To Lazarus Spengler. August 15, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2256.

1285\. to Wenc. Link. 16 Aug. 1528 1189

1286 To Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.

21 Aug. 1528 1191

1287\. to Eberh. Brisger. Towards the end of Aug. 1528 1192

1288: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

Aug. 30, 1528. 1193

1289\. To an unnamed person. Early Sept. 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 1344.

1290: Spalatin to Luther. After Sept. 2.

1528 1194

1291: Heinrich von Einsiedel to Luther. Beginning of September? 1528.
(Regest.) 1196

1292: Spalatin to Luther and Melanchthon. According to

Sept. 2, 1528. (Regest.) 1197

1293 To Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 3.

1528 1197

1294\. to Elector John of Saxony. Sept. 3, 1528 1198

1295\. to Spalatin. Sept. 3, 1528 1199

1296: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

After Sept. 3, 1528 1201

1297\. to Wilhelm Reifenstein. Sept. 4, 1528. 1201

1298\. to Spalatin. 8 Sept. 1528 1203

1299\. to Spalatin. 8 Sept. 1528 1204

1300\. to Joh. Agricola. 11 Sept. 1528. 1205

1301\. to the knight Mart. Baumgartner. 11 Sept.

1528 1206

1302 Chancellor Brück to Luther. Around mid-Sept.

1528 1208

1303 Joh. Agricola to Luther. Second half

Sept. 1528. (Regest.) 1209

1304 To Elector John of Saxony. 18 Sept.

1528 1210

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order. XXVII

> **Column**

1305\. to Wolfgang Fues. Sept. 22, 1528 1211

1306\. to Chancellor Brück. September 24, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. XV, 2089.

1307\. to Leonhard Beier. Sept. 29, 1528 1211

1308 To the Zerbst City Council. Sept. 30, 1528 1212

1309 To Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.

Oct. 5, 1528 1213

1310\. to Landgrave Philip of Hesse. 9 Oct.

1528\. St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 2108.

1311\. to Friedrich Pistorius. Oct. 12, 1528 1218

1312\. to Joh. Oct. 14, 1528 1218

1313 To the Zerbst City Council. Oct. 15, 1528 1219

1314\. to Mich. Boots. 16 Oct. 1528 1220

1315\. to Gerh. Wilskamp. 20 Oct. 1528 1221

1316\. to Spalatin. 20 Oct. 1528 1222

1317 ,/Caspar Aquila. 21 Oct. 1528 1224

1318\. Agricola to Luther and Melanchthon.

23 Oct. 1528. (Regest.) . 1227

1319\. to Joh. Agricola. 25 Oct. 1528 1228

1320: Duke George of Saxony to Luther. 28 Oct.

1528\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 425.

1321\. to Spalatin. Oct. 29, 1528 1229

1322\. to Eberh. Brisger. 29 Oct. 1528 1230

1323\. to Duke George of Saxony. Oct. 31, 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 426.

1324\. to Nic. Amsdorf. Nov. 1, 1528 1231

1325 Bugenhagen to Luther. Nov. 1, 1528 1231

1326 The City Council of Hamburg to Luther. I. Nov.

1528\.

a\. In Low German 1236

b\. Translated into High German 1238

1327\. AnSpalatin . 8 Nov. 1528 1239

1328\. to Chancellor Brück. Nov. 11, 1528 1240

1329\. to Spalatin. Nov. 11, 1528 1241

1330\. to Mich. Boots. Nov. 24, 1528 1242

1331\. to Amsdorf. Nov. 25, 1528. St. Louis

Vol. XVII, annex, No. 8.

1332\. to Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 25, 1528 1242

1333\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 26, 1528 1243

1334: Luther, Metsch and Pauli to the Elector.

Nov 26 1528 1245

1335\. ToMelanchthon . Nov. 26, 1528 1246

1336\. to Mich. Boots. End of Nov. 15281247

1337\. to Balthasar Thuring. Nov. 1528 1247

1338\. to Nic. Hausmann. 2 Dec. 1528 1248

1339: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

2 Dec. 1528 1248

1340 Chancellor Brück to Luther. 4 Dec. 1528 1249 1341 Joseph Levin
Metzsch to Luther. 6 Dec.

1528\. (Regest.) 1250

1342\. to Margarethe N. 15 December 1528.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2032.

1343\. to Nic. Amsdorf. Dec. 30, 1528 1251

1344\. to Wenc. Link. Towards the end of December

1528\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, annex, no. 15.

1345\. to Elector John of Saxony. Dec. 31, 1528. St. Louis Edition, vol.
XIX, appendix, no. 22.

1346 To Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 7.

15291252

1347 To Elector John of Saxony. 9 Jan.

1529 1253

1348\. to MartinGörlitz . 15 Jan. 1529 1254

1349\. to Spalatin. Around mid-Jan . 1529. 1256

> **Column**

1350\. Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

18 Jan. 1529 1256

1351\. to Nic. Amsdorf. 21 Jan. 1529 1257

1352 Otto von Pack to Luther. Jan. 23, 1529.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 433.

1353 Anden Rath zu Memmingen. Jan. 30, 1529 1259 1354 \" Joh. Heß. Jan.
31, 1529 1260

1355\. to Joh. Agricola. 1 Feb. 1529 1261

1356 To the Zerbst City Council. Feb. 1, 1529 1262

1357\. to Nic. Amsdorf. 12 Feb. 1529 1263

1358\. to Nic. Hausmann. Feb. 13, 1529 1263

1359\. the visitators in Franconia to Luther and

Melanchthon. Feb. 19, 1529. (Regest.) 1264 1360. to Amsdorf. Feb. 28,
1529 1265

1361 To an unnamed person. 28 Feb. 1529 1265 1362. the visitators in the
Franconian district.

March 1 1529 1266

1363 Nicolaus von Minkwitz to Luther. March 1, 1529 1267

1364\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 3, 1529 1268

1365\. to Wenc. Link. March 7, 1529 1269

1366\. to Caspar Aquila. 7 March 1529 1271

1367\. to Balth. Thuring. March 7, 1529 1271

1368: The City Council of Zwickau to Luther. March 7

1529 1272

1369 Bugenhagen to Luther, Jonas 2c. March 8, 1529 1273

1370: Duke John Frederick to Luther, Jonas, Metsch and Taubenheim. March
12, 1529.

(Regest.) 1275

1371\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 13, 1529 1275

1372\. to Nic. Amsdorf. March 15, 1529 1277

1373 To Hans Metsch, Stadthauptmann zu Wittenberg. St. Louis edition,
vol. XIV, 288.

1374\. to Nic. Amsdorf. March 21, 1529 1278

1375\. Duke John Frederick to Luther and Ge

nossen. March 21, 1529 1279

1376\. to Nic. Amsdorf. March 29, 1529 1281

1377\. to Spalatin. March 30, 1529 1282

1378\. to Nic. Hausmann. March 31, 1529 1283.

1379\. to Nic. Hausmann. April 8, 1529 1284

1380\. to Conrad Cordatus. April 9, 1529 1285

1381\. to Gerhard Hecker. April 13, 1529 1286

1382: Duke John Frederick to Luther. April 13,

1383\. To Justus Jonas. April 14, 15291288

1384\. \" Justus Jonas. 19 April 1529 1289

1385\. to Duke John Frederick of Saxony.

April 19\'1529 1291

1386 To Duke John Frederick of Saxony.

April 23 1529 1292

1387\. to Andreas Kaugisdorf. May 1, 1529 1293

1388\. to Nic. Amsdorf. May 4, 1529 1294

1389\. to Nic. Amsdorf. May 5, 1529 1294

1390\. to Marg. Göritz. May 5, 1529 1295

1391: Duchess Sibyl of Saxony to Luther.

May 5 1529 1296

1392\. to Wenc. Link. May 6, 1529 1297

1393\. to Justus Jonas. may 6, 1529 1298

1394\. to Elector John of Saxony. May 12

1529 1300

1395: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

May 18 1529 1301

1396 To the Memmingen City Council. May 21, 1529 1302

1397\. to Wenc. Link. 21 May1529 . 1303

XXVIII

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

1398 To Elector John of Saxony. May 22, 1529 1303

1399 To Elector John of Saxony. May 25, 1529 1306

1400\. to Spalatin. May 28, 1529 1309

1401\. to Gerh. Wilskamp. May 28, 1529 1310

1402\. to Jakob Montanus. 28 May 1529 1311

1403\. to Matthias Drzewicki, Bishop of Leslau.

May 28 1529 1312

1404 Anarg von Wildenfels to Luther. May 29, 1529 1313

1405\. to Nic. Amsdorf. May 31, 1529 1314

1406 To the St. Jacobi parish in Goslar.

May 31, 1529. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 374.

1407\. concerns to Elector John of Saxony.

End of May 1529. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 518.

1408\. memo. Beginning of June 1529 1315

1409\. to Justus Jonas. June 5, 1529 1316

1410\. to Justus Jonas. Between the 5th and

June 15 1529 1317

1411\. to Justus Jonas. 14 June 1529 1318

1412\. to Justus Jonas. 15 June 1529 1319

1413\. margrave George of Brandenburg to

Luther. June 15, 1529 1320

1414 To the City Council of Torgau. June 18, 1529\.... 1321 1415. to
Wenc. Link. June 20, 1529 1322

1416 To Landgrave Philip of Hesse. June 23

1529 St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1932, no. 20.

1417\. to Michael Stiefel. June 29, 1529 1323

1418\. to Michael von der Straßen. June 29, 1529 1324

1419 Landgrave Philip to Luther and Melanch

thon. July 1, 1529. (Regest.) 1325

1420\. To Spalatin. July 6, 1529 1325

1421\. to landgrave Philipp, jointly with

Melanchthon. July 8, 1529 1326

1422\. to Jakob Probst. 1O.Julr1529 1326

1423\. to Nic. Amsdorf. July 10, 1529 1328

1424\. ordination certificate for Wenc. Kilmann.

July 13 1529 1329

1425 To Elector John of Saxony. July 14, 1529 1330

1426\. to Elector John of Saxony. July 14, 1529 1331

1427\. to Conrad Cordatus. July 14, 1529 1332

1428\. to Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld. July 14

1529\. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1216.

1429\. to the Chancellor Christian Bayer. July 17, 1529 1333

1430\. to Georg Vogler, chancellor at Ansbach.

July 18, 1529 , 1333

1431 To Margrave George of Brandenburg.

July 18 1529 1334

1432\. to Nic. Hausmann. July 19, 1529 1336

1433\. to Wenc. Link. July 19, 1529 1337

1434\. to Nic. Amsdorf. July 29, 1529 1338

1435\. to Joh. Brismann. July 31, 1529 1338

1436\. to Conrad Cordatus. Aug. 1, 1529 1340

1437\. to Nic. Hausmann.Aug. 1, 1529 1341

1438\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 5, 1529 1342

1439\. to Martin Glaser. Aug. 10, 1529 1342

1440\. To Spalatin. Aug. 13, 1529 1343

1441\. to Justus Jonas. 17 Aug. 1529 1344

1442 To Elector John of Saxony. Aug. 17.

1529 1345

> **Column**

1443\. to Spalatin. Aug. 21, 1529 1346

1444 To Elector John of Saxony. Aug. 22.

1529 1347

1445\. to Jos. Levin Metzsch. August 26, 1529.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1686.

1446\. to Thomas Löscher. Aug. 26, 1529 1348

1447\. to Nic. Hausmann. Aug. 27, 1529 1350

1448\. to Wenc. Link. 29 Aug. 1529 1351

1449\. to Joh. Brenz. Aug. 29, 1529 1352

1450\. to the Riga City Council. Aug. 31, 1529 1353

1451\. to Justus Jonas. Aug. or Sept. 1529 1354

1452 To Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld. 9 Sept.

1529 1355

1453 To Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld. 9 Sept.

1529 1356

1454\. to Joh. Agricola. 9 Sept. 1529. 1361

1455: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

28 Sept. 1529. (Regest.) 1362

Luther\'s concerns about the doctrine of the Lord\'s Supper. St. Louis
edition, vol. XVII, 2052.

1457 To Philip of Hesse, together with the other theologians. Oct. 4 (?)
1529 \... 1362

1458\. to Nic. Gerbel. Oct. 4, 1529. St. Louis Edition, vol. XVII, 1952,
no. 27.

1459\. to his wife. 4 Oct. 1529 1366

1460\. to Johann Agricola. 12 October 1529.

St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVII, 1954, No. 28.

1461\. to Friedr. Myconius. Oct. 17, 1529. 1867

1462\. to Nicolaus Amsdorf. October 19, 1529.

St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVII, 1956, No. 30.

1463\. to Nic. Hausmann. 20 Oct. 1529 1369

1464\. to Conrad Cordatus. 20 Oct. 1529 1370

1465\. to Nic. Hausmann. Oct. 26, 1529 1370

1466\. to Nic. Amsdorf. 27 Oct. 1529 1371

1467\. to Joh. Lang. 28 Oct. 1529 1373

1468\. to Wenc. Link. Oct. 28, 1529. St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1957,
no. 31.

1469 To Elector John of Saxony. Oct. 29.

1529 1373

1470: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

30 Oct. 1529. (Regest.) 1374

1471 To Duke Albrecht of Prussia. Nov. 5.

1529\. 1374

1472\. to Friedr. Myconius. Nov. 7, 1529 1375

1473\. to Jakob Probst. 10 Nov. 1529 1376

1474\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 10, 1529 1378

1475\. to D. Philipp Nosenecker. Nov. 11, 15291379

1476: The Council of Coburg to Luther. Nov. 12.

1529\. (Regest.) 1380

1477 To Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 18.

1529\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 552.

1478 To Elector John of Saxony. Nov. 23.

1479: The Councils of the Electorate of Saxony to Luther. November 25,
1529 1381

1480 To Duke Henry V of Mecklenburg.

Nov. 27, 1529 1382

1481 To the Elector John of Saxony.

Nov. 29, 1529 1384

1482\. Friedr. Myconius to Luther. Dec. 2, 1529, 1387, 1483, Landgrave
Philip of Hesse to Luther.

9\. dec. 1529 1390

1484\. to Elector John of Saxony. Dec. 11.

1529 1392

1485\. to Abbot Friedr. Pistorius. 13. Dec. 1529 \... 1393

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XXIX

> **Column**

1486\. to Esban Hesse. 13 Dec. 1529 1394

1487\. to the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.

16 Dec. 1529 1396

1488 Luther and Jonas to the Elector of Saxony. 17. Dec. 1529! 1397

1489: Luther and Jonas to the Elector of Saxony. 20 Dec. 1529 1398

1490: Prince John of Saxony to Luther and Jonas. Dec. 21, 1529 1399

1491 Luther and Melanchthon to the Coburg City Council. Dec. 25, 1529
1400

Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s concerns to the Elector. St. Louis edition,
vol. XVI, 283.

1493\. to Johann Purgolt. 1529 1402

1494\. Concerns to Brenz about the death penalty of heretics.
(Fragment.) 1529 1403

Luther\'s preface to the German translation of Melanchthon\'s notes on
the Epistle to the Colossians. St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 176.

1496\. to Michael Stiefel. January 2, 1530 1404

1497\. to Nic. Hausmann. 3 Jan. 1530 1404

1498\. to Conrad Cordatus. 3 Jan. 1530 1405

1499 To Elector John of Saxony. Jan. 4.

1530 1407

1500\. to Nic. Amsdorf. 4 Jan. 1530 1408

1501 Luther and the other Visitators to the Elector. Jan. 9 , 1530, 1408

1502 To the preachers of Lübeck. Jan. 12, 1530 1409

1503: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

Jan 18, 1530 1411

1504: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

Jan. 27, 1530. (Regest.) 1412

1505 To Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.

Feb. 1, 1530; St. Louis edition, vol. X, 736.

1506 To the bishops of Brandenburg, Havelberg and Lebus. February 1,
1530. St. Louis

Ed. vol. X, 738.

1507 To the Counts and Lords of Churbrandenburg. St. Louis edition, vol.
X, 740.

1508\. to Catharina Hornung. February 1, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 742.

1509\. to Nic. Hausmann. Feb. 2, 1530 1413

1510\. to Conr. cordatus. Feb. 10 (?) 1530\.... 1414

1511\. to his father Hans Luther. 15 Feb.

1530\. St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1794.

1512\. to Nic. Hausmann. Feb. 25, 1530 1416

1513\. to Spalatin. Feb. 26, 1530 1417

1514 To Duke John Frederick of Saxony.

St. Louis edition, vol. VI, 892.

1515: Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther. Beginning of March

1530\. (Regest.) 1418

1516\. to Just. Menius and Friedr. Myconius.

Ans. March 1530 1418

1517\. to Adam Adam. 5 March 1530 1419

1518 To Elector John of Saxony. March 6

1530, St. Louis edition, vol. x, 544.

1519\. to Joseph Levin Metzsch. March 12, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1814.

1520\. Churf. Joh. to Luther, Jonas 2c. March 14

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 635.

1521 To Just. March 14, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 637.

> **Column**

1522\. Elector John of Saxony to Luther and comrades. March 21, 1530.
(Regest.) .1421

1523\. Catharina Hornung to Wolf Hornung, with

Luther\'s preface and glosses. March 24, 1530 1421

1524: Luther\'s (?) expert opinion for the Elector John of Saxony. End
of March or beginning of Apr. 1530 1426

1525\. to Georg Wicel and Anton Hermann.

April 1 1530 1428

1526\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. April 2, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 664.

1527\. to Conrad Cordatus. April 2, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 665.

1528\. to Justus Menius. April 12, 1530 1429

1529\. to Nic. Amsdorf. April 18, 1530 1430

1530\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. April 18, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 667.

1531\. to Wenc. Link. April 22, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 669.

1532\. to Esban Hesse. April 23, 1530 1432

1533\. to Catharina Jonas. April 23, 1530 1433

1534\. to Melanchthon. Apr. 23, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2307.

1535\. to Just. Jonas. April 23, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI,
1750.

1536 To Spalatin. April 23, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1754.

1537: Luther\'s draft of the \"Admonition to the Clergy. Between 23 and
29 Apr.

1530 1434

1538\. To his table companions. April 28, 1530.

St. Louis ed., vol. XVI, 1752.

1539\. Melanchthon to Luther. April 28, 1530\.... 1445

1540\. to Justus Jonas. April 29, 1530 1446

1541 To Melanchthon. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, appendix, no. 5.

1542 To Elector John of Saxony. End of April 1530 1447

1543: Joh. Agricola to Luther. Ans. May 1530.

(Regest.). , 1449

1544\. Joach. Camerarius to Luther. Ans. May

1530\. (Regest.) 1449

1545\. Justus Jonas to Luther. May 4, 1530 1449

1546\. Melanchthon to Luther. May 4, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 650.

1547: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

May 4, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 690.

1548: Prince John of Saxony to Luther. May 11, 1530, St. Louis edition,
vol. XVI, 656.

1549\. Melanchthon to Luther. May 11, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 654.

1550\. to Melanchthon. May 12, 1530. St. Louis

Vol. XVI, Annex, No. 7.

1551\. to Melanchthon. May 15, 1530 1453

1552 To Elector John of Saxony. May 15

1530\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 657.

1553 To Joh. Agricola. 15 May 1530 1454

1554\. to Justus Jonas. may 19, 15301456

1555 To Elector John of Saxony. May 20

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 690.

1556: Urban Rhegius to Luther. May 21, 1530.

(Regest.) 1457

1557\. Melanchthon to Luther. May 22, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 688.

XXX

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

1558\. to Wenc. Link. May 28, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, annex,
no. 6.

1559\. to Justus Jonas. Late May or early June 1530 1458

1560 To Jakob Probst. June 1, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, annex,
no. 2.

1561\. to Johann Zelst. June 1, 1530 1463

1562: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

June 1, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 707.

1563\. to Melanchthon. June 2, 1530. St. Louis

Vol. XVI, annex, No. 3.

1564\. Tohis wife. 5 June 1530 1464

1565\. To Wenc. Link. June 5, 1530 1465

1566 To Melanchthon. June 5, 1530 1467

1567\. \" the abbot Friedr. Pistorius. June 5, 1530 1469

1568 To Melanchthon. June 7, 1530 1470

1569\. Justus Jonas to Luther. June 12, 1530. \... 1471

1570\. Justus Jonas to Luther. June 13, 1530. \... 1477

1571 Melanchthon to Luther. June 13, 1530. 1480 1572. Justus Jonas to
Luther. June 18, 1530. \... 1481

1573\. Melanchthon to Luther. June 19, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 734.

1574\. to Caspar von Teutleben. June 19, 1530 1486

1575\. to Hieronymus Weller. June 19, 1530 1487

1576\. to Peter Weller. June 19, 1530 1489

1577\. to his son John. 19 June 1530 1491

1578\. to Conrad Cordatus. June 19, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, annex, no. 8.

1579\. to Gabriel Zwilling. June 19, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, annex, no. 10.

1580\. Veit Dietrich to Luther\'s wife. June 19.

15301492

1581\. To Landgrave Philip of Hesse. June 20

1530\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVII, 1960.

1582\. to Erh. Schnepf. June 20, 1530 1494

1583\. Andreas Osiander to Luther. June 21, 1530 1495

1584\. to Nic. Hausmann. June 25, 1530 1497

1585 Melanchthon to Luther. June 25, 1530 1498 1586. Justus Jonas to
Luther. June 25, 1530\... 1499

1587\. Justus Jonas to Luther. June 25, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 817.

1588: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

June 25, 1530. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 752.

1589\. Melanchthon to Luther. June 26, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 896.

1590 To Melanchthon. June 27, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 894.

1591\. to Wenc. Link. 27 June 1530 1503

1592\. Melanchthon to Luther. June 27, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 898.

1593\. Agricola to Luther. Around this time 1530. (Fragment.) 1504

1594\. to Melanchthon. June 29, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 901.

1595\. to Just. Jonas. June 30, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 820.

1596 To Melanchthon. June 30, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 905.

1597 To Spalatin. June 30, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 908.

1598\. to Johann Agricola. June 30, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 750.

1599 To Joh. Brenz. June 30, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 910.

> **Column**

1600\. to Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.

June 30, 1530. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1758.

1601\. Melanchthon to Luther. June 30, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 900.

1602\. Spalatin to Luther. June 30 (?) 1530.

(Fragment.) 1506

1603\. Jonas to Luther. June 30 (?) 1530.

(Fragment.) St. Louis ed., vol. XVI,

1604 Osiander to Luther. June 30, 1530. (Regest.) 1507

1605 To Abbot Friedr. Pistorius. I. July 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. V, 1178.

1606\. concerns about quite a few items. Ans. July 1530 1507

1607\. concerns of Melanchthon and Luther. Around the same time 1530
1512

1608 To Melanchthon. July 3, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 913.

1609 To Melanchthon. July 5, 1530. St. Louiser

Ed. vol. XVI, 914.

1610\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. July 6, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 881.

1611\. to Conrad Cordatus. July 6, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 914 f.

1612\. to Cardinal Albrecht. July 6, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 916.

1613\. to Lazarus Spengler. July 8, 1530 1513

1614\. Melanchthon to Luther. July 8, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 886.

1615\. Brenz to Luther. July 8, 1530 1515

1616 To Heinr. Gnesius. July 9, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2146.

1617\. to Elector John of Saxony. July 9.

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 814.

1618\. to Justus Jonas. July 9, 1530. st. louis.

Ed. vol. XVI, 927.

1619\. Melanchthon to Luther. July 10, 1530 1516

1620\. to Wenc. Link. July 13, 1530. St. Louiser

Ed. vol. XVI, 926.

1621\. to D. Johann Rühel. July 13, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 926.

1622\. to Melanchthon. July 13, 1530. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XVI, 931.

1623 To Justus Jonas. July 13, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 929.

1624\. to Spalatin. July 13, 1530. St. Louis

Ausg., vol. XVI, 1759.

1625\. concerns about the fair 2c. July 13, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1724.

1626\. Melanchthon to Luther. July 14, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1010.

1627\. to Jonas, Spalatin, Melanchthon and

Agricola. July 15, 1530 1517

1628\. to Spalatin. July 15, 1530 1520

1629: Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

July 15, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 890.

1630\. Melanchthon to Luther. July 15, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 944.

1631\. to Justus Jonas. 15 July 1530 1521

1632\. to Melanchthon. July 19, 1530. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XVI, 924.

1633 To Spalatin. July 20, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1761.

1634\. to Wenc. Link. July 20, 1530 1523

1635\. Melanchthon to Luther. July 20, 1530 1524

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XXXI

> **Column**

1636 To Melanchthon. July 21, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1013.

1637\. to Justus Jonas. July 21, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI,
appendix, no. 15.

1638\. to Melanchthon. July 27, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1454.

1639\. to Justus Jonas. July 27, 1530 1525

1640\. to Spalatin. July 27, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1006.

1641\. to Joh. Agricola. July 27, 1530 1528

1642\. Melanchthon to Luther. July 27, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1018.

1643\. concerns from the fair. Around the same time

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1040.

1644 Melanchthon to Luther. July 28, 1530 1529 1645. Joh. Agricola to
Luther. July 28, 1530\... 1531 1646. Melanchthon to Luther. July 30,
1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 992.

1647 To Melanchthon. July 31, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 899.

1648\. to Laz. Spengler. July 1530. St. Louis

Ed. vol. X, 416.

1649\. to Hieron. Weller. July? 1530 1532

1650\. to Melanchthon. I. Aug. 1530 1535

1651\. to Justus Jonas. Aug. 3, 1530 1536

1652 To Melanchthon. Aug. 3, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1019.

1653 To Melanchthon. Aug. 4, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1022.

1654\. concerns. Response to 5 questions. 4 Aug.

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2228.

1655\. to Chancellor Brück. Aug. 5, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI;
1764.

1656 Justus Jonas to Luther. Aug. 6, 1530 1538

1657\. Melanchthon to Luther. August 6, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1079.

1658\. Joachim Camerarius to Luther. Aug. 6.

1530\. (Regest.) 1541

1659\. Melanchthon to Luther. August 8, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1080.

1660\. to his wife. 14 Aug. 1530. st. louis ed. vol.XVI, 1084. \'

1661\. to his wife. 15 Aug. 1530 1541

1662\. to Hieron. Weller. Aug. 15, 1530. 1542

1663\. to Melanchthon. Aug. 15, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1082.

1664 Concerns about what the Protestant states should do. First half of
August 1530 1544

1665\. to Melanchthon. August 20, 1530 1546

1666\. to Abbot Friedr. Pistorius. Aug. 20, 1530 1548

1667\. to Eoban Hesse. 20 Aug. 1530 1549

1668\. Melanchthon to Luther. August 22, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1401.

1669\. Spalatin to Luther. Aug. 23, 1530 1550

1670 To Melanchthon. Aug. 24, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI,
appendix, no. 11.

1671\. to Lazarus Spengler. August 24, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1400.

1672\. Melanchthon to Luther. August 25, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1451.

1673 Bucer to Luther. Aug. 25, 1530 1552

1674\. to Elector John of Saxony. Aug. 26.

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1414.

1675\. au Spalatin. Aug. 26, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1406.

> **Column**

1676\. to Melanchthon. Aug. 26, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1402.

1677\. to Just. Jonas. Aug. 26, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1405.

1678\. to Joh. Brenz. Aug. 26, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 166.

1679\. Melanchthon to Luther. August 26, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol.
XVI, 1452.

1680: Concerns about some articles. Toward the end of Aug. 1530. St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1407.

1681\. to Hans von Sternberg. Aug. 27, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. V, 1132.

1682\. to Spalatin. Aug. 28, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1457.

1683 To Melanchthon. Aug. 28, 1530. St. Louis Acts, vol. XVI, 1455.

1684\. to Just. Jonas. Aug. 28, 1530. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI,
appendix, \"No. 13.

1685\. to Lazarus Spengler. August 28, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1478.

1686\. Melanchthon to Luther. August 29, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1453.

1687 Landgrave Philip to Luther. Aug. 29, 1530 1559

1688\. Melanchthon to Luther. September 1, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1484.

1689 Melanchthon to Luther. Sept. 4, 1530 1560

1690\. Justus Jonas to Luther. Sept. 6, 1530\... 1562

1691\. to his housewife. 8 Sept. 1530 1564

1692\. to Hieronymus Weller. Sept. 8, 1530 1565

1693\. dispatch letter from interpreting 2c. 8 Sept.

1530 -St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 968.

1694\. Melanchthon to Luther. September 8, 1530. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI,
1513.

1695\. to Melanchthon. September 11, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1514.

1696\. to Landgrave Philipp. II Sept. 1530 1567

1697\. settlement means proposed by Truchsess 2c. 10 and 11 Sept. 1530.
St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1509.

1698\. to Wenc. Link. 12 Sept. 1530 1568

1699\. to Melanchthon. September 15, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, annex, no. 12.

1700\. concerns about the means of comparison. 17. or

September 18, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1510.

1701\. to Wenc. Link. Sept. 20, 1530, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1525.

1702\. to Melanchthon. 20 Sept. 1530 1569

1703\. to Justus Jonas. September 20, 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1479.

1704\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. 23 Sept. 1530.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1522.

1705\. to Conrad Cordatus. Sept. 23, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, annex, no. 14.

1706\. to his wife. 24 Sept. 1530 1571

1707\. to Laz. Spengler. September 28, 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1555.

1708\. to Mart. Glazier. I. Oct. 1530 1572

1709\. to Lazarus Spengler. -I. October 1530.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1556.

1710\. to Hans Honold. 2 Oct. 1530 1573

1711 To Elector John of Saxony. 3 Oct.

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1557.

1712\. to Ludwig Senfel. 4 Oct. 1530 1574

1713\. to Hans von Sternberg. Oct. 4. 15301576

XXXII

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

> **Column**

1714\. to Hieronymus Baumgärtner. 5 Oct. 1530 1577

1715\. to Landgrave Philip of Hesse. Oct. 15, 1530 1578

1716\. to Conr. cordatus. 18 Oct. 1530 1579

1717 Landgrave Philip of Hesse to Luther.

21 Oct. 1530 1580

1718\. Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther. 21 Oct. 1530.

(Regest.) 1584

1719\. to Nic. Hausmann. 26 Oct. 1530 1584

1720\. to Landgrave Philip of Hesse. 28 Oct.

1530 1585

1721\. concerns of Luther 2c. of the opposition.

End of October 1580. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 562.

1722\. to Amsdorf. 31 Oct. 1530 1587

1723\. to the council of Herzberg. Nov. 1, 1530 \... 1588 1724. Stephan
Agricola to Luther. Nov. 1, 1530.

(Regest.) 1589

1725\. Bugenhagen to Luther, Jonas rc. Beginning

Nov. 1530. (Regest.) 1590

1726 Joh. Brenz to Luther. Nov. 4, 1530 1590

1727\. to Joh. Apel. Nov. 7, 1530 1592

1728\. to Joh. Brismann. 7 Nov. 1530 1593

1729\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. Nov. 7, 1530 1595

1730\. Luther, Jonas and Melanchthon to the

Electors. Nov. 8, 1530 1596

1731\. to Veit Dietrich. Nov. 13, 1530 1597

1732\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. Nov. 13, 1530 1598

1733\. to Friedr. Myconius. Nov. 13, 1530 1599

1734\. Elector John of Saxony to Jonas,

Luther and Melanchthon. Nov. 14, 1530.

(Regest.) 1601

1735\. Eoban Hesse to Luther. Nov. 16, 1530.

(Regest.) 1601

1736\. Veit Dietrich to Luther. 20 Nov. 1530 1601

1737\. to Casp. von Köckeritz zum Sees. 28 Nov.

1530\. St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1056.

1738\. to Wenc. Link. 1. Dec. 1530 1604

1739\. to Joh. Fesel.1. dec. 1530 1605

1740\. to Joh. Heß. Dec. 5, 1530 1606

1741\. to Elector John of Saxony. 12 Dec.

1530\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1777.

1742\. to Peter Hackenberg. 16 Dec. 1530 1608

1743 To the City Council of Göttingen. 18 Dec. 1530 1609 1743a. To
Wolfg. Wiebel. Without date 1530?

1533? 1610

1744\. to Hieran. Baumgärtner. Jan. 1, 1531. 1610 1745. Nicolaus Gerbel
to Luther. 1 Jan. 1531.

(Regest.) 1611

1746\. concerns about confiscation of monastery property.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1829.

1747\. To the City Council of Göttingen. Jan. 11, 1531 1611

1748\. to Joh. Sutel. Jan. 11, 1531 1612

1749\. to Heinr. Scholl. Jan. 12, 1531 1614

1750\. to Joh. Purgolt. Jan. 12, 1531 1615

1751\. concerns about Bucer\'s settlement proposals.

St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1975.

1752\. To Laz. Spengler. 15 Jan. 1531 1616

1753\. to Wenc. Link. 15 Jan. 1531 1616

1754\. to Johann Weber. 16 Jan. 1531 1619

1755\. to Nic. Hausmann. 21 Jan. 1531 1620

1756\. \" Mart. Bucer. Jan. 22, 1531. St. Louis

Ed. vol. XVII, 1973.

1757\. to Cath. Zell. 24 Jan. 1531 1621

> **Column**

1758 To Duke Ernst of Brunswick-Lüneburg. Feb. 1, 1531, St. Louis
edition, vol. XVII, 2002.

1759\. Mart. Bucer to Luther. 9 (?) Feb. 1531 1622

1760\. to Lazarus Spengler. February 15, 1531.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 570.

1761\. to Elector John. February 16, 1531.

St. Louis ed. vol. XVII, 1976.

1762\. luthers, Jonas 2c. Concerns. Around 16 Feb.

1531 St. Louis ed. vol. XVII, 1978.

Luther\'s postscript to a letter by Melanchthon. 19 Feb. 1531 1628

1764\. to Justus Menius. Feb. or March 1531 1628

1765 To the parish priests of Göttingen. March 1, 1531 1629

1766 To the City Council of Göttingen. March 1, 1531 1631

1767\. to Joh. Sutel. March 1, 1531 1632

1768\. to Stephan Roth. March 4, 1531 1633

1769\. to the mayor and council of Zwickau. 4. 1531 1635

1770 To Elector John of Saxony. March 4, 1531 1636

1771\. to Justus Jonas. 7 March 1531 1637

1772\. the mayors of Zwickau to Luther.

March 8 1531 1638

1773\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. 12. March1531 1640

1774\. to Justus Jonas. 13 March 1531 1640

1775 To the mayors and judges of Frauenstein. March 17, 1531, St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 2216.

1776 To a citizen of Nuremberg. March 18, 1531, St. Louis edition, vol.
X, 568.

1777\. marginal note and postscript by Luther to a letter. March 20,
1531 1641

1778 To the City Council of Göttingen. March 28, 1531 1642

1779\. to Cyriacus Gericke. March 28, 1531 1642

1780\. to Joh. Frosch. March 28, 1531 1643

1781\. to Valentin Hausmann. Probably still in March 15311644

1782\. Stephan Roth to Luther. April 3, 1531\.... 1646

1783\. to Spalatin. April 5, 1531 1649

1784 To Elector John of Saxony. April 16

1531\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1745.

1785\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. April 17, 1531, St. Louis edition, vol. X,
1618.

1786\. to Justus Jonas. april 18, 1531 1650

1787\. to Nic. Hausmann. April 24, 1531 1651

1788\. to Stanislaus Hoffmann. April 24, 1531 1652

1789\. to Spalatin. April 24, 1531 1653

1790\. to Brosius Heinrich. April 29, 1531.

. St. Louis ed. vol. X, 746.

1791\. to Barbara Lischner. April 30, 1531.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1744.

1792 To the City Council of Reval. May 3, 1531.

(Regest.) 1655

1793\. to Chancellor Brück. may 8, 1531. st. louis ed. vol. xvi, 1749.

1794\. to Nic. Hausmann. May 10, 1531 1655

1795\. to Wenc. Link. 12 May 1531 1656

1796\. to Andreas Osiander. May 13, 1531 1658

1797\. to Nicolaus Hausmann. May 19, 1531.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1614.

1798\. to his mother. May 20, 1531. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1798.

1799 To Conrad Cordatus. May 23, 1531, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1612.

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

XXXIII

> **Column**

1800\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. June 1531 1660

1801 To Elector John of Saxony. June 1

1531 1661

1802\. to Casp. Löner and Nic. Medler. June 7

1531\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1618.

1803 To Elector John of Saxony. June 8.

1531 1661

1804 To Elector John of Saxony. June 16

1531 1662

1805 To the preachers in Zwickau. June 21, 1531 1664

1806 To the Christians in Zwickau. June 21, 1531.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1922.

1807 Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

June 25 1531 1665

1808\. concerns, jointly with Melanchthon.

June 26 1531 1666

1809\. to Wenc. Link. June 26 1531 1666

1810 To the Christians of Frauenstein. June 27

1531\. St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2218.

1811\. to Hieron. Weller. June 27, 1531 1667

1812\. to M. Osw. Losan. Perhaps in June 1531 1668

1813 To Joh. Brenz. Perhaps in June 1531. \... 1669 1814. Brenz to
Luther. June 30, 1531 1670

1815\. to Nic. Gerbel. Perhaps in June 1531. .. 1671

1816\. to Mich. Boots. June or July 1531 1672

1817 To Elector John of Saxony. July 3

1531 1672

1818\. to one of nobility. July 3, 1531, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 822.

1819\. toSpalatin,Eberh. BrisgerandErh.Stein

bach. July 5 1531 1674

1820\. to Conrad Cordatus. July 10, 1531.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1606.

1821\. to Bernh. von Lölen. July 13, 1531 1675

1822\. to Spalatin. July 14, 1531 1676

1823: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

July 14 1531 1676

1824 To the Elector John of Saxony.

July 29, 1531, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1798.

1825 To Chancellor Brück. End of July 1531 1677

1826 To the City Council of Brunswick. Aug. 13.

1531 1677

1827 To Prince John of Saxony. Aug. 14.

1531\. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1720.

1828\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. Aug. 14, 1531 1679

1829\. concerns of Luther, Melanchthon rc. Aug.

1531\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1792.

1830 To Elector John of Saxony. Aug. 15.

1531 1680

1831 To the clergy in Zwickau. 18 Aug. 1531 1680 1832. to Matthias
Crozsch. 18 Aug. 1531 1682

1833\. to Wenc. Link. 18 Aug. 1531 1683

1834\. to Albrecht, Duke of Prussia. Aug. 24.

1531 1684

1835\. To Joh. Brismann. Aug. 24, 1531 1685

1836\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. Aug. 26, 1531 1686

1837\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. Sept. 4, 1531 1687

1838\. to D. Robert Barnes. Sept. 3 or 5, 1531 1688

1839\. Leonhard Munssoor \[Musioius (?)\] to Lu

ther. Sept. 12, 1531. (Regest.) 1697

1840\. Jonas, Luther and Melanchthon to Hans

Solver. 13 Sept. 1531 1698

1841\. to Margrave George of Brandenburg.

September 14, 1531. St. Louis Ausq, vol. XIX, 1216.

> **Column**

1842 To Landgrave Philipp von Hessen. Sept. 22.

1531\. (Regest.) 1699

1843\. to the mayor and council of Zerbst.

7 Oct. 1531 1699

1844\. To Martin Goerlitz. 9 Oct. 1531\.... 1700

1845\. \" Spalatin. Oct. 10, 1531 1700

1846: Prince John of Saxony. Oct. 10.

1531 1702

1847\. to Justus Menius. 18 Oct. 1531 1703

1848\. Nic. von Amsdorf to Luther. 18 Oct. 1531 1704

1849 Jonas and Luther to Prince John of Saxony. Oct. 25, 1531 1705

1850\. Laurentius Zoch to Luther. Oct. 30, 1531.

(Regest.) 1706

1851\. to Nic. Hausmann. Oct. 31, 1531 1707

1852 To the City Council of Rostock. Nov. 10.

1531 1708

1853\. to Margrave George of Brandenburg. Nov. 16, 1531. 1710

1854\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 22, 1531 1712

1855 Facultätszeugniss for Veit Oertel. Nov. 22, 1531 1713

1856\. to Joh. Bugenhagen. Nov. 24, 1531 1714

1857\. to Martin Görlitz. Nov. 27, 1531 1716

1858\. to Hans Löser. Dec. 16, 1531; St. Louis edition, Vol. V, 1302.

1859\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. 28 Dec. 1531 1717

1860\. \" Justus Jonas. Without date 1531 1717

1861 \" an unnamed prince. Without date 1531. St. Louis edition, vol. X,
1722.

1862\. to Elector John of Saxony. Without date 1531 1718

1863\. ToMartin Görlitz. 3 Jan. 1532 1719

1864\. to Caspar Huberinus. 3 Jan. 1532 1719

1865\. to Wenc. Link. 3 Jan. 1532 1720

1866\. \"The Council of Torgau. Jan. 12, 1532 \... 1722

1867\. to Abbot Friedrich Pistorius. Jan. 17. (?)

1532 1722

1868\. Johann Bugenhagen to Luther. Jan. 24.

1532\. (Regest.) 1725

1869\. to the council of Herford. Jan. 31, 1532. 1725

1870\. to Jak. Montanus and Gerh. Wilskamp.

31 Jan. 1532 1726

1871\. to Eberhard von der Tannen. Ans. 1532.

St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1664.

1872: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

4 feb 1532 1727

1873 To Prince John of Saxony. In Feb.

1532\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1810.

1874\. to the Churprinzen Johann Friedrich.

February 12, 1532. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1807.

1875\. to Valentin Hausmann. 19 Feb. 1532.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1752.

1876\. to Veit Dietrich. In February 1532 1730

1877\. to his housewife. 27 Feb. 1532 1731

1878\. letter of recommendation for Joh. Rischmann.

27 feb 1532 1733

1879\. to Mrs. Dorothea Jörger. March 7, 1532 1733

1880\. to Hans von Taubenheim. March 18, 1532 1735

1881: Prince John of Saxony to Luther.

March 23, 1532. St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1802.

1882 To Elector John of Saxony. March 28

1532\. St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1802.

XXXIV

Register of Luther\'s letters, arranged in chronological order.

**Column**

1883 To the Chancellor Georg Vogler. March 28

1532\... 1736

1884 To Albrecht, Duke of Prussia. Perhaps April 1532. St. Louis
edition, vol. XX, 1678.

1885\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. April 2, 1532 1737

1886\. to Georg Mohr. Two letters.

A. 5 April 1532 1738

B. 13 April 1532 1739

1887: Duke Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.

April 6, 1532. (Regest.) 1740

1888: Duke Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.

April 12, 1532. (Regest.) 1740

1889: To the \"nine men\" of Herford. At

April 1532 1740

1890\. to Gerh. Wilskamp and comrades. April 22

1532 1742

1891 To the Abbess of Herford. April 22, 1532 1743

1892 To N. Zink. April 22, 1532. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2046.

1893: To Margrave Joachim of Brandenburg.

April 30 1532 1744

1894\. to the council of Soest. April 30, 1532 1745

1895 Concerns about spiritual goods. Perhaps April 1532. St. Louis
edition, vol. XVI, 1829.

1896 Concerns about the Act of Peace. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1826.

1897\. concerns about the act of peace. May

1532\. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1819.

1898\. to Spalatin. May 20, 1532 1746

1899\. concerns about a future religious peace. May 1532 1747

1900\. Johann Apel to Luther. May 31, 1532.

(Regest.) 1750

1901\. the council of Soest to Luther. Beginning of June

1532\. (Regest.) 1751

1902\. To Franz Koler. 8 June 1532 1751

1903\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. June 13, 1532 1751

1904\. to the council of Soest. June 17, 1532 1752

1905\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. June 24, 1532 1754

1906\. to Valentin Hausmann. June 24, 1532.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1753.

1907 Prince John to Luther, Bugenhagen and Melanchthon. June 28, 1532
1755

1908\. concerns, jointly with Jonas.

June 29 1532 1755

1909: To the Elector John of Saxony.

June 29, 1532. St. Louis ed. vol. XVI, 1812.

1910\. to Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.

June 29 1532 1758

1911\. to the preachers at Erfurt, Aegidius, Andreas and Petrus. 1 July
1532 1759

1912 The Nuremberg Council and the Councils of Margrave George to Luther
and the Wittenberg Theologians. July 16, 1532. (Regest.) 1760

1913\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. July 27, 1532 1760

1914 To the margravial governors and councillors, mayor and council of
Nuremberg, together with the other theologians.

Aug. 1, 1532 1761

> **Column**

1915\. to Margrave Joachim of Brandenburg. Aug. 3, 1532 1765

1916 To the Council of Reval. August 7, 1532.

(Regest.) 1768

1917\. churfürst Johann to Luther, Jonas, Me-

lanchthon and Pauli. Ans. Aug. 1532 1768

1918\. to an unnamed person. 19 Aug. 1532 1770

1919\. to an unnamed person. 19 Aug. 1532 1771

1920\. to Martin Lodinger. August 27, 1532.

St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2220.

1921\. Veit Dietrich to Just. Menius. Aug. 31, 1532 1772

1922\. to Johann Riedtesel. September 7, 1532.

St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1724.

1923\. to the Kamenz City Council. Sept. 10, 15321773

1924\. to Johann, Georg and Joachim, Princes of

Anhalt. Maybe a little before 14 Sept. 1532 1774

1925\. to Johann and Joachim, Princes of Anhalt. -

14 Sept. 1532 1776

1926\. to Andreas Osiander. 19 Sept. 15321776

1927\. to Johann, Prince of Anhalt. 25 Sept.

1532 1778

1928\. To Frederick, King of Denmark. September 28, 1532. 1779

1929 To the people of Leipzig who are oppressed for the sake of the
Gospel. Oct. 4, 1532, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1932.

1930 To the Counts of Schlick. Oct. 9, 1532, St. Louis edition, vol. XX,
1686.

1931\. to the Elector John Frederick. 17 Oct.

1532\. St. Louis edition, vol.X, 816.

1932\. to Elector John Frederick. 18 Oct. 1532 1781

1933\. concerns about the sequestration. Perhaps Oct. 1532. St. Louis
edition, vol. XVI, 1833.

1934\. to Nic. von Amsdorf. Nov. 2, 1532

1935\. to Laurentius Zoch. November 3, 1532. St. Louis edition, vol. X,
2036.

1936\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 6, 1532

1937\. to Nic. Hausmann. Nov. 24, 1532

1938\. to Jonas von Stockhausen. Nov. 27, 1532. St. Louis edition, vol.
X, 1748.

1939\. to Mrs. von Stockhausen. Nov. 27, 1532. St. Louis edition, vol.
X, 1752.

1940 The Council of Soest to Luther. Towards the end of Nov. 1532
(Regest.).

1941\. to Joh. von Riedtesel. Dec. 6, 1532

1942\. to Laurentius Zoch. St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2036.

1943\. to Eberhard Brisger. 12 Dec. 1532

1944\. to Gerhard Wilskamp. 15 Dec. 1532

1945\. to Caspar Cruciger. 21 Dec. 1532

1946\. to the council of Soest. Dec. 21, 1532

1947 To the City Council of Münster. St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2047.

1948\. to Bernh. Rothmann, preacher at Münster. Dec. 23, 1532

1949\. to Joh. Bugenhagen. St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 324.

1950: Concerns, together with Jonas and Melanchthon, about how
Protestant noblemen should behave toward their Catholic feudal lords.
St. Louis edition, vol. X, 586.

1782

1783

1784

1785

1785

1786

1788

1788

1789

1790

**Index of letters included in this volume.**

**B. Arranged alphabetically by name.**

(The number indicates the number of the letter).

**I. Letters of Luther to:**

Adam, Adam. 1517.

Nobility, to one of. 1818.

Aesticämpianus, John. 56.

Agricola, Johann. 406. 918. 965. 980. 993. 1006. 1022. 1047. 1081. 1109.
1115. 1121. 1122. 1300. 1319. 1355. 1454. 1460. 1553. 1598. 1627 (at the
same time to Jonas, Spalatin and Melanchthon). 1641.

Agricola\'s wife, Elisabeth. 1091.

Alber, Matt. 947.

Altenburg, Bürgermeister und Rath zu. 480. 486. 490.

Amsdorf, Nicolaus von. 303. 405. 415. 427. 445. 773. 798. 807. 809. 821.
833. 844. 867. 877. 888. 896.

951\. 967. 1041. 1084. 1137. 1164. 1199. 1259. 1262. 1275. 1278. 1324.
1331. 1343. 1351. 1357. 1360.

1872\. 1374. 1376. 1388. 1389. 1405. 1423. 1434.

1462\. 1466. 1500. 1530. 1722. 1729. 1732. 1773.

1800\. 1828. 1836. 1837. 1859. 1885. 1903. 1905.

1913\. 1934.

Anhalt, Georg, Fürstvon . 1924.

„ Joachim, „„ 1924. 1925.

„ Johann, „„ 1924.1925.1927.

\" Wolfgang, \" 1269.

Antwerp, to the Christians at. 840.

Apel, I). Johann. 1727.

Aquila, Caspar, pastor at Saalfeld. 1317.1366.

Attensasfen. See Ottensaß.

Augsburg, Christen zu. 686.

Augsburg. Draft of a section of the text \"Vermahnung an die
Geistlichen, versammelt auf dem Reichstage zu Augsburg. 1537.

Bader, Paul, Kastner zu Coburg. 1362. See Visitators.

Barnes, D. Robert. 1838.

Baumgärtner, Hieronymus. 769.1714.1744.

Bayer, Christian, churf. sächs. Chancellor. 1429.

Concerns. On prohibited marriage degrees. 530a.

Whether a prince may protect his subjects against the emperor and others
for the sake of faith. 584.

On Mosaic Law. 744.

Whether a forced marriage is valid. 802.

About a marriage case to Wolfg. Fueß. 1029.

How to counter the peasants\' revolt in its source. 1046.

Of One Shape to Reach the Weak. 1168.

On the teaching of the visitators. 1175.

For the Lords of Einsiedel. 1189. 1193. 1194.

In the Pack case (?). 1221.

In the Pack case. 1231. 1236.

Whether those who teach differently from the Lord\'s Supper should be
excluded from the covenant. 1407.

On the Doctrine of the Lord\'s Supper. 1456.

That the Elector could not be satisfied with Speier\'s farewell to the
empire. 1492.

On the Death Penalty of Heretics. 1494.

On several articles: of both forms, of celibacy, of the Mass, of
priestly ordination 2c. 1606.

About the fair 2c. 1625.1643.

Ueber fünf vorgelegte Fragen vom Abendmahl. 1654.

What the Protestant estates should do if the Emperor demands that the
judgment on the matter of religion be left to him. 1664.

On several disputed articles. 1680.

On the means of comparison proposed by Truchsess. 1700.

About the counterattack. 1721.

On the confiscation of monastery property. 1746.

\" Bucer\'s settlement proposals. 1751.

\"Hartung\'s Marriage Case. 1808.

the peace negotiations to be held in Schmalkalden. 1829.

On the confiscation of spiritual goods. 1895.

\" the act of peace. 1896.

\" the act of peace. 1897.

\" a future religious peace. 1899.

\" the articles of the Nuremberg Religious Peace.

1908\.

On the confiscation of spiritual goods. 1933.

How Protestant noblemen should behave against their Catholic feudal
lords. 1950.

Beier, Leonhard. 902. 915. 952. 1211.

Bercken, Joh., Augustinian prior. 12.

Bernard, a converted Jew. 619.

Billicanus, Theobald. 656.

Blank, Christoph. 282.

Bohemian brothers. 598.

Bohemian estates. 523.

Börner, Caspar, in Leipzig. 503.

Brabant, Christians at. 637. See Holland.

Brandenburg, Bishop of (Hieron. Scultetus). 58. \" Bishops of (Havelberg
and Lebus). 1506. \" George, Margrave of. 1250. 1841. 1853. \" Counts
and lords in the Churfürstenthum.

1507\.

Brandenburg, Joachim I, Elector of. 1309. 1893. 1915.

Braun, Johann, Vicarius in Eisenach. 1. 2.

Braunfels, Otto. 770.

Brunswick, Ernst, Duke of B.-Lüneburg. 1758.

\"Margaretha, Duchess of. 226.

Rath zu. 1826.

Bremen, Christians at. 814.

Brenz, Johann. 1147.1449. 1599. 1678. 1813.

XXXVI

Index on Luther\'s letters, arranged alphabetically.

Breslau, preacher at. (See Heß.) 1128.

Brisger, Eberhard, pastor in Altenburg. 963. 1060.

1146\. 1287. 1322. 1819. 1943.

Brismann, Johann. 483. 595. 705. 746. 806. 898. 1083.

1485\. 1728.1835.

Brück, Gregor, Chancellor. 670. 697. 698. 731. 979. 1220.

1306\. 1328. 1655. 1793. 1825.

Bucer, Martin. 1756.

Book inscription about John 12, 32. 1524.

Bugenhagen, Johann. 360. 1856. 1949.

Bünau, Günther von. 332.

Bünau, Heinrich von. 293.

Cajetan, Thomas, Cardinal. 98. 99. 100.

Capito, Wolfgang Fabricius. 447. 738. 740.

Carl V, Emperor. 328. 399.

Carlstadt, Andreas. 97. 139. 205. 1149.

Casel, Gregory. 926.

Chrosner, Alexius. 277.

Coburg, Rath zu. 1491.

Cordatus, Conrad. 1036. 1057. 1210. 1380. 1427. 1436.

1464\. 1498. 1510. 1527. 1578. 1611. 1705. 1716.

1799\. 1820.

Cranach, Lucas. 398.

Crotus, Johann; Rubianus. 634.

Crozsch, Matthias. 1832.

Cruciger, Caspar. 1945.

Crusius, Gottschalk. 776. 919.

Cuspinianus, Johann, imperial councilor. 393.

Czahera, Gallus. 779.

Denmark, Christian, Crown Prince of. 1275a.

Denmark, Frederick, King of. 1928.

Danzig, To Bishop Matthias von. 1403.

Danzig, An den Rath zu. 850.

Memo. 1408.

Teutonic Knights. 688.

Dietrich, Veit. 1731. 1876.

Dölen, Bernhard von. 1821.

Dolzig, Johann von. 429. 561. 885. 1069.

Domitsch, Rath und Prediger zu. 899.

Draco, John. 1062.

Draschwitz, Hanna von. 625. See Court Maidens.

Dressel, Michael, Augustinian Prior at Neustadt. 16. 20.

Printer of his sermons. 621a.

Drucker, admonition to the. 899a.

Dungersheim, Hieronymus, von Ochsenfart. 133. 154.

161\. 204. 212.

Eck, Johann. 75 a. 107. 128a. 146a. 167a.

Egranus, Joh. Sylvius. 66. 71. 140.

Einsiedel, Haugold von, churf. Rath. 368. 429.

\"Heinrich von; zu Gnandstein. 1188.

\" the lords of (Abraham and Henry). 1189.

1193\. 1194. 1204. 1252.

Letter of recommendation for Joh. Rischmann. 1878.

Emser, Jerome. 213.

Erasmus of Rotterdam. 163. 726.

Erfurt, Augustinerconvent zu. 3.

\" Christians to. 1059.

\"Decan and theological faculty at. 8.

\" Municipality to. 522.

\" the preachers to. 1911.

\" Rath zu. 909.

\" Seniors of the Augustinian Convent to. 6. See

Lohr.

Eßlingen, municipality of. 665.

Facultätszeugniss for Veit Oertel. 1855.

Feilitzsch, Fabian von. 350.

Feilitzsch, Ursula von. 625. See Court Maidens.

Flanders, Christians in. 637. See Holland.

Frankfurt, Rath zu. 868.

Frauenstein, Christen zu. 1810.

Friedrich, Abbot at Nuremberg. See Pistorius.

Frog, Johann. 1026. 1780.

Fuchs, Thomas, Ritter zum Schneeberg. 248.

Fueß, Wolfgang, pastor at Colditz. 1029. 1305.

Prince, to one. 1861. See Unnamed.

Gerbet, Nicolaus, lawyer in Strasbourg. 431. 464. 578. 620. 683. 736.
772. 986. 1277. 1458. 1815.

Gericke, Cyriacus, pastor in Köthen. 1779.

Glaser, Martin, Augustinian Prior at Ramsau. 184. 1439. 1708.

Gluenspieß, Philipp. 1043.

Gnesius, Heinrich, pastor at Ichtershausen. 1616.

Goldsmiths\' Guild at Nuremberg. 839.

Göritz, Margaretha. 1390.

Görlitz, Martin, pastor at Brunswick. 1348.1844. 1857. 1863.

Goslar, the Jacobigemeinde zu. 1406.

Göttingen, the parish priests at. 1765.

Göttingen, Rath zu. 1743. 1747. 1765. 1778.

Gottschalk, Heino, Abbot of Alt-Uelzen. 1207.

Greffendorf, Joh., ducal Saxon chamberlain. 342.

Gülden, Johann. 998.

Günther, M. Franz. 211.

Güttel, D. Caspar, Augustinian prior in Eisleben. 474.

Hackenberg, Peter. 1742.

Hall, Christians at. 1127.1232.

Hausmann, Nicolaus. 387. 463. 469. 497. 517. 530. 531. 540. 616. 650.
675. 676. 679. 681. 682. 717. 732. 741. 781. 817. 836. 911. 914. 917.
956. 972. 999. 1002. 1010. 1019. 1024. 1027. 1053. 1071. 1101.

1108\. 1112. 1117. 1139. 1143. 1156. 1166. 1191.

1200\. 1206 .1218. 1225. 1227. 1244. 1268. 1279.

1333\. 1338. 1358. 1364. 1371. 1378. 1379. 1432.

1437\. 1438. 1447. 1463. 1465. 1474. 1497. 1509.

1512\. 1526 .1530. 1584. 1610. 1704. 1719. 1755.

1785\. 1787. 1794. 1797. 1851. 1854. 1936. 1937.

Hausmann, Valentin. 1781. 1875. 1906.

Havelberg, Bishop zu. See Brandenburg and Lebus.

Hecker, Gerhard. 1381.

Henry VIII, King of England. 900.

Heinrich, Brosius, at Dittersdorf. 1790.

Herford, Aebtissin zu. 1891.

\" \"nine men\". 1889.

\" Council to 1869.

Hermann, Anton. 1525.

Hermann, Nicolaus, in Jáchymov. 778,

Herwagen, Joh., printer. 1020. See Secerius.

Herzberg, Rath zu. 1723.

Heß, Johann, Canonicus in Breslau. 317. 468. 653. 703. 891. 983. 1128.
1190. 1265. 1312. 1354. 1740.

Hesse, Eoban. 596. 1233. 1532. 1667.

Hesse, Landgrave Philip of. 1037. 1052. 1310. 1416. 1421. 1457. 1487.
1581. 1696. 1715. 1720. 1842.

Heuge, Paul, Mayor of Kiel. 1238.

Hirschfeld, Bernhard von. 429.

Court virgins, three expelled. 625.

Hofmann, Christoph. 566.

Hoffman\", Stanislaus. 1788.

Holland, Christians at. 637.

Honold, Hans, in Augsburg. 1261. 1710.

Hornung, Catharina. 1508.

Huberinus, Caspar. 1864.

Jonas, Catharina. 1533.

Index on Luther\'s letters, arranged alphabetically.

XXXVII

Jonas, Justus. 302. 412. 643. 649. 1134. 1138. 1141. 1148. 1153. 1162.
1165. 1179. 1383. 1384. 1393.

1409\. 1410. 1411. 1412. 1441. 1451. 1521. 1535.

1540\. 1554. 1595. 1618. 1623. 1627. 1631. 1637.

1639\. 1651. 1677. 1684. 1703. 1771. 1774. 1786.

1860\.

Jörger, Christoph. 1177.

Jörger, Mrs. Dorothea. 1178. 1216. 1879.

Jüterbock, Franciscan at. 176.

Kaiser, Leonhard. 1086.

Kamenz, Rath zu. 1923.

Kanitz, Elfe von. 1110.

Kaugisdorf, Andreas, pastor in Eilenburg. 1007.1082. 1140. 1387.

Child, D. Nic., pastor at Eisfeld. 1362. see Visitators.

Convent virgins. 756.3

Klosterjnngfrau von Adel. 689. See Spiegel, Hanna von.

Koburg, Rath zu. 1491.

Köckeritz, Caspar von, zum Sees. 1737.

Koler, Franz. 1902.

Koppe, Leonhard, Schösser zu Torgau. 604. 883. 886.

Force, Adam. 527.

Kram, Knight Assa von. 1042.

Krämer, Michael, pastor at Domitsch. 899.

Krautwald, Valentin. 977.

Kronberg, Hartmuth von. 462.

Kunzelt, Georg, pastor at Eilenburg. 301.

Lang, Joh., Augustinian prior at Erfurt. 14. 17. 19. 21. 23. 25. 26. 32.
33. 40. 41. 42. 44. 51. 60. 64. 79. 92. 141. 168. 178. 186. 194. 206.
227. 247. 255. 276. 323. 348. 377. 389. 441. 472. 476. 511. 514. 521.
525. 551. 747. 812. 826. 920. 1064. 1235. 1467.

Langenmantel, Christoph. 112.

Lebüs, bishop of. 1506. See Brandenburg.

Leister, Georg, Augustinian. 11.

Leipziger, die um des Evangelii willen vertriebenen. 1929.

Leisnig, municipality of. 581.

Leisnig, Rath zu. 580.

Leitzkau, Probst zu (Georg Mascov). 28. 29. 39.

Lemberg, Paul, abbot at Sagan. 825. 1256.

Leo X, pope. 77.155.338.

Reader, To the. 636.

Liefland, Christians in. 638. 803. 881.

Lindenau, Paul. 1201.

Link, Wenceslaus, Augustinian in Nuremberg. 65. 82. 117. 313. 324. 362.
369. 380. 391. 442. 466. 477. 519. 572. 576. 602. 820. 884. 894. 895.
897. 1017. 1044. 1056. 1079. 1085. 1098. 1163. 1205. 1222. 1240.

1264\. 1273. 1285. 1344. 1365. 1397. 1415. 1433.

1448\. 1468. 1531. 1558. 1565. 1591. 1620. 1634.

1698\. 1701. 1738. 1753. 1795. 1809. 1833. 1865.

Lischner, Barbara (Lißkirchen). 1791.

Lodinger, Martin. 1920.

Lohr, Andreas. 3. 6.

Löner, Caspar, pastor in Hof (and Medler). 1802.

Losan, M. Oswald, in Leipzig. 1812.

Extinguisher, Thomas. 1446.

Löser, Johann, zu Pretisch, Hereditary Marshal of Saxony. 639. 1840.
1858.

Lübeck, the preachers to. 1502.

Lupinus, Peter. 205.

Luther, Catharina, Luther\'s wife. 1459. 1660. 1661. 1691. 1706. 1877.

Luther, Hans, the Father. 437. 1511.

\"Johann, Luther\'s son. 1577.

\"Margaretha, Luther\'s Mother. 1798.

Moravian Brothers. 598. . See Bohemian Brethren.

Mainz, Albrecht, Archbishop, Elector of. 47. 257. 439. 708. 871. 893.
1612.

Mansfeld, Count Albrecht von. 402. 436. 621. 712. 816. 1428. 1452. 1453.

Mansfeld, Günther, Ernst, Hoyer and Albrecht, Counts zu. 712.

Marx, read from *Muris*. See mason.

Mascov, Georg, provost. See Leitzkau.

Maurer (*Muris*), Michael. 339.

Mecklenburg, Duke Henry of. 1480.

Medler, Nic. pastor in Hof (also to Löner). 1802. Melanchthon, Philipp.
95. 110. 403. 404. 410. 414. 420.

421\. 425. 434. 446. 529. 1104. 1136. 1335. 1534.

1541\. 1550. 1551. 1563. 1566. 1568. 1590. 1594.

1596\. 1608. 1609. 1622. 1627. 1632. 1636. 1638.

1647\. 1650. 1652. 1653. 1663. 1665. 1670. 1676.

1683\. 1695. 1699. 1702.

Memmingen, Rath zu. 1353.

3Menius, Justus. 960. 1058. 1073. 1077. 1106. 1234. 1254. 1516. 1528.
1764. 1847.

Merseburg, Bishop Adolph von. 258.

Metsch, Hans von, Captain at Wittenberg. 1373. Metsch, Joseph Levin von,
zu Mila. 273. 1039. 1226.

1445\.

Miltenberg, Christians zu. 709.

Miltitz, minutes for the negotiations with. 125.

Miltitz, Carl von. 180.

Minkwitz, Hans von. 707. 815.

Mohr, Georg, pastor at Borna. 992.1886.

Montanus, Jakob, head of the school at Herford. 633. 1402. 1870.

Morgenstern, Gregor. Testimony for. 660.

Mosellanus, Peter, Rector of the University of Leipzig. 318. Mühlhausen,
Rath und Gemeinde von. 758. 1015.

Mühlpfort, Hieronymus, Stadtvogt in Zwickau. 343. Müller, Caspar,
Mansfeld Chancellor. 878a. 890,996. Munssoor, Leonhard. 1839.

Münster, Rath zu. 1947.

Mutianus. See Rufus.

Myconius, Friedrich, pastor in Gotha. 848. 988,1096. 1253. 1461. 1472.
1516. 1733.

N., Cyriacus zu Kothen. 1779. see Gericke.

N., Margarethe. 1342.

Nesen, Wilhelm. 586.

Neuenhagen, Thomas, pastor in Eisenach. 1018a. Neustadt, Augustinian
chapter at. See Dressel.

Nuremberg, a citizen of. 1776.

\"Goldsmith guild to. 839.

\" Mayor and Council to. 910.1914.

\" to the imperial governors and estates of the imperial regiment zu.
630.

Obsopoeus, Vincentius. 985.

Oecolampad, John. 627.

Oldenburg, Heinrich. 500.

Oelsnitz, Mila von. 625. See Court Maidens.

Oelsnitz, Rath und Gemeinde zu. 684.

Ordination certificate for Wilh. Kilmann. 1424.

Osiander, Andreas. 1796.1926.

Ottensaß, Hans. 1065.

Pellican, Conrad. 374.

Pensa, municipality of. 941.

Parish priest, to a. 1045.

Parish priests, to two, from rebaptism. 1196.

XXXVIII

Index on Luther\'s letters, arranged alphabetically.

Pirkheimer, Wilibald, at Nuremberg. 152.

Pistorius, Friedrich, Abbot of Nuremberg. 1074. 1088. 1144. 1241. 1263.
1311. 1485. 1567. 1605. 1666. 1867.

Planitz, Hans von der. 583.

Plauen, Rath zu. 921.

Polenz, Georg von, Bishop zu Samland. 847.

Prague, city council and people of the city. 678.

Pravest, Wilhelm, pastor in Kiel. 1215. 1237. Prussia, Albrecht, Duke
of. 704. 864. 1471. 1834.

1884\.

Prierias, Silvester. 84.

Probst, Jakob, pastor in Bremen. 1167. 1473. 1560. Puchler, Leonhard,
fencing master at Halle. 687. receipt. 4.

Radhemius. See Lupinus.

Councils, to the Electors. 1031.

Raudt, Georg, preacher in Plauen. 711.

Rauve, read from *rana*, see frog.

Rechenberg, Hans von, zur Freistadt. 533. Regensburg, Stadtrath zu. 652.
854.

Regius (Rhegius), Urban, preacher at Augsburg. 805. 1270.

Empire, Holy Roman. To the Princes, Princes and Estates of the. 400.

Reifenstein, Wilhelm. 1297.

Reißenbusch, Wolfgang, Preceptor at Lichtenberg. 837.

Reuchlin, Johann. 119.

Reutlingen, Christians zu. 948.

Reval, Rath zu. 1792.1916.

Riedtesel, Johann, churf. director zu Weimar. 528. 1922. 1941.

Riga, Christians to. See Liefland.

Romer, George. 647.

Rostock, Rath der Stadt. 1852.

Roth, Stephan, town clerk in Zwickau. 1229.1768. Rothmann, Bernhard,
preacher at Münster. 1948.

Ruck, Johann. 662.

Rufus, Conrad Mutianus. 13.

Rühel, D. Johann, Mansfeld councilor. 849. 863. 866. 873. 874. 878a.
981. 1001. 1014. 1113. 1208. 1621.

Saalhausen, Wolfgang von. 755.

Saxony, Churfürst Friedrich zu. 50.109.126.127.135. 153. 158. 162. 175.
199. 200. 208. 214. 223. 290. 366. 375. 451. 453. 455. 459. 471. 489.
611. 618. 644. 648. 719. 748. 754. 795. 828.

Saxony, Duke Georg zu. 148. 169. 179. 570. 937. 1323. Saxony, Johann,
Duke and Elector of. 281. 568.

743\. 754. 856. 892. 903. 906. 907. 924. 929. 933. 945. 946. 953. 957.
958. 961. 962. 966. 968. 974. 975. 976. 984. W7. 990. 1004. 1030. 1033.
1034. 1051. 1063. 1066. 1075. 1094. 1095. 1103. 1118. 1120. 1125. 1132.
1133. 1136a. 1142. 1150. 1157. 1184. 1186. 1248. 1257. 1266. 1267. 1271.
1293.

1294\. 1304. 1332. 1345. 1346. 1347. 1394. 1398.

1399\. 1407. 1425. 1426. 1442. 1444. 1469. 1477.

1478\. 1481. 1484. 1489. 1492. 1499. 1518. 1542.

1552\. 1555. 1617. 1674. 1711. 1730. 1741. 1761.

1770\. 1784. 1801. 1803. 1804. 1817. 1824. 1827.

1830\. 1846. 1849. 1862. 1873. 1882. 1909.

Saxony, Johann Friedrich, Duke of. 341. 383. 390. 465. 743. 764. 857.
859. 994. 995. 1224. 1245. 1249. 1385. 1386. 1514. 1600. 1874. 1910.
Churfürst. 1931.

Sagan, Abbot Paul zu. See Lviv.

Samland. See Polenz.

Hem, Conrad. 333.

Savoy, Duke Carl of. 655.

Scheurl, Christoph, jurist in Nuremberg. 31. 38. 45. 53. 62. 80.130.151.

Schleinitz, Jan von, zu Jahnshausen. 626.

Schlick, the Counts of. 1930.

Schlick, Sebastian, Count zu Passun. 524.

Schnepf, Erhard. 1582.

Scholl, Heinrich. 1749.

Schott, Ritter Hans. 734.

Schuldorp, Marquard, preacher in Kiel. 949.

Schützin, Catharina in Strasbourg, Matth. Zell\'s housewife. 793. 1757.

Schwanhaufen, Johann. 591a.

Schwarzburg, Joh. Heinr., Count of. 556. Schwarzenberg, Johann, Baron
of. 539. 794. Schwenkfeld, Caspar. 978.

Scultetus, Hieronymus. See Brandenburg. Seceriüs, Johann, printer. 778.
1195. Seligmann, Martin, vicar in the Mansfeld valley. 221.279.
Selmenitz, Frau Felicitas von. 1223.

Senfel, Ludwig, ducal Bavarian court musician. 1712. Severinus, an
Austrian monk. 1130.

Sickingen, Franz von. 411.

Soest, an den Rath zu. 1894. 1904. 1946.

Spalatin, George. 5. 7. 9.15. 18. 22.24. 27. 34. 36. 37. 43. 49. 52. 54.
55. 57. 59. 61. 63. 68. 69. 70. 72. 73. 75. 78. 83. 85. 86. 88. 94. 96.
102. 104. 105. 106. 108. 111. 113. 115. 116. 120. 122. 128. 129. 131.

134\. 136. 137. 142. 143. 144. 157. 159. 165. 166.

167\. 174. 177. 181. 183 .191. 197. 198. 201. 202.

207\. 216. 220. 224. 225. 231. 232. 234. 235. 237.

238\. 239. 240. 241. 242. 243. 244. 246. 249. 250.

251\. 252. 253. 254. 259. 260. 261. 262. 263. 264.

265\. 268. 269. 270. 271. 272. 275. 278. 280. 284.

285\. 287. 288. 289. 291. 292. 294. 295. 298. 300.

305\. 306. 307. 308. 309. 311. 312. 314. 320. 321.

322\. 325. 326. 329. 330. 331. 334. 336. 337. 345.

346\. 349. 353. 356. 357. 359. 363. 364. 365. 367.

370\. 372. 373. 376. 381. 386. 392. 401. 407. 413.

416\. 417. 418. 419. 422. 424. 426. 428. 430. 432.

435\. 438. 440. 440a. 448. 449. 456. 460. 467. 470. 473. 475. 482. 484.
487. 492. 493. 495. 496. 498.

504\. 506. 507. 509. 510. 518. 526. 532. 534. 536.

537\. 538. 541. 542. 543. 546. 547. 550. 552. 555.

557\. 559. 562. 563. 564. 569. 574. 575. 577. 582.

585\. 587. 589. 591. 592. 593. 594. 597. 599. 600.

601\. 603. 606. 607. 608. 609. 610. 614. 615. 617.

622\. 628. 632. 635. 640. 646. 654. 658. 661. 663 .

666\. 667. 669. 671. 673. 674. 677. 690. 691. 692.

693\. 696. 700. 701. 706. 710. 713. 716. 720. 721 .

722\. 724. 729. 733. 735. 737. 739. 742. 750. 753.

761\. 765. 766. 771. 775. 777. 780. 783. 786. 787.

788\. 790. 791. 796. 797. 798. 799. 801. 808. 811 .

813\. 822. 823. 827. 829. 831. 832. 835. 838. 841.

842\. 845. 846. 853. 858. 860. 875. 880. 887. 889.

901\. 912. 921a. 930. 935. 936. 973. 991. 1003. 1008. 1009. 1018. 1021.
1048. 1050. 1054. 1061. 1067.

1068\. 1076. 1078. 1087. 1089. 1092. 1099.. 1107.

1119\. 1154. 1160. 1187. 1192. 1197. 1203. 1214.

1217\. 1230. 1246. 1251. 1258. 1295. 1298. 1299.

1316\. 1321. 1327. 1329. 1349. 1377. 1400. 1420.

1440\. 1443. 1513. 1536. 1597. 1624. 1628. 1633.

1640\. 1675. 1682. 1783. 1789. 1819. 1822. 1845.

1898\.

Spengler, Lazarus, city clerk in Nuremberg. 347. 818. 927. 1284. 1613.
1648. 1671. 1685. 1707. 1709. 1752. 1760.

Spenlein, Georg, Augustinian in Memmingen. 10.

Index on Luther\'s letters, arranged alphabetically.

XXXIX

Specatus, Paul. 494. 512.1169.

Spiegel, Hanna von, Klosterjungfrau. 689.

Starenberg, Bartholomew von. 759.

Staupitz, Johann. 67. 76. 87. 118. 150. 215. 361. 371.

515\. 657.

Stein, Wolfgang, court preacher in Weimar. 554. 560.

590\. 605. 613. 699. 762. 768.

Steinbach, Erhard. 1819.

Sternberg, Ritter Hans von, Pfleger zu Coburg. 1362. 1681. 1713.

Stettin, Rath zu. 573.

Boots, N. Mich. 882,913,940,1016,1025,1049,1080.

1131\. 1135. 1314. 1330. 1336. 1417. 1496. 1816.

Stockhausen, Frau von. 1939.

Stockhausen, Jonas von. 1938\...

Stolberg, Ludwig, Count of. 485.

Stolz, Volkmar. 508.

Storm (Sturm), Claus, Mayor of Magdeburg. 513,

Strasbourg, Christians at. 792.

Strasbourg, Preacher at. 925.

Streets, Michael von der, escort in Borna. 668. 685. 1418.

Strauß, v. Jakob, preacher in Eisenach. 728. 730.

Sutel, Johann, preacher in Göttingen. 1748.1767.

Tann, Eberhard von der. 1871.

Taubenheim, Hans von. 1880.

Teppen, Henning, clergyman in Goslar. 553.

Tescher, Thomas, Pfarrerzu-Milau. Incorrect reading instead of: Löscher.

Teutleben, Caspar von. 1574.

Thorn, Lambert. 702.

Thür, Johann. 878a.

Thuring, Balthasar. 1283.1367.

Thurzo, Johann, Bishop of Breslau. 315.

Journeymen at table. 1538.

Torgau, Rath zu. 923.1414.1866.

Trutfetter, Jodocus, Professor Erfurt. 74.

Tulich, Hermann, Professor in Wittenberg. 335.

Hungary, Queen Mary of. 1028.

Unnamed. 388. 535. 1213.1274 a. 1289. 1342. 1361.

1693\. 1818. 1861. 1918. 1919.

Ursinus, Clemens. 1070.

Visitators in the Franconian District. (Sternberg, Kind and Bader.)
1362.

Vogler, Georg, Chancellor at Ansbach. 1430.1883.

Voigt, Johann, Augustinian at Magdeburg. 319.

Walther, Johann, Musikus. 1023.

Weißbach, Joachim von. 1111.

Weiler, Hieronymus. 1575. 1649. 1662. 1692.1811.

Weller, Peter. 1576.

Wertheim, Count George II von. 624.

Wicel, Georg. 778. also to Hermann.

Wilskamp (Viscampius). 1116. 1171. 1315. 1401. 1870.

1890\. 1944.

Wittenberg, to the Augustinians. 433.

\" Capitel zu. 782.

\" Christians to. 423.

\" Canons to. 588. 631, 649.

Wittenberger, an die. 450. This is not a letter; see there.

Wittiger, Michael, canon in Breslau. 316.

Worms, Christians at. 651.

Zell, Catharina. See shooter.

Zelst, Johann, pastor in Bremen. 1561.

Zerbst, Rath zu. 672. 680. 767,1055,1151,1155. 1159.

1173\. 1182. 1198. 1308. 1313. 1356. 1843.

Notes. 188.

Testimony for Gregor Morgenstern. 660.

Testimony for Johann Gülden. 998.

Zink, N. 1892.

Zoch, Laurentius. 1935. 1942.

Zwels, Stephan, in Geldern. 1255.

Zwickau, Christians to. 1806.

\"Clergymen to. 1831.

\" Preacher to. 1805.

\" Rath \"to. 1769.

Gemini, Gabriel. 481. 491. 501. 520. 1212.

**II. letters to Luther from:**

Agricola, Johann. 1303. 1318. 1543. 1593. 1645.

Agricola, Stephan. 1724.

Altenburg, Rath zu. 478. 488. 499. 549.

Alveld. 283.

Amsdorf. 1848.

Apel, Johann. 1900.

Blankenfeld, Marg. 1152.

Brandenburg, Margrave George. 571. 1413.

Brenz, Johann. 1615.1726.1814.

Brismann, Johann. 879.

Brück, Gregorius, chancellor. 1302. 1340.

Bucer, Martin. 1673. 1759.

Bugenhagen, Johann. 1325. 1369. 1725. 1868.

Camerarms, Joachim. 1544. 1658.

Capito, Wolfgang Fabricius. 89. 146. 351. 443.

Carl V. 378. 379.

Carlstadt, Andreas. 824. 878. 905. 1032.

Coburg, Rath zu. 1476.

Denmark, King Christiern of. 861. 959.

Dietrich, Veit. 1736.

Dungersheim. 132. 138. 160. 203.

Eck, D. Johann. 92a. 149.

Einsiedel, Heinrich von. 1291.

England, King Henry VIII of. 1038.

Erasmus, Desiderius. 185.

Erfurt, Rath zu. 855. 904.

Frobenius, Johann. 145.

Fox, Thomas, Knight. 245.

Gerbel, Nicolaus, legal scholar in Strasbourg. 409. 784. 843. 943. 1000.
1011. 1013. 1072. 1090. 1114. 1515. 1718. 1745.

Hamburg, Rath zu. 1326.

Hedio, Caspar. 304.

Hesse, Landgrave Philip of. 397. 1228. 1419. 1483.

1687\.

Hutten, Ulrich von. 296. 354. 394. 396.

Jonas, D. Justus. 1172. 1545.1569. 1570.1572. 1586.

1587\. 1603. 1656. 1690.

Kronberg, Hartmuth von. 479.

Landmann, Martin. 1185.

Leimbach, Gebrüder. 664.

Leipzig, University of. 147.

Leisnig, Rath zu. 570.

Leo X, pab. 164.

Lohmüller, Johann. 544. 695.

Mainz, Archbishop Albrecht von. 267. 444.

Melanchthon. 1539. 1546. 1549. 1557. 1571. 1573. 1585.

1589\. 1601. 1614. 1619. 1626. 1630. 1635. 1642.

1644\. 1646. 1657. 1659. 1668. 1672. 1679. 1686. 1688. 1689. 1694.

Merseburg, Bishop Adolph von. 266.

Metsch, Joseph Levin. 1341.

Miltitz, Carl von. 170. 209. 327.

XLRegister of Luther\'s letters, arranged alphabetically.

Minkwitz, Nicolaus von. 1363.

Münsterberg, Duke Carl von. 516.

Muenzer, Thomas. 310.

Myconius, Frederick. 1482.

Nuremberg, der Rath zu. 1912.

Orlamünde, Rath zu. 757.

Osiander, Andreas. 1583. 1604.

Pack, Otto von. 1352.

Pellican, Conrad. 274.

Poduschka, Johann. 189.

Pomerania, Duke Barnim von. 340.

Pravest, William. 1202.

Prussia, Albrecht von. 623. 970.1887. 1888.

Prierias, Silvester. 81. 103.

Rhegius, Urban. 1556.

Rosdalowsky, Wenceslaus. 190.

Roth, Stephan, in Zwickau. 1782.

Rubianus, Crotus. 228. 352.

Rühel, D. Johann. 862. 865.

Saalhausen, Wolfgang von. 752.

Saxony, churfürstliche Räthe von. 1012.1479.

Saxony, George, Duke of. 156. 173. 182. 382. 565. 939. 1040.

Saxony, Frederick, Elector of. 384. 385. 548. 641. 642. 749.

Saxony, John Frederick, Duke of. 358. 745. 870. 1370. 1375. 1382.

Saxony, Johann, Churfürst zu. 869. 924. 928. 950. 954. 955. 964. 969.
971. 982. 989. 1005. 1035. 1102. 1105, 1126, 1174, 1183, 1260, 1272,
1274. 1276.

1288\. 1293. 1296. 1339. 1350. 1394. 1455. 1470.

1490\. 1503. 1504. 1520. 1522. 1547. 1548. 1562.

1588\. 1629. 1754. 1807. 1823. 1872. 1881. 1907.

1917\.

Saxony, Sibyl, Duchess of. 1391.

Schaumburg, Silvester von. 299.

Scheurl, Christoph. 30. 35. 46. 48. 121. 123. 124. 196.

Schwenkfeld, Caspar. 934.

Sickingen, Franz von. 344.

Soest, der Rath zu. 1901. 1940.

Spalatin. 90. 612. 629. 834. 1290. 1292. 1602. 1669.

Speratus, Paul. \'876.

Speaker, Urban. 1123.

Staupitz, D. Johann. 91. 723.

Strasbourg, Preacher at. 785. 916.

Visitators in Franconia. 1359.

Wildenfels, Anarg von. 1404.

Zerbst, Rath zu. 1124.

Zoch, Laurentius. 1850.

Zwickau, Mayor of. 1772.

Zwickau, Rath zu. 1368.

**III. foreign letters from:**

Cajetan to the Elector Frederick. 101.

Carlstadt to Brück. 1282.

\"to the Elector Frederick. 195.

\" to Krautwald and Schwenkfeld. 1247.

Dietrich, Veit, to Luther\'s wife. 1580.

Dietrich, Veit, to Justus Menius. 1921.

Eck an den Churfürsten Friedrich. 192. 236.

Hornung, Catharina, to Wolf Hornung. 1523.

Hornung, Wolf, an die churbrandenburgischen Räthe.

1281\.

Kaiser, Leonhard, to a friend. 1086.

\"\" to Michael Stiefel. 1086.

\"\" to an unnamed person. 1086.

Miltitz, Carl von, an den Churfürsten Friedrich. 172.

217\. 222.

Miltitz, Carl von, to Spalatin. 171.

Saxony, Friedrich, Churfürst zu, to Cajetan. 114.

\"\"\"\"anEck . 193.219.

\"\"\"\" to Miltitz. 218. 229.

\"\"\"\"anSürf . 458.

\"\"\"\"anSpalatin . 210.

Saxony, Johann, Churfürst zu, to the Bishop of Passau. 1086.

Saxony, Johann, Churfürst zu, to Spalatin, Instruction. 908.

Schürf, D. Hieronymus, an Churfürst Friedrich. 457. 461.

Schurs, Schwertfeger and Melanchthon to the Elector. 645.

**IV. other documents:**

Luther\'s appeal to the student body. 355.

Report by Bugenhagen and Jonas on Luther\'s serious case of illness.
1100.

Report on the martyrdom of Leonhard Kaiser. 1086.

Contract between Eck, Carlstadt and Luther. 187.

Luther\'s draft for the council at Altenburg. 486.

Luther\'s draft of the exhortation to the clergy. 1537.

Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s expert opinion on the funeral of the
Elector. 851.

Expert opinion of Gabriel Zwilling on the funeral of the Elector. 852.

Instruction of the Elector for Joh. Oswald. 452.

Luther\'s transcript of the interrogation at Worms. 395.

Letter from the interpreter. 1693.

Settlement funds proposed by Truchsess. 1697.

Verzeichniß der Gebrüder Leimbach. 622 (Supplement).

**First section of Luther\'s letters**

together with the most important letters addressed to Luther.

**No. 1.**

Erfurt. April 22, 1507.

**To Johann Braun, Vicarius in Eisenach.**

Luther invites Braun to come to his first mass (Primiz) and wishes that
the Schalbe Collegium also participates.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 1; in Löscher\'s Reformation Acts, vol.
I, p. 1; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 3 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I,
p. 1. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 512.

To the holy and venerable priest of Christ and Mary, Johann Braun, vicar
at Eisenach, his most dear in Christ. 1)

Hail in Christ our Lord! I would shy away, dear friend, from assailing
your love with my impetuous letters and petitions, if I did not consider
the sincere attitude of your kind and benevolent heart, which I have
experienced enough from so many proofs and good deeds. Therefore, I have
had no hesitation in addressing this little letter to you, trusting in
the friendship that is based on mutual love, \[and hope\] that it will
be heard by you and will find you supplicating.

Now that the glorious God, who is holy in all his works, has rested to
make me miserable, I will not be able to do it.

1\) In the next line, the Erl. Briefw. as superscription: *Jhesu*, and
notes: \"missing from De Wette\".

But it is also not found in any of the editions mentioned here and by
him.

to exalt so gloriously the and in every respect unworthy sinner and to
call him to his exalted office out of pure and abundant mercy, I must,
in order that I may be grateful for this abundance of so great a divine
goodness (at least as much as is possible to a dust), perform the
service imposed upon me in a bad way.

Therefore, according to the decision of my fathers, it has been
determined to perform this for the first time on the fourth Sunday
\[after Easter\], which we call Cantate 2), with the help of divine
grace. For this day, because it is convenient for my father, has been
appointed to consecrate our first Mass to God, to which I humbly, but
perhaps boldly, invite your love, certainly not because I consider
myself worthy because of my merits for you (of which there are none), to
burden you with the burden of such a great journey, and to expect you to
come to the so little poverty of our lowliness, but because I have
recognized your goodwill towards me and your willingness when I was
recently 3) with you, moreover, elsewhere even more abundantly.

2\) This was only the Primiz, not the priestly ordination of Luther.
Luther was ordained by the Erfurt auxiliary bishop Johann (Bonemilch)
von Laspho, but we do not know the day of his ordination. Köstlin,
Martin Luther (3.), Vol. I, p. 83, places it on this very Sunday Cantate
(May 2), but it was not the custom that the newly ordained held his
first mass on the same day. (Erl. Briefw.)

3\) *nudius*. Walch correctly remarks: \"perhaps *tertius* is to be
added\", and offers in the text: \"the day before yesterday\".

**2** Letters from 1507 and 1509. No. 1. 2. 3

You now, dearest father, lord, brother (for the first name is due to you
because of your age and your care, the second because of your merit, but
the last because of the order), want to be present here, if it is
possible because of your time, because of your church business, or also
your domestic affairs, in order to help by your pleasant presence and
your prayers that our sacrifice becomes pleasing before God. You can,
however, take Conrad, 1) my relative, who was formerly sexton
(*aedituum*) at St. Nicolai, and besides him, whomever else you wish, as
a traveling companion, if he can also get away for domestic business and
feels like it.

Finally, you must be admonished that you go straight to our monastery
and enter it in order to stay with us for a while (since I do not fear
that you will not want to live here), and do not seek another, strange
lodging on the streets. For you will have to become a *cellarius,* that
is, a cell dweller. Fare well in Christ our Lord. Given from our
monastery at Erfurt, April 22, in the year of the Lord 1507. Brother
Martin Luther

from Mansfeld.

I do not dare to burden the Schalbe Collegium, 3) those worthy people
who have certainly rendered me great service, in an inconvenient manner,
because I am completely convinced that it is not befitting for their
status and dignity that they should be called upon to perform such a
lowly service, indeed, that they should be bothered with the wishes 4)
of a monk who has now died to the world. Besides, I am uncertain

1\) In 1500 Conrad Luther was still in service as sexton
(*hierophylax*). The kind of relationship is not known. (Köstlin, M.
Luther \[3.\] Vol. I, p. 777 ad p. 39.) \'

2\) Here we have added a *non.*

3\) The Collatoren - Collegium of the Minorite monastery under the
Wartburg, to which the Schalbe family, respected in Eisenach, had made
rich donations. (Erl. Briefw.) Mrs. Cotta came from this family.
(Köstlin, M. Luther \[3., Vol. 1, p. 38.)

4\) It can hardly be doubted that vota should be translated here by
\"wishes\" and not (with Walch) by \"vows\", because neither the
primicat nor the invitation to the same has anything to do with the
monastic vows.

and somewhat doubtful whether it would be pleasant or troublesome to
you. Therefore, I have resolved to remain silent, but I would like you,
if the opportunity arises, to testify my gratitude toward them.
Farewell.

**No. 2.**

Wittenberg. March 17, 1509.

**To Joh. Braun, priest in Eisenach.**

Luther had gone to Wittenberg as a professor in the last weeks of 1508
and apologizes for having left Erfurt without first taking leave of
Braun. He says that he would have preferred theology to philosophy.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 2b; in Löscher\'s Ref.Acta, vol. I, p.
797; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 5 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p.4. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 524.

To the venerable man sanctified to Christ and Mary, Mr. Johann Braun,
priest at Eisenach, his beloved Lord and Father.

JEsus.

Salvation and the Savior Jesus Christ himself wishes brother Martin
Luther, Augustinian. Finally, I beg you, my Lord and loving, more than
revered, Father, cease, I say, to wonder, after you have already
wondered enough, how I left you secretly and silently, or at least could
have left you, as if there had never been any intimate contact between
us, or as if oblivion, the author of ingratitude, had wiped out all
memory of your lovely person from my heart, yes, as if a cold and
hopeful north wind had extinguished all warmth of love. It is not so,
nor have I done this, nor thought to do this, although I would have done
this (if I had done it differently and not rather suffered hut), from
which one could think something bad about me without my fault.

I have indeed left, I confess, but I have not left, but have always
remained behind after my bigger and better part and will always remain
there. That this is so, I will not be able to obtain from you more
easily or more effectively, than through

4Letters from the \"years 1509 and 1512. No. 2. 3. 5

Your trust in me; as you have established this with me through your
merits and good deeds by your kindness alone, you will not suffer it to
go unfulfilled or even diminished without my fault, as you have never
suffered it. And so I have departed from you further in body, but have
come closer in mind, if only you will, as you certainly will, if my hope
does not deceive me.

And, to come to the point: So that I would not be compelled to suspect
any longer that your love doubts my fidelity (and yet God wanted this
suspicion, as is its nature, to hit the wrong thing), behold, with all
the power at my disposal I have stolen a little time from my so many and
so varied affairs in which to write this letter to you, especially since
messengers are rare for me, and if they were frequent, they would become
rare through my ignorance and seclusion. And what do you think that I am
seeking with this letter other than that you hold me in such command as
you have received me, and that you presuppose of me what you would have
me presuppose of you. Although I cannot or will not be equal to you in
any good thing, my heartfelt love (*animus*) for you is great, since I
have nothing else; of course, I do not give it to you now, but I say
that I have already given it to you many times. And there is nothing
that your generous spirit expects of me (that I know), but what is of
the spirit, that is, that only one mind be in the Lord, and one heart
and one soul, as one faith in the Lord.

But you should not be surprised that I left without telling you. For my
departure was so sudden that it was almost hidden from my housemates. I
wanted to write to you, but I could not because of lack of time and
leisure. However, I have suffered, because I was able to do so, since I
was forced to leave so suddenly without having greeted you. Therefore, I
am now at Wittenberg by God\'s command or permission. If you now wish to
know about my fate, I am well, thanks be to God, only that the study has
been forced upon me (*violentum*).

I would have preferred to exchange it from the beginning with theology,
with that theology, I say, which investigates the kernel of the nut and
the marrow of the wheat and the marrow of the bones. But God is God; man
is often, yes, always mistaken in his judgment. This is our God; He will
rule us in kindness and for all eternity.

Receive this graciously, I beg you, what I have thrown down in haste and
entirely without longer consideration, and if you can once conveniently
have messengers to me, let me share your letters. I will endeavor to do
the same. Fare well in the beginning and in the end, and think of me as
the kind of person you wanted me to be. Farewell again. At Wittenberg,
in the year of the Lord 1509, on the Saturday after Oculi \[March 17\].

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 3.**

Wittenberg. September 22, 1512.

**To the Prior Andreas Lohr and the Convent of the Augustinians at
Erfurt.**

Luther announces the date of his doctorate in theology and asks his
brothers in Erfurt to be present or at least to intercede for him.

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. A. 399, fol. 117 d. Printed by Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 4: by Löscher, Ref.-Acta, vol. I, p. 801 (with the erroneous
year 1513); by De Wette, vol. I, p. 9 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol.
I, p.7. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 520. De Wette\'s erroneous proof:
\"Walch XXI, 529\" has been reprinted by Erlanger Briefwechsel.

To the venerable, venerable and venerable fathers, the prior, Magister
Andreas Lohr, 2) and the elders of the convent of the order of the
hermits of the holy bishop Augustinus at Erfurt, his fathers venerable
in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord, venerable, revered and beloved fathers! Behold, it
draws near

1\) At first Luther had to read about the dialectics and physics of
Aristotle; whether at the university or only in the study institution of
the monastery, cannot be said with certainty. (Kolde, M. Luther, Vol. I,
p. 72.)

2\) The name is found only in *Cod. Gothan*. and in Erl. Briefw.

**6** Letters from the year 1512.\" No. 3. 4. 7

The day of St. Luke 1) is approaching, on which, out of obedience 2) to
the fathers and the venerable father Vicarius, the chair 3) in theology
will be solemnly given to me, which your fatherly love, as I believe,
clearly sees from the letter of our prior at Wittenberg 4). I leave my
self-accusation 5) pending and say nothing of my inadequacy, lest I also
seem to seek pride or praise through my humility. God knows it, and my
conscience, how worthy and how grateful I am against this splendor of
glory and honor.

Therefore, for the sake of Christ\'s mercy, I ask, first of all, that
you will command me in your common intercessions to God, as you know
that you are my debtors in this matter according to the law of love,
that his pleasing and blessed will be with me; then, if it is at all
possible, that you will deign to be present and take part in this pomp
(to confess the truth) for the adornment and honor of the Order and
especially of our Vicariate. I would not dare to ask your paternal love
for the arduousness of such a great journey and expense, but do it only
because the reverend Father Vicarius has so ordered, and because I
considered it unseemly, also indecent and annoying, if I, while you
Erfurtians did not know about it and had not been invited, ascended to
such a high dignity.

Now if the venerable Father Lector, Georg Leister, wants to or can come
with you, that would also be very pleasant; but if not, 6)

1\) October 18.

2\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. V, 723, ?62: \"I am first forced and
driven into such office, since I had to become Doctor of Holy Scripture
without my thanks.\" - *Ibid*. Vol. XXII, 665, Table Talks, Cap. 22, §
77 we read: \"Many were astonished that I, when I was only twenty-eight
years old, received the doctorate, forced by Staupitz.\"

3\) *aula cathedralis*. Perhaps *sella* would like to be read instead of
*aula.* What is meant is the doctorate.

4\) Wenc. Link.

5\) Thus in the editions: *mei ipsius accusationem*; in *Cod. Goth*. and
in the Erl. Briefwechsel: *mei impiam accusationem*.

6\) from only in *Cod. Goth*. and in the Erl. Correspondence. In the
other editions it is written instead: st\".

so may the will of the Lord be done. In these things your fatherly love
may now prove to be as we hope, and as it deserves to be hoped. We will
keep your willingness in good memory and gratefully acknowledge it. Fare
well in the Lord with all and every one of your brothers, and indeed
with ours, to whom we entrust ourselves and ours in their prayers. Given
at Wittenberg, on the day of St. Maurice \[22 Sept.\] 1512.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 4.**

Leipzig. October 9, 1512.

**Luther\'s receipt.**

Luther had to collect from Leipzig the money that the Elector had put up
to cover the expenses of his doctorate. This is his receipt for it to
the churfürstliche Rentmeister. See [Mathesius]{.underline}, St. Louis
Edition, p. 10.

The original is in *Cod. Seidelianus* in Dresden, p. 26, with the
inscription by the same hand: \"vicario Zu Wittb. Stawbicz l ffl. Zu eim
Doctorat Michaelis 1512.\" Printed by Schütze, \"Luthers ungedruckte
Briefe,\" Leipzig 1780, vol. I, p. 385, from the Börnersche Sammlung at
Leipzig; in Canzler und Meißner, Quartalschrift für ältere Litteratur
und neuere Lectüre, dritter Jahrgang, zweites Heft, Leipzig 1785, p. 27,
cf. p. 39; in De Wette, vol. I, p. II, and again, according to the
original, in De Wette- Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 2; in the Erlanger
Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 1 and, according to the original, in Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 9. We give this oldest German writing of Luther
according to the original. The first letter in the 6th volume of De
Wette, supposedly from 1503, is, as Seidemann himself says, who adds it,
[spurious]{.underline}.

I Martinus brother eynsydelerß order. In Wittenberg. I confess with this
handwriting that I have received on behalf of the prior of Wittenberg
from the strictest and most dear Degenhart Pfeffinger and Johann Dolczec
7) my most gracious lord chamberlain fifty francs on Sunday after 8)
francisci anno dnj 2c. xij

7\) Thus Seidemann with the remark: \"It can also be read:
[dolczer.]{.underline}\" Erl. Correspondence: \"doltzer.\"

8\) This \"after\" has been overlooked in the previous printings, except
for the Erl. Briefw., was overlooked in the resolution and (even by
Seidemann) the date \"October 4\" was set, the day of Franciscus. On
this day Luther became Licentiate. (So Kolde, M. Luther, vol. I, p. 82,
and Köstlin, M. Luther \[3.\], vol. I, p. 99.) The correct date, also in
Burkhardt, p. 1. - This word: \"after\" is followed in the original:
\"Micha\", but Luther crossed it out again. Nevertheless, it has passed
into the editions of Schütze and De Wette.

8Letters from the year 1514. No. 5. 9

**No. 5.**

Wittenberg. Beginning 1514. 1)

**To Georg Spalatin\'s Church of Saxony**

**Court Preacher.**

Luther gives a favorable verdict on Reuchlin\'s expert opinion against
Pfefferkorn\'s and the Cologne theologians\' advice to eradicate all
books of the Jews.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. A. 3 and 361. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I,
p. 8; in Löscher, Ref.-Acta, vol. I, p. 799; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 7;
in *Böcking, Ulrichi Hutteni operum Supplementum 1869, tom*. I, V. I, p.
748 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 14. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 518, who, according to Tentzel\'s Historischer Bericht von der
Reformation, vol. I, p. 165, also places this letter in the year 1510.

JEsus.

Peace be with you, venerable Lord Magister Georg! My brother Johann Lang
has asked me in your name. 3) What I think of the cause of the innocent
and highly learned Johann Reuchlin against his enemies in Cologne,
whether he is in danger of the faith or of heresy. But you know, my dear
Magister, that I also hold this man in very high esteem and love him,
and that my judgment is perhaps suspect, because I am (as they say) not
free and impartial; but, because you demand it, I say what is my
opinion: that in his whole written opinion there is absolutely nothing
that would be dangerous to me.

I am, however, very surprised about the people of Cologne, for whom they
have to tie such an intricate, and (as it seems to them) in fact even
more intricate knot than the Gordian one in a

1\) There has been much dispute about the date of this letter. Löscher,
De Wette, Seckendorf and Tentzel, even Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI,
p. 598, place it in the year 1510, while the other authorities place it
in the year 1514. We are Köstlin, Martin Luther (3.), vol. I, p. 784 p.
139; Kolde, Martin Luther, Vol. I, p. 373 ad p. 126 and Erlanger
Briefwechsel, which are based on Knaake in Zeitschrift für lutherische
Theologie und Kirche, Jahrgang 1868, p. 345 in the review on
Burkhardt\'s \"Luthers Briefwechsel\".

2\) actually Georg Burkhardt from Spalt an der Rezat, 4-1/2 miles from
Nuremberg. Kolde, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 41 writes: \"Spelt\". See No.
136.

3\) Spalatin\'s letter to Johann Lang in Wittenberg (end of 1513), to
which this reply refers, is found in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p.
11.

4\) since he very often uses such a solemn protestation, and does not
present articles of faith, but the opinion of an expert opinion. These
two things relieve him of so much suspicion with me in such a way that,
even if he had gathered the mud of all heresies in his expert opinion, I
would still believe that he had right and pure faith. For if such
protestations and opinions are not free from danger, we will have to
fear that these inquisitors might finally start swallowing cameos and
swallowing mosquitoes, and declare the orthodox, even if they *protest*
in everything, to be heretics.

But what shall I say about the fact that they are trying to cast out
Beelzebub and not with the finger of God? This is what I often lament
and regret, because we Christians have begun to be wise abroad and
nonsensical at home. 6) A hundredfold worse are the blasphemies in all
the streets of Jerusalem, and everything is full of spiritual idols.
Although these should be dealt with most diligently, as inward enemies,
yet we leave all these things that concern us most, and turn to outward
and strange things, of course by the devil\'s counsel, so that we leave
what is ours and do not mend what is strange.

Dear, can anything more foolish and incomprehensible be thought of than
this zeal? Do the unfortunate people of Cologne have so few difficult
and very confused things on which they would like to practice their
science, their zeal and their love, that it would be necessary for them,
since their mind is so far away from us, to first explore them?

But what do I do? My heart is full of these thoughts, more than the
tongue can say. But I finally make this conclusion, since this is
predicted by all prophets: that the Jews

4\) Compare *Plautus*, *Men*. 2, 1, 22; *Terentius*, *Andr.* 5, 4, 39.
(Erl. Briefw.)

5\) We think that *suspiciono* or *suppositione* should be read instead
of superstitione; \"superstition\" does not seem to make sense to us.

6\) About the saying: *Foris sapere et domi desipere*, see Luther\'s
explanation, Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. V, 830, § 76.

**10** Letters from the year 1514. no. 5. 6. **11**

God and their King Christinn will revile and blaspheme. And I confess
that he who has read this or does not understand it, has not yet seen
the theology. And therefore I suppose that the Colognians cannot
dissolve the Scripture, because it must be done and the Scripture must
be fulfilled. And if they should undertake to cleanse the Jews from
blasphemies, they will do so, that the Scripture and God appear to be
lies.

But have a certain confidence that God will be true, even if a thousand
times a thousand Cologne people do not want it and struggle against it
in vain. For this will be the work of God alone, who works from within,
not of men, who only play rather than work from without. If these things
are taken from them, they will compose worse. For they are so given over
to a hardened mind by God\'s wrath that they are, as Ecclesiastes \[Cap.
1, 15.\]^2)^ says, incorrigible, and every incorrigible becomes worse
and never bettered by chastening. Fare well in the Lord and keep my
words to me, 3) but pray for my sinful soul to the Lord. Given from our
monastery this day.

Your brother Martin Luther.

**No. 6.**

Wittenberg. June 16, 1514.

**To Prior Andreas Lohr and the seniors of the Erfurt Augustinian
Convent.**

Luther defended himself against the accusation of some Erfurtians,
especially M. Joh. Nathin, that he had been guilty of a breach of oath
by accepting the theological doctorate in Wittenberg instead of in
Erfurt, where he had received his doctorate in theology.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, fol. 118. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 6b; in Löscher\'s Ref.-Acta, vol. I, p. 803; in De Wette, vol. I,
p. 11 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p.17. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 525.

1\) Namely, the blasphemies of the Jews. Walch has the remark: \"*istae
is* not to be set off, on which it goes\"; it refers to *blasphemiae in
the* previous paragraph.

2\) See Luther\'s interpretation of this passage, St. Louis edition,
vol. V, 1399.

3\) Walch translates: *parce verbis* by: \"and is silent\".

To the venerable and devout fathers and brothers, the prior Andreas Lohr
and the elders of the monastery of the order of the hermits of St.
Augustine at Erfurt, his brothers who are highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord, venerable fathers! Although I have heard and read many
evil things that have been said about us, 4) especially about me, by
some of you, I have recently been so moved by the letters of Father John
Nathin, who writes, as it were, in the name of all of you, by the lies,
pointed words, and bitter and mocking challenges of him, that I was
close to pouring out the full bowl of wrath and indignation on him and
the entire Convention after the example of Magister Paltz 5).

Therefore I have also addressed two stupid letters^6)^ to you, - I do
not know whether they have reached you, - and would have sent their
secret interpretation immediately, if the mouth of him who speaks
ungodly things had not been shut on the occasion of the convened
meeting. Therefore I am forced to consider many of you, even most of
you, already excused.

Therefore I ask you, if you or some among you are offended in these
letters in something

4\) Instead of *vobis* in the editions, we have used the *Codex* and the
Erl. Briefw. *nobis* assumed.

5\) Joh. Nathin had begun his theological course in Tübingen in 1484 and
should also have received his doctorate there, but did so in Erfurt,
which sheds a peculiar light on his behavior in Luther\'s promotion
matter. He was in Erfurt since 1488 and is listed as professor of
theology in 1493. He was next to Paltz in the monastery when Luther
entered in 1505. During a visitation, he praised Luther to the nuns at
Mühlhausen as a model of holiness, another Paul (Kolde, M. Luther, Vol.
I, p. 57). -Johann Paltz, actually Johann Zenser von Paltz in Swabia or
in the archdiocese of Trier, Augustinian, famous preacher of indulgences
under Raymund von Gurk, author of the \"heavenly treasure trove\" (St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 201), was professor of theology in Erfurt when
Luther entered the monastery, since 1504 also provost in the monastery
zum Neuen Werk near Halle. In 1507 he moved to Mühlheim (now Thal
Ehrenbreitstein near Coblenz), probably because of the quarrel with the
Erfurt convent, which Luther denounced here. He died on March 13, 1511
(Erl. Briefw.).

6\) Walch offers: \"a doubly fatuous letter\".

**12** Letters from the year 1514. no. 6. 7. **13**

Forgive me this, and lay what I have done only to the angry writings of
Magister Nathin. For my exceedingly great agitation was a just one.

But now I hear even more annoying things, that this same person is
everywhere calling me a perjurer and a shameful person; I do not know in
which power he trusts. But I ask you, since you (as I fear) cannot stop
his mouth, that you at least moderate yourselves and teach others to
refrain from his words. For I am not perjured for the sake of it,
because I received my doctorate elsewhere. For both universities, and
all of you, know that I did not acquire the first degree, for the
Bible,^1)^ where it is customary to swear, at Erfurt, nor am I aware
that I have taken any oath in my entire \[academic\] career. And the
beginning 2) with the sentences 3) I have indeed made at Erfurt, but
that I have sworn, I believe, no one will claim. But what Magister
Nathin will hear from me by the power of the one who commands and
demands obedience 4) he will perhaps see in his own time.

I am writing this, dearest fathers, so that the theologians of Erfurt do
not take me for a despiser of their university, to which I ascribe
everything that is mine as a thankful mother. I have not despised them
\[the theologians\], nor will I ever despise them, although my
incorporation \[into the convent of the Augustinians at Wittenberg\] and
my doctorate have made me a stranger to them according to the place. But
both these things the convent, if it had wanted, could have prevented
with one word; but what it could and did not want then, behold, it
cannot do now, even if it wanted to.

1\) *in Bibliam*, that is, *Baccalaureus biblicus*. Luther received this
degree, with which he was permitted to lecture on the Bible, at
Wittenberg on March 9, 1509.

2\) Aurifaber: in *principio*. According to this wrong reading, Walch\'s
translation is meaningless.

3\) as a Sententiarius, who received permission to read over the first
two books of the Sentences of Peter Lombardus.

4\) namely of the vicar Staupitz, who had forced Luthern to the
doctorate.

For in such a way it pleased GOtte to nullify the ambiguities and the
threats of those who hoped for revenge.

But all this may pass away, for I am quite calm and peaceable in my
heart towards all of you, however much I have been offended. For God
blesses me, the unworthy, in a very special way, so that I have only
cause to rejoice, and to love and do good, likewise to those who have
earned the opposite for me, just as I also have earned the opposite of
what I receive from God from the Lord. Therefore, I ask that you also be
content, and put away the bitterness that may be present, and may my
release from your bond (*excorporatio*) not move you, because the Lord
has willed it so, which must not be resisted. Be well in the Lord. From
our monastery in Wittenberg, June sixteenth, 1514.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 7.**

Wittenberg. August 5, 1514.

**To Georg Spalatin.**

Luther testifies to his displeasure at the outrageous attacks of Ortwin
(*Ortuinus Gratius* \[de Graes\]) against Reuchlin. He was one of
Hoogstraten\'s comrades and wrote *Apologiam adversus Joh. Reuchlinum*;
this

appeared in February 1514.

The damaged original is in the Minist erialbibliothek 5) at Erfurt.
Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 278. Printed by Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
5; by Löscher, Ref.-Acta. Vol. I, p. 802; in De Wette, Vol. I, p. 13 and
in Erlanger Briefwechsel, Vol. I, p. 20. German in Walch, Vol. XXI, 522.

To the highly learned and by him in Christ highly admired priest, Georg
Spalatin, his allertheuersten \[friend\].

JEsus.

Hail! Until now, highly learned Spalatin, I have taken this Cologne
poetaster Ortwin for an ass. But you see that he has become a dog, yes,
a ravening wolf in sheep\'s clothing, if not rather a crocodile, as you
think even more astutely. I, at least, believe that he himself, since
our Johann Reuchlin has indicated to him that he is a donkey, has become
a dog.

5\) So De Wette. The Erl. Briefw. says: at the university library.

**14** Letters from the year 1514. no. 7. 8. **15**

(*asinitatem*, to speak Greek in the Latin language 1) finally even
grasped it with his hands, but, since he was anxious to take it off and
to put on the lion majesty, he remained in a wolf or crocodile by an
unfortunate leap on this side, namely since he strove too much beyond
his strength to effect the transformation.

Dear God, what shall I say? Let us learn here, I beg you, from this one,
the judgment of all who have ever written or spoken, write or speak,
write or speak about spitefulness: how quite true, reasonable and
sensible it is; I say especially of spitefulness, which is probably the
most nonsensical, which wants to harm most violently and yet is unable
to do so. Although its licentiousness is without fear, yet 2) its
incapacity is exceedingly full of extraordinary anguish and unrest.

It is true that this Ortwin foolishly brings together and forces
ridiculous and self-contradictory things, but more correctly, things to
be deplored and lamented, not only because he twists the words and the
meaning of the quite innocent Capnio \[Reuchlin\] with all
sacrilegiousness, but also because he increases the damage of blindness
and obstinacy in his heart with all fury, as the Scripture says \[Habak.
2, 6\]: \"He only loads much mud 3) upon himself.\"

I would discuss many things from those writings with you by letter, if
one did not have to suffer more than laugh about them, with such great
destruction of souls, which I fear even more for the future. May the
Lord grant that it will soon come to an end. But it is a special joy to
me that the matter has reached Rome and the apostolic see rather than
that in other places 4) those hostile people are free to judge 5) . . .
Since Rome has very learned people among the Cardinals, \[so\].

1\) Luther says this jokingly because of the non-Latin word *asinitas*
(donkey nature) which he formed.

2\) We have adopted *tamen* instead of turn with Aurifaber.

3\) Walch reads: *lumen* \[light\], instead of: *lutum* \[koth\].

4\) *in partibus* == *in* other places besides Rome.

5\) Here is in the original, already torn in Aurifaber\'s time, a
smaller and immediately following a larger gap, which we have tried to
fill in something.

at least more mercy \[for Reuchlin can be expected from them than\] will
be granted by the unwilling Cologne people, \[more\] than these ABC
grammarians have, who can neither distinguish what a writer tells, nor
what he claims, yes, also cannot understand what he speaks, but more
correctly I say, do not want to understand. Farewell and pray for me,
and let us pray for our Capnio. From the monastery, on the day of the
Blessed Virgin of the Snows \[Aug. 5\] 1514.

Brother Martin, Augustinian. 6)

**No. 8.**

Wittenberg. December 21, 1514.

**To the Dean and Doctors of the Theological Faculty at Erfurt.**

About the same subject as No. 6.

The original of this letter was formerly in the Carthäuserkloster at
Trier, now in the city library there. From the original published by
Prof. Joh. Hugo Wyttenbach in the program of the Gymnasium zu Trier of
1829, p. 6. Afterwards in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 9 and in Erl.
Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 23.

To the excellent and exceedingly righteous men, fathers and lords, the
dean and the other doctors of the theological faculty of the University
of Erfurt, his patrons, with all devotion to service and much reverence
in the Lord.

JEsus.

Reverence and service from our lowliness. I have heard a not good rumor
about me, dear men, fathers and highly esteemed gentlemen, namely that I
am accused of breach of oath by your dignities, because I have accepted
the degree of a doctor elsewhere than at Erfurt; since I now realize
that this is something that not only annoys your dignities, but also the
least human being, I see that it is incumbent upon me to be humble
enough and to seek to be reconciled again. But I ask urgently,

6\) De Wette reads here: *Augustinus*, the name, which Luther received
at his entrance into the monastery, but it is to be read with Aurifaber,
Löscher and the Erlangen correspondence *Augustinianus,* because in the
original on the last letters an abbreviation is to be recognized
(Köstlin, M. Luther, vol. I, p.778 ad p. 63).

**16**

Letters from the year 1514. No. 8.

**17**

that you hear me with your ears, that is, with kindness and perfect
patience, for you will more easily forgive, as I hope, when you will
have recognized that I have been without deceit or at least ignorant in
this matter. Above all, it is certain that I did not become a
baccalaureate (*biblicus*) at Erfurt, but at Wittenberg; therefore, I
did not swear to obtain the baccalaureate (*pro biblia*), which, as I
hear, is custom and order among you. But since I had already 1) disputed
here to attain the degree of a Sententiarius, and, because I had been
called to Erfurt, had postponed the completion (*principium*), I was
admitted and accepted by your, rather our faculty with all difficulty,
since, when the Dean, the excellent Mr. Storheim, began to present me
with the regulations (*statuta*) .. 2) the Doctor was interrupted by the
venerable father Magister Johann Nathin, who had variously noted on a
large piece of paper what must actually be read and held for the
Baccalaureates or for the Sententiaries, and prescribed to him that he
should so read what served the present matter. For this I have quite
certainly in my memory and am not aware of any oath. I confess that I
doubt very much whether what concerns a Baccalaureus (in which, as I
hear, this oath is contained) is also read for me, but much more whether
I have also sworn. For that would have been a very pleasant shield for
me, which I could have held up to the one who commanded me to 3) let
myself be \[promoted to doctor, since I not only did not seek this, but
even resisted his violence to the point of annoyance. But since I was
neither aware \[of an oath\] nor had a memory of it, and those to whom
it was incumbent to speak looked through their fingers, I was forced to
render obedience, but, what I did not know, with a

1\) namely at Wittenberg, where the disputation for the attainment of
the dignity of a Sententiarius had already been held, when Luther was
forced to go to Erfurt in a hurry.

2\) Here some words are missing, perhaps: \"and to read the same\".

3\) Staupitz. Cf. no. 3 at the beginning and no. 6 towards the end.

Offense with you. What do I care that some have not believed me or do
not believe me? The awareness of the truth is enough for me, and my
witness is God Himself. But this I do not write, dear fathers, that I
want to be considered excused by these things or complain about
injustice. I know that it can be rightly said against me: but
nevertheless, you have not heard, you have not sworn: what about the
condition of the right? yes, how? since you have heard our ordinances
for almost six years afterwards? You are a member and you have sworn to
keep our given and yet to be made orders. I admit it and acknowledge it,
my mother, the University of Erfurt, to whom I owe not strife but honor.
Therefore, I do not seek a fierce defense of the law, but rather, bound
in Christ, I present a simple confession, for the general oath also
oppresses me sufficiently, whatever in particular seems to excuse the
ignorance here. Therefore, I humbly ask and beg, for the sake of the
kindness of God our Savior, that your dignities forgive me first of all
this offense and forgive me the guilt, be it because of a real matter,
or be it for superfluous assurance and inner calming of my conscience,
as we are commanded to forgive our debtors, because this was done
without deceit and knowledge, which may have happened. Then I also ask
this, that you will condescend to indulge (*dispensare*) in all things,
to approve (*ratificare*) and, what is lacking, to supplement (*defectus
supplere),* if not (which I may not assume in view of your kindness) any
of these things should seem to have to be cut off for my punishment.
Since I, as a poor man of Christ, cannot do enough in any other way, I
will gladly suffer with shame that I am regarded by you as a clumsy and
rejected man; I seek more that the guilt than the punishment be remitted
to me, if neither can be conceded. This I would have done long ago, and
presently, in words; for this I had resolved to do, but, I know not by
what business I was distracted (for so it seems to me

**18** Letters from the years 1514, 1515 and 1516. No. 8. 9. 10. **19**

at least), I have postponed the matter 1) until now. In this, your
dignitaries, most esteemed fathers, want to act according to your
discretion, in kindness and friendliness, which I will repay with all
services, for which God the Lord gives me the ability; I say, I will not
repay, but Christ in me as in his very least, in whom your dignitaries
may be at ease. From Wittenberg, on the twelfth day before the calends
of January 1515 \[Dec. 21, 1514\]. 2)

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian,

unworthy Wittenberg theologian.

**No. 9**

Wittenberg. . 26 December 1515.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports that the dictations on the Psalter requested for printing
are not yet ready and must be printed in his presence.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen. a, fol.* 279. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
9d; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 47 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p.
26. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 526.

To the highly learned man Georg Spalatin, priest of Christ, his
\[friend\] highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! Only returned yesterday, 3) I found your letter late in the day,
my dear Spalatin; I ask you that you answer for me that Martin Mercator
4) that he may not expect my dictations on the Psalter 5).

1\) distuli *rem* is Plitt\'s conjecture instead of: *distulerim.*

2\) Seidemann has placed the year 1515 above this letter.

3\) from Erfurt. Lingke, Luthers Reisegeschichte (1769), p. 26.

4\) Aurifaber, De Wette and Seidemann (De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 482) take
*Mercator* as a proper name; on the other hand, the Erlangen
correspondence wants *mercator to* be interpreted as an apellative, and
the first name \"Martin\" to Martinus *Herbipolensis* (== Landesberg
from Würzburg) in Leipzig, because neither a *Mercator* nor a
\"merchant\" is found in the printer directories. We are not able to
decide about this.

5\) See in the 8th volume of the St. Louis edition the preface, p. V.

Although I wish extraordinarily that they are not published anywhere and
never, I have nevertheless been forced to do so. I have not yet done
enough to fulfill the commandment, but now that I have finished the
public lecture on Paul 6), I want to devote myself to this one work
constantly.

But even if they \[the Dictates\] were finished, they are not put
together in such a way that they could be printed in my absence. Then it
has pleased the masters of the liberal arts (*Artistis*) that they
should be printed by the work of our printer 7). But this cannot even be
started before Lent, 8) This very thing (if they have to be published at
all) has also pleased me, so that they are first printed with rather bad
9) types, because they do not seem to me to be of such a kind that they
should be produced with good type and by the service of skilled men,
because they are insignificant things (*nugae*) and quite worthy of
eradication. Farewell. In haste from the monastery, on Boxing Day at
twelve o\'clock 1516. 10)

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 10.**

Wittenberg. April 8, 1516.

**To Georg Spenlein, Augustinian in Memmingen.**

Oeconomic matters. Luther impressed upon him the doctrine of
justification by faith.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 11; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 806; in De
Wette, vol. I, 28 (with the wrong date of April 7) and in Erl.
Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 28. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 528 with the
wrong time determination: \"Mittwoch\", that is, April 9.

6\) On the Epistle to the Romans. See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 446.

7\) Johann Grünenberg.

8\) It was not printed at that time. It was not until 1876 that
Seidemann published \"Luther\'s First and Oldest Lectures on the Psalms
from the Years 1513-1516.

9\) *ignobilioribus* could also be translated: with very bad. Thus, even
at that time, Grünenberg did not enjoy Luther\'s applause as a printer.

10\) That is, Dec. 26, 1515, according to the custom of beginning the
new year with Christmas Day. Walch and De Wette have the year 1516.

**20** Letters from the year 1516. no. 10. **21**

To the devout and sincere brother Georg Spenlein, 1) Augustinian hermit,
who is staying in the monastery at Memmingen, his \[friend\] to be loved
in the Lord.

JEsus Christ.

Grace and peace be with you from God the Father and the Lord Jesus
Christ! Dearest brother George, I want you to know that I have collected
three and a half florins from your sold things, namely one florin for
the Brussels vestment, half a florin for the larger work of the
Eisenacher 2) and one florin for the habit and several other things. Now
there are still some left, as Baptista\'s eclogues and your collections,
in which you will have to suffer loss. For until now we have not been
able to sell these things. We have now transferred the third and a half
florins for you to the venerable father Vicarius. As for the last half
florin which you owe him, you will endeavor either to pay or to obtain
remission of the debt. For I am of the opinion that the reverend father,
being well disposed towards you, will have no difficulty in remitting to
you what is left.

By the way, I would like to know what your soul is doing: whether it
does not finally, tired of its own righteousness, learn to breathe again
in the righteousness of Christ and to trust in it. For in our time, the
temptation of presumption is widespread among many, and especially among
those who strive with all their might to be just and good; not knowing
the righteousness of God, which is given to us in Christ most abundantly
and freely, they seek to do such lukewarm good works through themselves
until they have the confidence that they can stand before God, adorned
as it were with their virtues and merits, which cannot possibly happen.
You have been with us in this opinion, rather error; I have been too,
but even now

1\) Spenlein later became a parish priest in Arnstadt. See the letter of
June 17, 1544, De Wette, Vol. V, p. 466.

2\) Jodocns Trutfetter from Eisenach; he was formerly also a teacher of
Luther.

I am fighting against this error, but have not yet overcome it.

Therefore, my dear brother, learn Christ, and that the crucified, learn
to sing to him and to despair of yourself and to say to him: Thou, Lord
JEsu, art my righteousness, but I am thy sin; thou hast taken upon thee
that which is mine, and hast given me that which is thine; thou hast
received that which thou wast not, and hast given me that which I was
not. Beware lest thou strive even for so great a purity as not to appear
to thyself, nay, not to be, a sinner. For Christ dwells only in sinners.
For this is why he descended from heaven, where he dwelt in the
righteous, that he might dwell in sinners also. Consider this love of
his with thee continually, and thou shalt see his exceeding sweet
consolation. For if we had to come to the rest of conscience through our
efforts and tribulations, for what would he have died? Therefore, you
will find peace only in him, through complete despair of yourself and
your works. Moreover, you will learn from him that just as he himself
accepted you, he also made your sins his own, and his righteousness
yours.

If you believe this firmly, as you are guilty (for cursed is he who does
not believe this), you also receive your unruly and still erring
brethren, and bear with them patiently, and make their sins yours, and
if you have anything good, let it be yours, as the apostle \[Rom. 15:7\]
teaches, \"Receive one another, even as Christ hath excepted you unto
the praise of God\"; and again \[Phil. 2:5\], \"Be ye therefore minded,
even as Jesus Christ was; who, though he was in the form of God, yet
uttered himself. \"2c. So also thou, if thou seemest to thyself to be
better, think it not robbery, as though thou alone were so; but divest
thyself, forgetting of what nature thou art, and be as one of them, that
thou bearest it.

For unblessed is the righteousness of such a man who 3) treats others as
if they were in disguise.

3\) It seems to us that instead of *quae* should be read: *qui*. After
that we have translated. In our copy of the Aurifaber, this correction
is already made by an old hand.

**22**

Letters from the year 1516. no. 10. 11. 12.

**23**

This means that he buries the Lord\'s pound and does not give his fellow
servants what is due to them. Therefore, if you are a lily and a rose of
Christ, know that your walk will be among thorns; only see that you do
not become a thorn through impatience and sacrilegious judgment or
hidden hope. The dominion of Christ is in the midst of his enemies, as
the Psalm \[110:2\] says.

What then dost thou devise, that thou shouldest be in the midst of
friends? Therefore, seek all that thou lackest on thy knees, asking of
the Lord Jesus. He will teach you everything; only consider what he has
done for you and for all, so that you too may learn what you should do
for others. If he had wanted to die only for the good and for friends,
dear, for whom would he have died or for whom would he have lived? Act
in this way, my brother, and pray for me, and the Lord be with you. Fare
well in the Lord. From Wittenberg, Tuesday after Misericordias Domini
\[April 8\] 1516.

Your brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 11.**

Wittenberg. April 15, 1516.

**To Georg Leiffer, Augustinian at Erfurt.**

Luther consoles his friend because of the temptations he suffers and
advises him to entrust himself completely to his comforter, Father
Bartholomew Usingen.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 13; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 808; in De
Wette, vol. I, p. 18 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 31. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 532.

To the venerable father and devout Mr. Georg Leiffer, Augustinian hermit
in Erfurt, his father in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord and in his Comforter! Werther father and dear brother
in the Lord, I hear that you, dear brother, are challenged by storms,
plagued and troubled by many a flood. But praise be to God, the Father
of mercy and the God of all comfort, who has provided you with the best
comforter and advisor that one can have among men.

The Father Magister Bartholomew, 1) can take care of you. Let it only be
your concern that you throw away your own feeling and mine from you, and
give his words room in your heart. For I am sure, and instructed by your
experience and mine, yea, also from the experience of all whom I have
ever seen troubled, I know that the prudence of our sense alone is the
cause and root of all our trouble. For our eye is a great mischief, and
that I speak of myself, ei! in how great misery it has afflicted me, and
afflicts me still in the utmost.

The cross of Christ is distributed over the whole world, each one always
receives his part of it. Therefore, do not throw it away from you, but
rather receive it as a highly holy relic, not in a golden or silver
vessel, but in a golden heart, i.e., one that is dressed with mild love.
For if the wood of the cross is so consecrated by the touch of Christ\'s
flesh and blood that the remains of it are most honestly held, how much
more are the insults, persecutions, sufferings and hatred of men,
whether they be just or unjust, the most holy relics, which are not
grasped, kissed and blessed by the touch of his flesh, but of his
exceedingly loving 2) heart and divine will through love, and are highly
consecrated above all things, because the curse is changed into
blessing, and injustice into equity, and suffering into glory, and the
cross into joy. Farewell, dear father and brother, and pray for me. From
Wittenberg, on the 15th day of April, 1516.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 12.**

Dresden. May 1, 1516.

**To Johann Beriten, Augustinian prior in Mainz.**

Luther reclaims (as vicar) a monk who had escaped from Dresden and found
refuge in Mainz.

1\) Bartholomäus Arnoldi from Usingen, usually called Usingen, a former
teacher of Luther at Erfurt. He died on Sept. 9, 1532 in Würzburg, where
he had been since 1526. (Erl. Briefw.)

2\) Instead of: *amorosissimi,* Aurifaber and De Wette read:
*amorosissimi*, which does not exist.

**24**

Letters from the year 1516. no. 12. 13.

**25**

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 48 b. (Because Aurifaber, as he notes
in the margin, received the letter too late from his friends, it is not
placed in the correct place, but under the letters of the year 1518, but
with the year 1516; therefore not [wrong, as the]{.underline} Erl.
Briefw. says); in Löscher, vol. I, p. 809; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 20
and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 32. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
533 with the incorrect year 1517.

To the venerable and devout father, Brother Johann Bercken, Prior of the
Augustinian Hermits at Mainz.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord! Venerable and dear Father Prior, I have heard through
a bad rumor that there is with you, Father (*apud Paternitatem tuam*), a
certain Georg Baumgürtner, my brother from our convent in Dresden, who
has come to you, Father, unfortunately, for shameful reasons and in a
shameful way. But I thank you for your faithfulness and your kind
service, that you took him in, so that the disgrace would come to an
end. That lost sheep is mine, it belongs to me; it is mine to seek and
to bring back from astray, if it pleases the Lord JEsu so.

I therefore ask you, Father, for the sake of our common faith in Christ
and the religious vow to St. Augustine, to send him to me either to
Dresden or to Wittenberg, if your servant love is in any way able to do
so, or to persuade him to go, to cause him in a kind and gracious way to
come voluntarily. I will receive him with open arms, he shall only come;
he has therefore not to fear that he has given me offence.

I know, I know, that aversions must come; and it is no miracle that a
man falls, but it is a miracle when a man rises and remains standing.
Peter fell so that he would know that he was a man; the cedars of
Lebanon, which touch the sky with their towering summit, also fall
today; but also (what surpasses everything amazing) an angel in heaven
fell and Adam in paradise. What is it to be wondered at, therefore, if a
reed is tossed to and fro by the whirlwind, and a smoldering wick is
extinguished? May the Lord Jesus

teach you, and do and accomplish the good work with you. Amen. Farewell.
Alls Dresden, in our monastery, on the day of Saints Philip and James
\[May 1\] 1516.

Brother Martin Luther, professor of sacred theology, and vicarius of the
hermits of St. Augustine throughout Meissen and Thuringia. 1)

**No. 13 .**

Gotha. May 29, 1516.

**To Conrad Mutianus Rufus, Canonicnus in Gotha.**

Luther apologizes for not having visited or invited him during his stay
in Gotha.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, fol. 121 d. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 15; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 810; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 21
and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 34. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
535.

The highly learned and highly educated Conrad Mutianus, 2) Canonicus at
Gotha, Doctor of Laws, that is, a very worthy man.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord! The fact that I have not bribed your love, highly
learned and highly educated Mutianus, nor invited you to me, is partly
due to the haste of my journey and likewise also the diligence in
carrying out the service assigned to me, but also due to the high
opinion and true reverence which I have for you. For our mutual
friendship 3) is too young for me to have dared to question your
excellence, which is true in my eyes and in itself.

1\) Ten convents were subordinated to Luther as vicarius: Wittenberg,
Dresden, Herzberg, Gotha, Salza, Nordhausen, Sangershausen, Erfurt,
Magdeburg and Neustadt. Eisleben was added later.

2\) Mutianus (actually Mut) was the head of the humanist circle in
Erfurt, therefore Luther uses here the expression: *Humanissimo*, and
later in the letter the address: *Humanitas* do what we have given by:
\"your love\".

3\) This was initiated by Johann Lang\'s sending to Mutianus on May 2,
1515, the sermon Luther had delivered the day before at the meeting of
the order in Gotha (Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 938) with great
praise of Luther. (Köstlin, M. Luther \[3.\], Vol. I, p. 129.)

**26**

Letters from the year 1516. No. 13. 14.

**27**

to humiliate her that she should see yours truly.

But now I go where I have orders and must go, but I did not want to do
this without greeting you, although the shyness of my ignorance and
(that I say so) impertinence (*illoquentiae)* murmured against it; 1)
but my affection for you keeps the upper hand, and this peasant Corydon
greets you highly learned, exceedingly refined man,^2)^ namely Martin,
who is unlearned and always used to cackle among the geese. But I know,
but I am certain, but I even measure myself, that Mutianus prefers the
heart to the tongue and the pen. Therefore my heart is learned enough,
because it is friendly enough towards you. Farewell, farewell, dear
father in the Lord Jesus, and be mindful of me. From our monastery in
Gotha, on the 29th day of May 1516.

Brother Martin Luther, vicarius over ten monasteries. 3)

This one thing I want to let you know: the father Baccalaureus Johann
Lang, whom you know as a Greek and Latin, but what is greater than a man
of sincere heart, has recently been appointed by me as prior of the
monastery at Erfurt. You will recommend this man to the people in the
best way and intercede for him diligently before God. Fare well. In
haste, as you see.

**No. 14.**

Langensalza. May 29, 1516.

**To Joh. Lang, prior in Erfurt.**

Luther, still on the visitation journey, gives him regulations for the
better management of the household in the monastery.

1\) Only the Codex, and after it the Erlangen correspondence, has the
reading: *subministraret,* which seems to us to give no puffing sense;
therefore we have assumed *submussitaret* with the other editions.

2\) *Virg. Bucolica, Ecl.* II, v. 56.

3\) *Decanus Vicarius*. Here *Decanus* must not be taken as \"Decan of
the theological faculty in Wittenberg\", as De Wette did in his summary
of this letter, because Carlstadt held this dignity at that time; it
means \"tenfold Vicarius\", namely over the ten monasteries mentioned in
the previous number. It seems that Luther wants to justify the lack of
time for visits.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. X. 399, fol. 120. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 14 ; 4) in Löscher, vol. I, p. 811; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 22 and
in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 37. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 536.

To the venerable and devout father Johann Lang, Baccalaureus of
Theology, Prior of the Augustinian Hermits at Erfurt, his \[beloved\]
always in the Lord.

JEsus.

Grace and peace 5) multiply upon you abundantly. It has occurred to me,
dear father and my faithful co-worker in the work of the Lord, since I
am now absent, what I did not think of when I was present, or if I had
thought of it, I would not have considered or recognized it so great.
But it is this, that the hospice (*domus hospitum* == the house of the
guests) (which I have always considered something extremely dangerous in
the monasteries, if it comes into abuse, although it is an extremely
holy service of God, if it happens in the Lord) cannot be better judged
and directed, than if it is observed with careful attention, what and
how much is spent in it. Therefore, trusting in you, in which I have the
confidence that you will do more than I desire, I do not command, but
remind you in the Lord that you keep a special register, in which you
record daily how much beer, how much wine, how much bread, how much
meat, yes, how much of all things of every kind is consumed in the same
\[hospice\]; I add: what has been spent for your dignity 6) or that of
another.

4\) The Erl. Briefwechsel also notes here, as he did with the previous
letter: with Aurifaber \"in the wrong place\". This remark is also in
Löscher, Vol. I, 810 at No. 13. Aurifaber\'s oversight is this: he has
this letter in the first place, then the one in No. 13. Aurifaber was
somewhat justified to keep such order, because both letters are dated:
\"May 29, 1516\". He has overlooked, however, that Luther was on this
day rather in Gotha than in Langensalza.

5\) This apostolic greeting appears here for the first time in Luther\'s
letters. Compare Luther\'s interpretation of this greeting in the
detailed interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians, St. Louis
Edition, Vol. IX, 44, § 45 ff.

6\) This will refer to Lang\'s promotion to prior, which had taken place
only shortly before. See the postscript to No. 13.

**28** Letters from the year 1516. no. 14. 15. **29**

You shall not record there, but only that which is related to the common
guests.

The manner of this register, if you cannot invent something better,
arrange so that you write in certain interspaces thus: on the day of
this saint, or on such a weekday, after such a feast day, so much is
consumed, namely in wine so much, in bread so much 2c., for such a N. or
N. guests. Let not this be thought troublesome or superfluous; take heed
well, I beseech thee, or I would command thee; peradventure thou knowest
not my thoughts. For in such a way (if all common sense does not deceive
me) you will see whether the convent is more a monastery than an inn or
tavern. Yes, in this way you will not only be able to know how much has
been consumed, but also to which people and on how many days you have
been hospitable, finally also to which guests the works of reverence
have been paid; but also the grumbling of the brothers can be countered,
and accounts can be filed, or accused, and many other things that I do
not say now.

I would also like you to make a special and separate record for those
who come and go out and bring their guests with them, so that the
restless and insatiable people may be held accountable for how much they
wastefully consume, while they are hopeful for the greatness of their
benefits and their work. Fare well and be a strong man, and the Lord
will be with you; remember also that you are set up as a sign that will
be contradicted, to some a good smell to life, but to others a smell to
death, and pray for me. From Salza, on the eighth day after the Feast of
Corpus Christi (May 29) in the year 1516. Brother Martin Luther.

I have not found any monasteries in this district that are in as good
order as, by the grace of God, the one at Gotha and the one at Salza. We
heard this one in one hour, that one in about two. Therefore, we have
finished quickly, and will, by the grace of God

1\) *terminarii*, monks sent out to beg or collect offerings and favors.

I hope that the Lord will work and rule in spiritual and temporal
matters in these places without us, even though it is against the will
of the devil. I have a kind of indisposition that will cause me fever if
the Lord does not prevent it. You pray for me that his exceedingly
beautiful and always blessed will be done for me, amen.

**No. 15.**

Wittenberg. June 8, 1516.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther, having returned from his visitation trip, in response to a found
letter from Spalatin, refuted the Elector\'s plan to make Staupitzen a
bishop.

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 16; in Löscher,
vol. I, p. 812; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 24 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel,
vol. I, p. 39. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 539.

To the servant of God and servant of Christ, that is, to the extremely
righteous priest, Magister Georg Spalatin, your highly learned man and
his true friend.

JEsus.

Hail! As you asked, my best Spalatin, I have returned, thank God, at
least unharmed in body, God knows whether also in mind. I therefore give
thanks to your love. Your letter was also delivered to me immediately,
because the brothers did not know where I was, so that they could have
sent it to me. You also write that our most noble prince wishes that our
reverend father should now become vicarius, I do not know what kind of
high thing, and that he should also make use of you as a helper to bring
this about; and you certainly do what a man who is a friend without
hypocrisy is wont to do. But I wish that your persuasion of the
venerable father will become sleepier and duller than a dry stubble, and
I will advise in my letters what is contrary to you, or at least I will
advise in such a way that he, when he is persuaded, should waver as to
which way he should turn.

Are you surprised about this? It is certainly true that I do not despise
your advice,

30Letters from the year 1516. no. 15. 16. 31

because with the best will in the world I cannot help but believe that
they come from a very good heart, yes, because I see that you are
carried away by true love and therefore recognize that you are deprived
of the right judgment. For true love does not find the right judgment,
as Chrysostom says. But this I say, that the prince\'s desire has moved
you to talk to him. For I do not want the venerable father in any way to
get involved in this matter, which your persuasion is striving for with
all its effort, because it pleases your prince so. Many things are
pleasing to your prince, and shine with great brightness in his eyes,
which are displeasing to God and are not good. Not that I want to deny
that he is the very smartest in worldly affairs, but that I recognize
that he is almost sevenfold blind in the things that concern God and the
salvation of souls, just like your Pfeffinger. 1)

And I do not say this in the corner, as a slanderer, nor do I want you
to hide this in any way; I am ready, if somehow the opportunity gives
it, to say it to both of your faces. But if it were certain that what is
in your hands is from God, I wish that your persuasion would become fire
and that one would become stubble. And don\'t let it come to you that
what your prince and you are planning is so secret; I heard long before
I saw your letter that the venerable father is being asked to be a
bishop (if I remember correctly) \"at Kimsehe\" \[Chiemsee\] But this is
what your letter and Pfeffinger\'s, and also that of his sister, the
abbess,^2)^ whom I saw at Eisleben, is about, if I have not had the
wrong scent.

But, my dear Spalatin, these are not times of such prosperity that it
should be blissful, or rather extremely miserable, to be a bishop
(*praesulari*), that is, to live in indulgence, sodomizing, and
according to Roman ways, which you yourself sufficiently recognize when
you compare the works and doings of the old bishops with the doings and
works of the bishops of our time. At

1\) Degenhart Pfeffinger, a Bavarian nobleman from Alberskirch, Doctor
of Laws and Counselor to the Elector. Cf. no. 4.

2\) Probably Magdalena, Staupitzen\'s sister.

Now those are the best, who with all their strength and all their
intrigues pursue quarrels before the court and build up the property
(*rem familiarem*), that is, the insatiable hell of avarice. And even
though this man is very far from all these vices, will you be a
guarantor that, if the occasion arises, yes, if (as is now happening and
being said everywhere) necessity drives him, this man will not be drawn
into the whirlwinds and raging storms of the episcopal courts?

But enough of that; I answer your request. If this matter is indeed such
that it cannot suffer any delay, then I ask you to inform me
immediately, because the venerable father is now in Antwerp and will
hardly return before the autumn; but for his sake I will gladly send a
messenger of my own as far as Cologne. For this is the place where he
has instructed us to send letters to him. Fare well in the Lord, and
pray for me. From our monastery in Wittenberg, on the eighth of June in
the year 1516.

Martin Luter, Augustinian.

**No. 16.**

Wittenberg. June 22, 1516.

**To Michael Dresse, Augustinian Prior in Neustadt.**

First, about religious matters, then about true peace in the midst of
temptations.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B. n., fol. 177. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 18 b; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 815; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 26 and
in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 42. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 543.

To the venerable and devout Father Michael Dressel (*Tornatori*), Prior
of the Augustinian Hermits at Neustadt, his \[beloved\] in the Lord
always.

JEsus.

Salvation and peace, but not the revealed one according to the sense of
men, but the one hidden under the cross and exalted above all reason in
the Lord! I reply briefly to your letter and that of the Teutonic
gentleman who desires to be admitted to our Order, dear and venerable
Father. First of all, that it is not our place to

32Letters from 1516, No. 16. 17. 33

It is not to hinder a beneficial intention, but rather to promote and
encourage it, if care is taken that it is done with the Lord and in the
Lord. But it will be done in the Lord, if one does not keep every man\'s
mine and holy intention, but the prescribed law and the order of the
superiors and the decrees of the fathers, without which he hopes in vain
for prosperity and salvation for himself, however good his intention may
be.

Therefore, I do not give my consent, nor can I give my consent, to the
admission of this gentleman, unless he brings properly sealed letters
from his superior, and wants to do everything else, which, as is written
in the 16th chapter of our orders, must be done by such people, lest he
cause himself and us to repent afterwards. For no one may be removed
from his superior merely on the testimony of one. It is someone else\'s
property until he who has power over it gives his consent in a lawful
manner. If he would now hardly agree to produce such letters, behold, it
will already come to light whether the spirit is of God. For that which
is of God endures, and suffers and endures all things, that it may
endure.

Then about brother Henning, that you write that you gave him a vacation
(*licentiam*) on Tuesday after Vitus \[June 17\]: I have not yet seen
him, nor has he come to me. I have ordered the brother Peter
Hilperhausen to Sangerhausen instead of Andreas Ilmen, whom I have had
admitted to Erfurt because of his weakness. The fathers in Sangerhausen
have my letter to him, because I assumed that he would travel to
Mansfeld, as he had asked me.

You seek and desire peace, but in a wrong way, because you seek it as
the world gives it, not as Christ gives it. Or do you not know, my dear
father, that God is wonderful in his people because he has placed his
peace in the midst of strife, that is, in the midst of all temptations?
as he says \[Ps. 110:2\]: \"Rule in the midst of your enemies.\"
Therefore, it is not the peace that no one oppresses, but rather the
peace that has

of the world; but he whom all people and all things trouble, and bears
all this calmly with joy. You say to Israel, Peace, peace, and there is
no peace. Rather, say to Christ: Cross, cross, and is no cross. For as
soon as the cross ceases to be a cross, than thou canst cheerfully say:
Blessed cross, among all woods there is none such.

See, therefore, how fatherly the Lord provokes you to true peace, since
he surrounds you with such a great cross. For such is called the peace
of God, which is higher than all reason, that is, which cannot be felt
nor perceived, nor even thought. No thought can see and understand it.
Only the one who gladly bears the cross in everything he feels, thinks,
understands, such a afflicted one experiences this peace afterwards. For
all our understanding, all our work, all our thoughts, he has ordered
under this peace of his, and has fastened them to the cross (that is,
subjected them to various and troubled disturbances); therefore peace is
above reason, and different from that which we invent and desire, namely
incomparably much better. Seek this and you will find it. But you cannot
seek it better than by taking the troubles upon yourself with joy, as if
they were holy relics, and not by seeking and choosing peace according
to your opinion and sense. Fare well and pray for me, best father, and
may the Lord guide you. From Wittenberg, in the year 1516 on the day of
the ten thousand martyrs \[June 22\]. Martin Luder,

District^1)^ -vicarius.

**No. 17.**

Wittenberg. June 30, 1516.

**To Johann Lang.**

Luther asks him to send brothers of disorderly conduct to Sangerhausen
for punishment. News.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, *fol.* 113 b. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 17b; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 814; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 28
and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 44. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
541.

1\) Löscher, Vol. I, p. 353, interprets *districtus* as \"much
bothered\", which is also approved by the Erlangen correspondence. It
seems to us that this is not permissible for this purely official
letter, even if it would be permissible for a letter addressed to a
friend.

**34**

Letters from the year 1516. No. 17. 18.

**35**

Your venerable father Johann Lang, Baccalaureus of Theology, Prior of
the Augustinian Hermits at Erfurt, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord! I have written a letter to you from Sangerhausen,
dearest father, that if you had a brother who was unbroken in spirit,
you might send him there for his punishment. 1) Now I am writing another
letter to you from Wittenberg, and I do not only order, but I also ask,
that you leave either Georg Schleusinger or Wilhelm Tischer to them in
Eisleben, if not handed over, at least for the time being, until the
venerable father has returned. For now necessity forces it, and you may
tell this brother and all that this is not done by me out of a violent
mind, but we all, especially I, are obliged to uphold the honor of the
vicariate, especially of the venerable father vicarius, as and where we
can.

These very fathers have sent me a brother who was close to attaching a
huge stain to this new plantation 2). The brother Caspar, who is senior
there, has received the last ovation and is lying down, the Lector
Antonius is also lying down, the father Baccalaureus 3) is in Leipzig,
two others are on the journey 4) to collect for the building, as you
know, and this one 5) is now here with me. Five priests are in total in
the service of the convent: consider for yourself whether the need
should not be helped.

But so that you or others do not get a suspicion: the plague does not
prevail there. Be well and greet the fathers, the magisters and the
lector 6) and the others, not

1\) In October, three such monks were sent from Erfurt to Sangerhausen.
See No. 26.

2\) In 1515, the Counts of Mansfeld founded an Augustinian monastery in
Eisleben, whose prior at that time was Georg Nagel.

3\) Caspar Güttel, who came there from Neustadt an der Orla in 1515, was
in Leipzig to obtain the doctorate.

4\) *sunt in terminis* == they terminiren, collect mild gifts.

5\) Perhaps a monk delivering the present letter?

6\) Georg Leister.

in my name, but in the name and power of God. From Wittenberg, on the
day of the commemoration of St. Paul \[June 30\].

Brother Martin, Particular 7)-Vicar.

Two more Carmelite brothers 8) joined us. Brother Johann Königsberg has
recovered completely. The prior of Herzberg has suffered severely from
coughing and spitting up blood; I fear that he will not recover. Pray
for him and command him to yours; he has not yet been able to hold the
disputation for the baccalaureate. The storm and thunderstorm near
Dresden destroyed most of the vineyards of our monastery in such a way
that it is thought that the damage could hardly be repaired with two to
three hundred florins; it also destroyed many others. This is the news.

**No. 18.**

Wittenberg. August 24, 1516.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asked Spalatin for the letters of St. Jerome or an excerpt of the
life of the apostle Bartholomew from Jerome\'s *Cat. viror. illustrium,*
since he wanted to preach a sermon on this subject.

The original is in the Abbey Library of Zurich. Printed by *Hottinger,
Hist. eccl. tom*. VI, p. 756; in Tentzel, \"Historischer Bericht vom
Anfang und ersten Fortgang der Reformation\" 2c., p. 163; in *Strobel-
Ranner*, *Lutheri epp., p.* 33; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 48 (without
determination of the date) and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 46.

His Georg Spalatin, the servant of God.

JEsus.

Hail! I ask you for a service of both love and faith, my dearest
Spalatin, that is, that you either help me at this hour to the letters
of St. Jerome, or at least, as briefly 9) as possible, to the letters of
St. Jerome.

7\) In contrast to the general vicar, Luther here calls himself vicarirt
*particularis* == vicar of a piece.

8\) Their names were: Johannes Hais from Naumburg and Sixtus Maul from
Bamberg, *Album* p. 62. The prior of the Augustinians from Herzberg is
Simon *Cesarmis*, *Album* p. 64. *Liber Decan.* p. 19. 21. -
\"Königsberg\" seems to be Fogler, *Album p.* 33. (Seidemann at De
Wette, Vol. VI, p. 530, Amn. 2.)

9\) De Wette notes: \"It can be doubted whether it is called
*breviter.*\" - Perhaps *celeriter,* because Luther insists on the
highest haste.

**36** Letters from the year 1516. no. 18. 19. **37**

you can write out for me from the \"Little Book of Famous Men\" (which I
want more) what the saint himself wrote about St. Bartholomew, the
apostle, so that I have it before twelve o\'clock; for I will preach a
sermon about it before the people. 1) By those antics and lies of the
Catalogus and the golden legend^2)^ I have been extraordinarily annoyed.
Farewell, dear brother. From our little monastery.

Brother Martin Luder, Augustinian.

I do not want you to be surprised that I am a theologian and without
Jerome. For I am expecting the edition of Erasmus, 3) and the
\[Jerome\], which I used to use, Johann Lang has taken with him \[and\]
4) sold.

**No. 19 .**

Wittenberg. August 30, 1516.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther sends him the speech he gave in the Gotha chapter and tells him
to share it with other friends. Religious affairs.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, fol. 114. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 20; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 817; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 29 and in
Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 48. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 547.

To the venerable and sincerely God-fearing man Johann Lang, Prior of the
Augustinian Hermits of the monastery at Erfurt, Baccalaureus of
Theology, his brother in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! This speech of mine, which I held in Gotha at our chapter,^5)^ I
am sending to you.

1\) This sermon is found in the St. Louis edition, vol. XII, 1732. Since
it was preached in 1516, on St. Bartholomew\'s Day, the time
determination for this letter given by the Erlangen correspondence
results from it.

2\) This refers to the *Petrus de Natalibus catalogus sanctorum* and the
*Jaoobus de Voragine legenda aurea*. (Tentzel, Vol. I, p. 163.)

3\) The latter\'s edition of Jerome appeared in the year

4\) There is a gap here in the original; we have added *atque.*

5\) The chapter at Gotha was on April 29, 1515. The sermon Luther
delivered on May 1 is found in the St. Louis edition, Vol. X, 938.

to you, venerable father, and command them to your fidelity, as I wish
to do enough for my fidelity through them, that is, that you have them
brought as soon as possible either to Mr. Johann Braun, priest of the
holy virgin at Eisenach, or to Mr. Wigand von Guldennappen,^6)^ priest
in Waltershausen, 7). For I owe it to him to fulfill the promise;
however, I promise and give the Lector, Father Georg Leister, the
opportunity to read them, or to whom he himself may wish. Not that I
consider them worthy of reading, but that I only have to comply with and
obey the wishes of others more than my own.

By the way, you are violently agitated against the Magister Johann Vogt
8). I know nothing, nor do I understand any secret things (*mysteria*).
But I have heard the Magdeburg prior, face to face \[I have talked with
him\], who was also morose at that time - and completely the same as he
had been in Eisleben, that is, completely despairing of maintaining the
studies 9) with him, and also some seniors held it with him; then, as
far as I fully understood and believed the father Magister, the study
there was left without active help and assistance, but only in a
suffering way, but with the will of the provincial fathers. And so,
easily believing this, I left.

But now it will be your business not only to receive this blow on the
right cheek, but also to offer it to the others. This will not be your
greatest, but also not your last challenge. God\'s wisdom is only
playing with you and preparing you for serious warfare if you live. It
is nothing that you send the studying brethren to me, both because we
have too much of it, and because the plague is raging all around, and it
is expected to break in every day, so that it may

6\) Thus in Latin: *Guldennappensem*; Walch: \"Guldenapt.\"

7\) As Luther wrote to Duke John Frederick of Saxony on May 14, 1526,
interceding on his behalf, he had been one of Luther\'s teachers in
Eisenach when he attended the school of the parish church of St. George
there.

8\) Augustinians in Magdeburg.

9\) The term \"*studium\" is* probably used here to refer to the
\"studium gensrule\", the educational institution associated with the
Augustinian monastery.

**38** Letters from the year 1516. no. 19. 20. **39**

When they come, they will not be forced to leave soon, because everyone
predicts the coming of the plague in the most certain way. Endure,
suffer, believe, hope everything, as your love does.

I don\'t know if you can find the venerable father 1) in Munich. He sent
letters to me from the valley 2) when I returned from Magdeburg, which
are quite sad and short; I thought I had given you news about them. But
the Prince, and even the Counts of Mansfeld 3) have sent him letters,
and his arrival was assumed and is still suspected, but perhaps he is
traveling to Alsace. Magister Johannes Vogt writes that Magister Johann
von Mecheln 4) has written to him: because of the reformation 5) of the
convent in Dordrecht, the venerable father has been requested by Duke
Carl 6) and the council of this city; 7) I do not want this to happen.
Farewell. From Wittenberg, on the day of Felix and Adauctus 8) \[Aug.
30. Greet everyone and commend me to them. Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 20 .**

Wittenberg. September 25, 1516.

**To Michael Dressel and the Augustinian chapter in Neustadt.**

Luther removes Dressel as prior because of the discord prevailing in his
monastery, and orders that a new one be elected.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 21; in
Löscher, vol. I, p. 819 (with the wrong resolution of the date: Sept.
27); in De Wette, vol. I, p. 30 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p.
50. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 549.

1\) Staupitz.

2\) *ex Valle*, that is from Mühlheim, *Vallis molaria*, now
Thal-Ehrenbreitstein.

3\) because of the newly founded monastery in Eisleben.

4\) Jnscribirt im *Album Viteb*., p. 22 im Sommersemester 1507.

5\) That is, about the admission to the Congregation of the Reformed
Augustinians.

6\) of funds.

7\) Here it says *et* in the editions, but is missing in the codex we
followed.

8\) In the Jubelkalender von Wien, St. Louiser Ausg., vol. XV, 132:
\"Adauchus.\"

To the venerable and devout Fathers, Brother Michael Dressel, Prior of
the Convent of the Hermits of St. Augustine at Neustadt, together with
the Seniors and Chapter Lords of the same Convent, his dearly beloved in
the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord! I hear with sorrow, as I am worthy to hear, dear
fathers and brethren, that ye live without peace and unity, and though
ye are in one hand, have not one manner, nor, as the rule requires. Have
one heart and one soul in the Lord. This wretched and useless way of
living comes either from the weakness of your humility, because where
there is humility there is peace, or from my negligence, or at least
from your guilt and mine, because we do not complain before the Lord who
made us, nor pray that he may guide our way in his sight, and lead us in
his righteousness. He who errs, errs, errs who fails to guide himself by
his counsel, much less others, but this must be obtained from God by
humble prayer and godly disposition, as the Psalm \[119:133.\] 9) does:
\"Let my walk be sure in thy word.\" Thus Tobias taught his son \[Cap.4,
20. Vulg.\]: \"Always give thanks to God, and ask Him to guide you in
your ways.\" Therefore, because you did not do this or did not do it
rightly, it is not to be wondered at that you were not guided but
hindered. How now? There is danger in a life without peace, because it
is without Christ, and is rather a death than a life.

Therefore, I am forced to do absently what I did not want to do at the
moment, and now I would like to be present very much, but I cannot.
Therefore, with wholesome obedience, accept this decree of mine, if
perhaps the Lord of Peace will deign to work with us. For the whole or
the foremost cause of your confusion is that you are at variance with
your head and prior, and this is more harmful than one brother being at
variance with another. Therefore, by the authority of my office, I
command you, Brother Michael Dressel, to take office and seal.

9\) Erl. Briefw., Ps. 119, 35.

**40** Letters from the year 1516. no. 20. 21. **41**

By this authority I also absolve you from the office of a prior, in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, amen. And by
this letter, as one absent, I will have done to the absent what I would
have done presently to the present.

Nor do I want you to complain that I have judged you unheard and have
not heard your excuses. For I believe very gladly that you have done
everything you have done in the best opinion, and I can also in no way
think that you have done anything intentionally and maliciously, by
which this disturbance has been brought about; you have done as much as
you have had grace. For this I give you thanks, and all your brothers;
if they do not give you thanks, they displease me greatly.

But this is what must comfort you, that it is not enough for a man to be
good and godly for himself, but there must also be peace and harmony of
others with him. Often the best works fail, and are justly condemned, in
order that peace may be preserved: how much more are those not to be
preferred to peace, which a man has done in good faith and with all
diligence, and yet by them has not served peace!

Therefore, after the prior has been absolved \[from his office\], I ask
you, for the sake of Christ\'s mercy, to immediately be unanimously
careful to elect three in order according to the statutes, namely, so
that you do not (as I have often experienced useless elections and
futile votes) mention one of them, nor does anyone among you give his
vote to such a one, whom one cannot have, namely, who is already in
office or otherwise not available. 1) For if one so votes, one loses
time and labor, and the votes are given in vain. Therefore, it would
please me if, before the election, all those who cannot be given to you
were publicly enumerated, so that everyone would know to whom he should
not give the vote. Nor is it a mistake for you to list some of those who
can be given to you.

1\) Heinrich Zwetzen was elected in Dressel\'s place. See No. 25.

For the sake of those who do not know about those who are to be chosen.

But whomsoever ye shall choose, do this for him, brethren, with all
diligence, that ye entreat, not with your strength, but with continual
prayer, as I have said, that the Lord may guide you. For the scripture
saith in Jeremiah \[Cap. 10:23\], \"I know, O Lord, that the doings of
man are not in his power, neither is it in any man\'s power how he shall
walk, or how he shall direct his course.\" For behold, I testify to you
by this present writing, and I tell you beforehand that unless you
obtain a rule over you from God through prayer, you will not have peace
and good prosperity, even if St. John the Baptist were your prior.
Everything is in the hand of the Lord; whoever does not believe this
will have plagues and troubles until he learns it.

In the instruction of the young people, I ask you to be diligent and
faithful, as in that which is first and highest for the whole convent,
as I said and recommended to you when I was present. Be well and pray
for me and for all of us. In the convent of Magdeburg the brother
Johannes de Buscha (*Busscha*) died; the Subdiaconus in Dresden,^2)^ the
father senior, Johann Kunzel. The plague is raging all around us, and we
expect daily what the Magdeburgers are suffering. Therefore, be mindful
of us and of those in Magdeburg, that whom He will call away. He calls
in mercy. Be at ease in the Lord. From Wittenberg, Thursday after
Mauritius \[Sept. 25\] 1516.

Brother Martin Luder, temporary \[*medius*\] vicar of the Augustinians.

**No. 21**

Kemberg. October 5, 1516.

**To Johann Lang.**

Luther sends Lang a letter concerning the prior at Eschwege, speaks out
about a satirical writing sent to him, and exhorts him to patience
against fallen brothers.

2\) According to the punctuation in the editions, \"Buscha\" would be
the Subdiaconus in Dresden. But the postscript to the letter of October
5 reads: *Obist in Dresden P. Senior Johannes Kuntzel*.

42Letters from the year 1516. no. 21. 22. 43

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A. 399, fol. 119. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 25 b; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 824; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 36 and
in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 59. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 557.

To the venerable man devoted to the true religion, Johann Lang,
Baccalaureus, of sacred theology, prior of the hermits at Erfurt, his
\[friend\] to be highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! Please see to it, my dear father, that this letter is brought to
the prior in Eschwege 1) in any way possible to you, and the money,
which he might send to you, no one can get to us more easily than you.
For you know how extremely impatient our genii, lares and all penates 2)
are about a delay, because they are very poor. Since the Eschwegesche
brother himself is poor and owes us, he is also so poor and in debt that
he must be helped soon.

Those antics that you sent to me, \"of the petitions to the holy pope
against the false theologians\" (*theologastros*), 3) are, as is all too
clear, invented by an immoral person, and taste entirely of the same pot
as the letters of the dark ones. However, they have been made known to
almost everyone by me on a good occasion, since we were all together,
invited to a licentiate (as they say) of two physicians, and all have
passed the same judgment about it.

I sincerely begrudge Doctor Henning 4) his honors, but I fear no less
for his well-being, that he might be lifted high, so that he might fall
down by an even heavier fall. May the Lord grant him to think moderately
of himself in all things and to recognize himself clearly.

You would have looked for the venerable father Vicarius in Munich quite
rightly, 5) because from there

1\) Johann Spangenberg. - Eschwege an der Werra im ehemaligen
Churfürstenthum Hessen.

2\) This is what Luther jokingly calls the inhabitants of the monastery.

3\) *Tenor supplicationis Pasquillianae in Pasquillus Marranus exul*,
reprinted in *Böcking, Huttwni opp. suppl., Tom,* l, p. 505. (Erl.
Briefw.)

4\) D. Henning Göde was received with great jubilation upon his arrival
in Erfurt (Erl. Briefw.). See the postscript to No. 23.

5\) Compare No. 19, fourth paragraph.

He sent me a letter on September 10. I do not know whether he will come
to us, but one hopes so. Of course, he writes to me that he is forced to
stay because of necessity, because of poverty.

Take care of your brother, even of our brother who has fallen away, with
the Lord. For thou needest not forsake him turned away by godliness,
who, turned away by ungodliness, hath forsaken thee; let it not trouble
thee that they suffer affliction: we are called, baptized, ordained,
that we bear one another\'s burdens, and to our dishonest members we
give the most honor \[1 Cor. 12:23.\]. \"One must be another\'s burden
of shame,\" for such Christ has been to us, is still, and will be for
ever, as it is written \[Heb. 5:6\], \"Thou art a priest for ever.\"

Beware, therefore, that you are not so pure that you do not want to be
touched by the unclean, or that you now refuse to carry, cover and wipe
off uncleanness. You are placed in an office of honor, but which is to
be nothing else than to bear the shame of others. For so shall we glory
in the cross and in the shame.

Be well and pray for me. The Christ and cross bearer, him, I say, the
father Bartholomew Usingen,^6)^ you shall teach, that he may be
sufficient for his name and his work, and bear Christ on his body,
because it is so good in the eyes of the Lord. From Kemberg, on the
fifth day of October 1516. Greetings to all from me. Brother Martin
Luther.

7\) In Dresden the father senior Johannes Kuntzel has died. In Grimma
the younger brother Andreas Rochlis, priest, died.

**No. 22 .**

(Wittenberg.) (Around October 5, 1516.) 8)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the writing mentioned in the previous number, which he had
received from Lang, and gives his verdict on it.

6\) See No. 11, at the beginning.

7\) The following postscript is found only in the Erlangen
correspondence, which has taken it from Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 435.
(According to the *Cod. Goth.*)

8\) This time determination results from the reference to the
*Supplicatio contra theologastros* mentioned in the previous number.
Buddeus and, following him, Walch place this letter in the year 1521.

**44** Letters from the year 1516. no. 22. 23. **45**

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv at Zerbst. Handwritten
in *Cod. Jen. A*. fol. 235. Printed in *Buddeus*, *supplementum
epistolarum Lutheri,* p. 16; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 38 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 61 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 742.

The Magister Georg Spalatin, the highly learned priest.

JEsus.

Hail! I have received both the letter and the florin you sent me
yesterday. What is to be done will be done. Furthermore, the prior of
Erfurt, Johann Lang, sent me \"the petition against the false
theologians\", which, since it contains nothing of truth based on facts
(*gestae veritatis*), reveals the same or a similar comedian as its
author, as the letters of the dark ones also have him. I approve of his
intention (*votum*), but I do not approve of his work, because it does
not abstain from invective and vituperation. Yes, immediately it was
ridiculed by all to whom I recently made it known, whatever it may be.
Therefore, watch and read it with your usual modesty. Farewell. 1)

**No. 23 .**

Wittenberg. Around the middle of October 1516. ^2)^

**To Johann Lang.**

Luther complains that Lang sends him too many brothers. He explains
about the disputation held by St. Bartholomäus Bernhardt from
Feldkirchen on September 25, 1516 (St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 5
ff.), especially about the third thesis. Then religious matters and, in
the postscript, a report on D. Henning Göde.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. V. 399, fol. 116 (without the postscript).
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 23; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 821; in De
Wette, vol. I, p. 33 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 54. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 522.

1\) The original has no signature.

2\) This letter is without year and date. The year we set is accepted by
all without exception. De Wette lets it be written: \"Before October 5,
as it seems\", the Erl. Briefw.: \"September (?) 1516\". We have
followed the Weimar edition, Vol. I, p. 143, in determining the time. We
were moved to do so by the following considerations. Our letter cannot
be placed in September, because Feldkirchen\'s disputation was held on
September 25 and

To the venerable Baccalaureus of sacred theology, Father Johann Lang,
prior of the Augustinians, hermits at Erfurt, his \[friend\] to be
highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! \[You act as if we indeed had such great abundance that I, who am
poor, could receive those whom you, who are richer, cannot receive. For
this winter, if the plague does not intervene, I will be the
thirty-sixth, or even the fortieth, if all come who are indicated. You
seem to me to assume much of the distrust and the Erfurtian
idiosyncrasy, as if God could do that, that he does not also feed the
ungrateful, and does not also sustain those who do not want to be
sustained.

Then you make this monastery your own in such a way that you call other
people (*alios*) strangers and advise me to help my mother with you.
Which is my mother and which is yours? See, therefore, how unjust zeal
you have, that you want to serve her with your harm, but not her with
your gain. Beware, therefore, that you persevere, as your Tauler says,
as one separated on both sides, and in regard to everything \[be\] a
common man, 3) as is proper.

At the time of our letter, it had already been printed for some time and
sent to Lang, as Luther reports here, by Amsdorf. - Between August 30
and October 5, Luther does not seem to have written a letter to Lang,
because only on the latter day does he return to the remark made there
about Staupitzen\'s stay in Munich, and only on October 5 in the
postscript does he report to Lang the death of Johannes Kunzel in
Dresden, about whom he had already written to the Augustinian chapter in
Neustadt on September 25. - On October 5, nothing is said about the
plague, but in our letter it is said that it comes gradually and at the
beginning; on October 26, that it takes away several. - In the letter of
October 5, the honorable reception of D. Goede in Erfurt is
commemorated; in our letter in the postscript, however, his violent
actions there are already mentioned. - Our letter has several points of
contact with Luther\'s letter to Lang of October 26. The brother Johann
Metzeler mentioned here is mentioned there again, as well as the two
brothers sent from Cologne. According to the receipt of this letter,
thirty-six to forty persons must be maintained in the Wittenberg
monastery from the meager income; through the influx of new brothers
received during the letter, the number increased to forty-one on October
26.

3i Walch already remarks that here *sis* has to be added to make sense.

**46** Letters from the year 1516. no. 23. **47**

befits the son of the common God and the common church. I will give you
the brother Johann Metzeler when I have learned that the Eislebeners can
do without him.

It is nothing that your Gabrielists 1) are surprised about my, rather
Bartholomew\'s Feldkirchen thesis, since also mine are so far
tremendously surprised about it. And of course the thesis itself is not
made by me, but M. Bartholomew has put it that way, namely moved by the
chatter of the yappers against my lectures. Therefore, he has arranged
for this to be discussed publicly (except in the order in which I
presided), in order to shut up the gossips or to hear the judgment of
others. Of course, I have annoyed everyone very badly because I have
denied that the book of true and false repentance 2) is by Augustine.
For it is quite tasteless and exceedingly inconsistent, and in
everything far removed from Augustine\'s sense and learning. For I knew
that Gratianus and Magister Sententiarum took a great deal from it, and
made not a remedy for consciences, but a torture out of it. But it has
so annoyed those people that they cannot be reconciled, especially
Doctor Carlstadt, that I dare to deny this knowingly. You shall
therefore tell my astonished or rather whimsical theologians that it is
not to be disputed with me whether Gabriel says this, whether Raphael
that, or Michael that. I know what Gabriel says, namely everything quite
well, except where he speaks of grace, love, hope, faith, virtues; how
much he pelagianizes there with his Scotus, I cannot now bring forward
in writing.

Of the third thesis, 3) which you say you do not understand, this is the
opinion of the

1\) Followers of the scholastic Gabriel Viel. - About Feldkirchen
compare St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, introduction, p. 26 f. He is from
Feldkirchen in Swabia. He is from Feldkirchen in Swabia; born August 24,
1487, died July 21, 1551. He was not, as is usually assumed, the first
married Protestant preacher, but others married before him. See
Seidemann\'s \"Explanations,\" p. 13.

2\) This writing was the main authority for the penitential theory of
the Middle Ages. Luther was right in doubting its authenticity; even
Bellarmin declared it spurious.

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 13.

Magister Bartholomew: that love, which (as those bad theologians hold)
awaits the utmost need, is inactive, yes, extremely inactive, that is,
absolutely no love. Since love, forgetting itself, seeks what is
external, how should it then await the utmost need,^4)^ since a human
being, not wild animals nor the stone kind, is expected. Namely, the
exceedingly astute theologians understand the word of John \[1 Ep. 3,
17. Vulg.The apostle (ille) intended this: when someone sees that his
brother is in need of something, or is in need of something; as the Lord
was in need of the donkey and the stuffing, and as in the Acts of the
Apostles \[Cap. 2,45.\] each one was given what was needed.

Against this unbelieving view, which also extinguishes the whole love,
he said: \"a completely inactive love\". From no other teacher have we
taken this \[thesis\] than from him who says \[Matt. 7:12.\], \"All
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them.\" But I mean, it could not be doubtful even to thuen, that though
they thirsted not to the last breath, yet they wished to be watered by
others, and that love would be injured if they were not watered; - but
they should not injure love if they only offered \[the drink\] to one
who would otherwise die of thirst? Therefore, when will the service of
love occur? Who will prescribe when this need is there? These are
monstrous things that moved M. Bartholomew because he had heard such
things from me. Magister Amsdorf confesses that he sent this thesis to
you with cut off titles 5); and he also wondered, but not anymore.

There was no need to ask whether the novice brothers, dressed in white,
would be able to see the

4\) It seems to us that instead of: *expectat* should be read:
*expectit*,. - Equally following we have read with\'all editions: *cum
hominis, \... expectatur* instead of the reading of the Codex and the
Erl. Briefw.: *cum hoc \... expectat*.

5\) Thus, Feldkirchen\'s disputation had already been printed.

**48** Letters from the year

1516\. no. 23. 24. 25. **49**

For if they administer the office in the monastery (*intus*), why not
also outside? Have they adopted the clothes for the sake of the people
and wear them? Therefore, they and the brothers as a whole are allowed
to walk according to the statutes, in fact, they are allowed to wear
their clothes. But in Italy (for this province this regulation is
primarily given, or at least it is believed that all other \[provinces\]
act in the same way) they always walk in black robes even in the
monastery (*intus), so* that everywhere there is a difference between
the novices and those who have made profession or have advanced higher.
Thus I hold, but with reservation of the judgment of the superior.

When the venerable father Vicarius has answered you, inform me as soon
as possible; I will keep these brothers here for a few days to see what
I can do or where the pestilence wants to go, which is arriving and
starting all the time. I am reluctant to send them back, since they are
suitable for study, but we are weighed down by lack; but the Lord lives
and reigns.

Against the Nuremberg Prior 1) put on a gentle mind, for that is
serviceable, since he has put on a hard mind. For not a hard one casts
out a hard one, that is, not the devil the devil, but a gentle one the
hard one, that is, \"the spirit of God\" casts out the devils.

Behold, at this very hour, as I write this, two brothers are coming to
me from Cologne,^2)^ who are to study. I do not know what the venerable
father may think that he, without asking me, is showering me with
brothers in this way; all our possessions can no longer provide either
cells or other things. Fare well and pray for me, and command us yours
that when the Lord calls some of us away, he may deign to call us away
well prepared. From Wittenberg.

Brother Martin Luther, Vicarius.

1\) Nicolaus Besler, prior from May 15, 1512 to December 4, 1516; prior
in Cologne in 1525. (Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 70, note 16.)

2\) Among them Augustin Himmel, immatriculated in the fall of 1516, who
later became pastor in Colditz and superintendent in Altenburg.

I want to write to Doctor Henning^3)^ , but lack of time prevents me
from doing so. I am very sorry that he argues with his opponents more
with violence than with humility and gentleness. For he follows the
sense of Rehoboam \[1 Kings 12\], who despised good counsel, that he
should act modestly, and in all that he did followed the counsel of the
people of his own kind. I wish very much that this parable would be well
considered by Doctor Henning. For I fear not only for him, but I fear
that he may have come to Erfurt in vain, and that joy may be turned into
sorrow.

**No. 24.**

Wittenberg. October 19, 1516.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, annex, no. 3, Col. 1972.

**No. 25.**

(Wittenberg.) October 26, 1516.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther complains about his many affairs, about the amount of brothers
with whom his monastery is burdened, and about the plague, from which he
does not want to flee after all. News about friars.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 399, fol. 121 b. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 28; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 827; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 41 and in
Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 66. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 559.

To the venerable father Johann Lang, Baccalaureus, Prior of the
Augustinians at Erfurt, his \[friend\].

JEsus.

Hail! I have almost two scribes or chancellors of necessity; I do almost
nothing all day but write letters, so I don\'t know if I write the same
thing over and over again; you will see. I am a monastery preacher, a
table preacher, and every day I am also a pastor.

3\) D. Henning Göde, formerly professor in Erfurt, became professor of
canon law and provost at the collegiate church in Wittenberg in 1509. In
1516 he returned to Erfurt, especially to reconcile this city with the
House of Saxony, which came about through his efforts in the Treaty of
Naumburg. In 1518 he returned to Wittenberg and died in 1521. (Erl.
Briefw.)

**50**

Letters from the year 1516. No. 25.

**51**

I am a study nector, 1) I am vicarius, that is, eleven times^2)^ prior,
I am the fish receiver in Leitzkau, lawyer of the Herzbergs in Torgau,
3) reader on Paul,^4)^ collector of the Psalterium, 5) and what I have
already said, that the work of letter writing takes up most of my time.
Rarely do I have uninterrupted time to complete and keep the Horen 6);
in addition, there are my own temptations from the flesh, the world and
the devil. Behold, what an idle man I am!

I think that in the meantime my opinion and answer about the brother
Johannes Metzel 7) has reached you; but I will see what I can do. How do
you think I can accommodate your Sardanapals and Sybarites? If you have
brought them up badly, feed also the badly brought up. I have enough
useless brothers everywhere, if any are otherwise useless to a patient
soul. I am convinced that the useless ones are more useful than the most
useful ones, so bear them for a while.

Of the brothers who are sent to me, I think (but I do not know) recently
wrote to you, 8) To the convert 9) I have

1\) in the Study Institute of the monastery.

2\) In the meantime, Eisleben had been added to the ten monasteries
under Luther\'s control mentioned in No. 12. - In Leitzkau near
Magdeburg, the Augustinian monastery of Wittenberg owned a pond, the
yield or income of which had to be received by the *terminarius.*

3\) There was a dispute between the Elector and the Herzberg City
Council over the parish church incorporated into the monastery by the
Elector, which the City Council reclaimed. Luther was the administrator
for the Herzbergers.

4\) On October 27, 1516, Luther began his lectures on the Epistle to the
Galatians. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. VIII, 1352, note.

5\) \"Luther\'s First Lectures on the Psalms,\" published by Seidemann
in 1876. See No. 9.

6\) Luther prayed them on Saturday for the whole week, See Tischreden,
Cap. 15, § 12 and § 24. St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 517 and 525.

7\) In No. 23 Luther calls him: \"Metzeler\".

8\) See Letter No. 23.

9\) This will probably refer to the \"apostate brother\" mentioned in
No. 21. - M. Spangenberg, inscribed in the winter semester of 1508 as
*Frater Bethel de Spangenberg, Augustin*, prior at Eschwege (cf.

No. 21); later opponent of Luther at the Leipzig Augustinian Convention
June 22, 1523; sent to Cologne in 1525 to reform the Augustinian
monastery there, i.e., to expel the Protestant-minded friars. (Erl.
Briefw.)

I sent them with a younger \[brother\] to M. Spangenberg to their
places, where they desired, so that they would not remain in this air,
which is little beneficial to them. I have kept two others, together
with the two men from Cologne, 10) with whose skill I have had such
great pity that I would rather keep them, even with explicit harm, than
send them back. Twenty-two priests, twelve young people, and a total of
forty-one people feed on our more than exceedingly poor supply; but the
Lord will provide.

You write that you began the second book of the Sentences yesterday; but
I will begin the Epistle to the Galatians 11) tomorrow, although I fear
that the presence of the plague, after I have begun, will not allow it
to continue. The plague in our country takes away at most (but not yet
every day) three or two, and the blacksmith, our neighbor across the
street, has buried a son today who was healthy yesterday, and the other
son is down with the plague. What can I say? It\'s here and it\'s
attacking all of a sudden, especially younger people. And you advise me,
and M. Bartholomew with you, to flee. 12) Where shall I flee to? I hope
that the world will not collapse when Brother Martin falls. The
brothers, of course, if the plague increases, I will scatter all over
the world; I am set here; out of obedience I am not free to flee until
the obedience that commanded commands again. Not that I do not fear
death (for I am not the Apostle Paul, but only a reader of the Apostle
Paul), but I hope the Lord will pluck me out of my fear.

The venerable father, Magister Johannes Huesden, 13) Prior of Cologne,
wrote to me that the father M. Spangenberg was honored and loved by the
citizens of Dordrecht.

10\) See No. 23.

11\) The shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians. St,
Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1352.

12\) Aurifaber and Löscher offer: *M. Bartholo: tecum fugam*. Aurifaber
adds the marginal note: *Quid si: ad te confugiam*. De Wette and the
Erl. Correspondence read: M. *Bartholomaeo*, and the latter: *fugam
tecum*.

But it is *Bartholo* to be dissolved by *Bartholomaeus.*

13\) Also Huesden was deprived of his priory in l525 and Nicolaus Bester
(see No. 23), who was attached to the old doctrine, became prior in his
place.

**52**

Letters from the year 1516. no. 25. 26. 27.

**53**

and the convent will become more glorious than the others in a short
time. Prior there is the Lector Heinrich, 1) who was once our fellow
student (as they say), before he was in second place (*secundarius* ==
subprior) at Cologne. The Lector Fugius (*Phugius*) writes that
Reuchlin\'s cause stands well, and rejoices extraordinarily. About the
preceptor or the letter of permission 2) I ask to send at the same time
also a sibyl: these sheets I cannot read what they contain. Greet all
who are to be greeted, and to the Fathers Magisters I cannot write now,
I will write at another time. Read this letter to them if you wish.

Magister Wenceslaus 3) is absolved \[from his priory\] and is a preacher
in Munich; likewise the Baccalaureus Fladenstein in Culmbach is
absolved. In Neustadt, Brother Michael Dressel 4) is relieved of the
priory, and Brother Heinrich Zwetzen is prior. But I did this for the
sake of hoping that I myself would reign there for about half a year,
because this place needs a head very much. The venerable father Vicarius
sent letters to me again on the eighth of October from Alberkirchen, 5)
that is, from the house of Pfeffinger, who is now, with his Sara,
fattening a Bavarian pig 6). He writes that he will enjoy the winter of
rest in Munich. Farewell. In haste, and be mindful of us in this time of
the visitation of the Lord. Glory be to him. Amen. October 26, 1516.

Brother Martin Luther, 7) Augustinian.

1\) Heinrich von Zütphen, later burned for his faith, immatriculirt as
*Fr. hinricus gelrie de zutphania (Alb.* p. 26) in the summer term 1508.

2\) According to No. 27, this is how the word *licentiatorio is* to be
translated. There it occurs several times in this meaning.

3\) Link. He stayed only a short time in Munich. He was expected back in
Nuremberg as early as the end of January 1517.

4\) See No. 16.

5\) this is Albertskirchen, a small village near Bogen in Lower Bavaria,
where Pfeffinger had an estate.

6\) Walch reads *suum* instead of: *suem* and translates: \"who now
feeds his Bayer\".

7\) Instead of *Lutherus* in the other editions, the Erl. Briefw.
according to the *Cod. Goth*.: Vicarius. We did not dare to accept this
reading, because the codex also has many other bad readings, as:
*Luckaw* instead of *Litz*

*kaw*; arce instead of aere; *dies* instead of *duos*; *fladensis*
instead of *fladenstein*; avem instead of *suem*.

**No. 26.**

Wittenberg. October 29, 1516.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther transfers three monks from Erfurt to the monastery at
Sangershausen.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, fol. 119d. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 30; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 829; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 43 (with
the wrong date of October 28) and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 71.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 563.

To the venerable and devout Baccalaureus, Father Johann Lang, Prior at
Erfurt, his \[friend\] in thy HErrn.

JEsus.

Hail! If it is still in your and your fathers\' mind, venerable father,
to send the three brothers away,^8)^ as you have written to me for the
second or even the third time, then it has seemed good to me that they
should no longer be let go. Therefore, I summon all three of them to
Sangerhausen by my power and command and appointment for a while, if
they want to get along again. And I would have sent them there a long
time ago, because that convent had needed people for a long time, but I
feared that they would be extremely useless to strangers, since they are
not useful to their own.

But now I have written to the prior there that he should receive them,
and especially not let the brother Jakob Schlegel go out to collect
gifts. 9) Now it must be tried what the Lord wants to work in them and
in such a way. It is now up to you to immediately inform them of this
commandment of mine and to encourage them to travel, as is customary.
Fare well and pray for me. From Wittenberg, on the day after Simonis and
Jude \[Oct. 29\] 1516.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian vicar.

**No. 27.**

Wittenberg. December 14, 1516.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends thanks to the Elector for a donated dress, reports on
Staupitzen\'s efforts to collect relics and the difficulties he
encountered in doing so

8\) See No. 17.

9\) *terminatum ire* == to go begging. The begging monasteries were
dependent on mild gifts. - Walch: \"to roam around\".

**54** Letters from the year 1516. no. 27. **55**

He humbly rejects the praise given to him by the Elector, expresses his
opinion about Spalatin\'s plans to translate several writings into
German, recommends Tauler\'s sermons to him, and sends him the
\"Büchlein, was der alte und neue Mensch sei\" (see St. Louis edition,
vol. Louiser Ausgabe, Bd. XIV, 180), an excerpt from your book \"Ein
deutsch Theologia\", of which he says in its preface that \"the matter
is almost after the manner of the enlightened Doctor Tauler\".

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammt-Archiv in Zerbst. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 30 d; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 829; in De Wette,
vol. I, p. 44 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 72. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 564.

To the servant of Christ and priest of the Lord, Georg Spalatin, the
highly learned magister and his sincere friend and righteous brother.

JEsus.

Hail! Your letter, my dear Spalatin, was delivered to me just on the
feast day of St. Lucia \[Dec. 13\], in which you, among other things,
saw to it and reminded me that I should hand over to the Wittenberg
bearer what I wanted to send to you or to Hirschfeld. For I wanted
nothing more urgently than a certain bearer or reliable provider of the
things to be sent.

I have, of course, written two letters to the venerable Minorite Father
Jacob, who is the confessor of Prince Frederick, that he should at the
same time thank the Prince for having clothed me so generously, and with
better cloth than is perhaps proper for a habit, if it were not a gift
from the Prince: Cloth, than perhaps befits a habit, if it were not a
gift from the Prince; and that he would like to inform him about the
matter of the holy relics, which he had ordered our Reverend Father
Vicarius to procure in the Rhine regions 3); but I do not know whether
the letters have arrived or will arrive yet. Therefore, I want you to
know how this matter stands. The venerable father Vicarius obtained from
your

1\) Bernhard von Hirschfeld at the Electoral Court; in 1521, Luther
dedicated the sermon on the Gospel of the Ten Lepers to him, along with
Hangold von Einsiedeln and Hans von Dolzig. See St. Louis edition, vol.
XII, 1438.

2\) Jakob Vogt, Franciscan. He died on April 15, 1522. See Förstemann\'s
\"Neues Urkundenbuch\", p 22 b.

3\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, Introduction, p. 50b f.

Archbishop of Cologne relics for the prince, and a plenipotentiary or
(as it is called) *commissarius officialis* 4) in this matter, of the
same archbishop, and on the part of the prince and the vicarius the care
has been entrusted to the subprior 5) of our monastery at Cologne to
demand \[relics) and raise them. Since, however, after the departure of
the venerable father, the superior (*virgo maxima*) of St. Ursula was
requested \[for relics\] by the aforementioned plenipotentiaries, the
pope\'s prohibition protected her, and she could not, for the sake of
conscience, let herself in without the pope\'s command and permission.
Although a copy of the letter of permission was shown to her, she has
rejected it until now, because the copy would not be authenticated and
proven by the seal. Therefore, if you wish, you can indicate to our
prince that he send a letter of permission of proven credibility, or
that he may consider the venerable father vicarius excused.

But that you write that the most noble prince has remembered me often
and in an honorable way, I am not happy about that, but I pray that God
the Lord will reward his humility with glory. For I am not worthy that
any man should remember me, let alone a prince, and such and such a
great prince; indeed, I see and experience that those benefit me most
who remember me most grievously. But I ask you to let me give thanks
through you, both for the favor and the good deed of this prince of
ours, although I do not want to be praised by you or by any man, for the
praise of man is vain, but the praise of God is true, as it is written:
Not in any man, but \"in the LORD shall my soul be praised\" \[Ps. 34:3,
Vulg.\], and again, Not in your name, but \"in His holy name let
yourselves be praised\" \[Ps. 105:3, Vulg.\]. Not that our rulers are to
be blamed, but rather that they are rulers of men as of God, to whom
alone praise, honor and glory \[be\], auras.

4\) Martin Oed von Kempen. (Erl. Briefw.)

5\) Johann Ferber. (Erl. Briefw.)

**56**

Letters from the year 1516. No. 27. 28.

**57**

You want my judgment about your intention to translate small writings
into German: there you demand something that goes beyond my powers. For
who am I to judge what would both please and benefit the public? since
that alone is a work of grace, that whatever pleases and benefits may
please and benefit. Or do you not know that the more wholesome some
things are, the less they please and benefit? What is more wholesome
than Christ and the gospel? But to most they are stinking and a stench
of death unto death, and to very few a stench of life unto life. Perhaps
you say that in public you want to benefit only those who like the good.
Here you no longer need my judgment, for the sheep always hear every
voice of the shepherd, and only reject or flee the voice of strangers.
Therefore, whatever you do, if it is only good and the voice of Christ,
do not doubt it, will please and benefit, but only a few and very few,
because the sheep are very few in this land of wolves.

Above all, however, seek Christ\'s counsel and will through humble
prayer, to whom even the good that is done without his command and will
is not filled, as Isaiah says, Cap. 30, 1. \[Vulg.\]: \"Woe to you,
apostate children, because you have counseled without me, and not from
me, and have begun a plot, and not by my Spirit.\" Therefore, do not
follow your good and godly opinion (as the great multitude of monks and
priests err everywhere and in the worst way), but ask for your
permission, yes, for your command, especially in this and in all your
work, if you do not want your work to become stagnant. But I also add my
advice. If it pleases you to read pure, thorough theology, which is
quite similar to the old one, written in German, then you can obtain the
sermons of Johann Tauler, Order of Preachers, whose entire short epitome
I send you, lo and behold, here. For I have seen no theology, either in
Latin or in our language, that is more wholesome and more in harmony
with the Gospel. Taste it therefore, and see how friendly the Lord is,
after

you have tasted before and seen how bitter everything is that we are
only ever ourselves. Farewell and pray for me. From our monastery in
Wittenberg, on the following Sunday after St. Lucius \[Dec. 14\] 1516.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 28.**

(Wittenberg.) (Late 1516.?) 1)

**To the provost at Leitzkan, Georg Mascov.**

(Fragment.)

Luther exhorts patience in the face of the rampant corruption of morals
in the monastery.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 2; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 64 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 77. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 576.

JEsus.

Hail! I believe that your order will become lax, because all orders
become lax and \[the guardians\] act mischievously, while those who are
appointed guardians should act vigilantly. Therefore, if you cannot do
anything with peace and good, I do not advise you to quarrel with the
greater part of yours by force and obstinately, but give room to anger,
and let the tares grow with your wheat; it is better to keep a few in
peace, than to put everyone altogether in trouble because of many. And
it is better to tolerate many for the sake of many than to spoil many
for the sake of many. Brother Martin Luther. ^2)^

1\) We have left this letter and the following one in the same order as
it is found in Aurifaber. The Erlangen correspondence has reversed this
order, because in the following one there is a clue for the approximate
time determination, but not in this one. Namely, it is mentioned (in No.
20 towards the end) on September 25 that the plague is raging in
Magdeburg and its environs, and no other reason for the mortality can be
assumed than the plague, which is also mentioned in No. 23 and 25. That
we have now given this letter the same time as the following one, is
because we agree with Lücke\'s assumption in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 571,
that both are a letter from the middle of which something has fallen
out, although Aurifaber has given the second one this superscription:
*Fragmentum ex [alia]{.underline} epistola etc*. All editions except the
Erlangen Briefwechsel place both pieces in the year 1517. - In Leitzkau,
also called \"Kloster Liezke\", was the provost of the Premonstratensian
monastery Georg Mascov, for whom Luther already in 1512 composed the
magnificent synodal speech on I John 5, 4. f.. See St. Louis edition,
vol. IX, 1728.

2\) This signature seems to have been added unauthorizedly, because the
piece given here is obviously only the beginning of a letter.

**58**

Letters from 1516 and 1517. No. 29. 30.

**59**

**No. 29 .**

Wittenberg. (Late 1516.)

To the provost at Leitzkau, Georg Mascov. (Fragment.)

Comfort because of mortality. Ask for intercession.

The locations are given at the previous number.

But be strong in Christ, and be not moved, that the cattle and the
bodies die. For these are more signs of grace than of wrath. For he is
then most angry when he is not angry, as he says through Ezekiel \[Cap.
16, 42. Vulg.\], \"I will no more be angry with thee, and my zeal shall
be taken away from thee.\" This is something exceedingly frightening and
said only to the hardened. At the end of the letter I beg you very much
to pray to the Lord for me, for I confess to you that my life is getting
closer to hell day by day, because I am getting worse and worse every
day. Farewell. From Wittenberg.

The exiled son of Adam, Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 30 .**

Nuremberg. January 2, 1517.

Christoph Scheuch legal scholar in Nuremberg, to Luther.

Scheurl seeks Luther\'s friendship under the praise of Luther nud
Staupitzen, whose merits and successes are described.

Handwritten in the Scheurl family archive in Nuremberg, *Cod. G*, fol.
66 (104) ß. Printed in Burkhardt, Luthers Briefwechsel (1866), p. 3; in
\"Christoph Scheurl\'s Briefbuch,\" edited by Franz Freiherr von Soden
and J. K. F. Knaake, vol. II (1872), p. 1 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I,
p. 79.

To Martin Luder, theologian of the Augustinian school near Wittenberg
2c.

My services before. Your membership in the Augustinian Order, your
well-known virtue and your famous name, venerable father, bind me to you
in such a special way that I very much wish to become a friend of yours
and to be inscribed in the register of your intimate friends. With our
common father and vicar, as much as it concerned our mutual business, I
have sometimes conversed for whole days, and sometimes also for part of
the night; often

The talk was about your excellence, goodness and erudition; apart from
Martin, Otto 1) and Amsdorf, we missed very little. However, our very
good friend preached about the final consummation of the eternal
dispensation,^2)^ to such great applause of the people, to such a large
audience that I hardly dare to say; so large that your church 3) often
could not contain it. Those who excel in spiritual gifts among us praise
and admire this man\'s eloquence, mature mind and skill, and that I say
it in one word, they publicly claim that they have not heard this man\'s
like before. I say nothing of the fact that some call him a disciple,
nay, the tongue of Paul, others a herald of the Gospel. and true
theologian; his kindness and accessibility made this far more glorious.
Not only respectable citizens, but also the nobles and at least those
who have the highest leadership of the commonwealth in their hands,
considered it something nice to apply for his friendship, yes, they
considered it an honor to offer themselves as guests and to have lunch
with Doctor Staupitz uninvited. Those who did so gained favor, and rose
higher in the same. The council is only concerned that he may not gain
too little. In the last five years, during which I have served the
Fatherland, no one has been so kindly, so sincerely, so benevolently
honored; the whole city awaits his return: all to our Order\'s 4)
immense honor. As for me, though I have long been an Augustinian; now I
have certainly become one for the Augustinians; every least of your
association will always have me for his property and devoted servant.
But at the request of the friends, Staupitzen\'s sermons, for God\'s
glory and the salvation of the Augustinians, have been divided into
twenty-four chapters and faithfully translated,^5)^ whose publication in
both languages the people expect in the course of a few days, but with
great acclaim: all this, I hoped, will give you

1\) Otto Beckmann. On him, see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 567, note 4.

2\) Staupitz preached these sermons during Advent 1516, and Scheurl
published them in both Latin and German. The Latin copy has the date at
the end: Feb. 6, 1517; the German: Jan. 20, 1517.

3\) This is the church of the Augustinians in Nuremberg.

4\) The whole Scheurl family had been accepted by Staupitz into the
Augustinian brotherhood on October 6, 1511 by a brotherhood letter.

5\) Editor of the Latin *Libellus de Executione eterne predestinatiois.
Fratris Joanis de Staupitz etc.*, and also the German translation was
Christoph Scheurl.

**60** Letters from the year 1517. no. 30. 31. **61**

I thought I had to write it to you, and I ask you to interpret it for
the best, and to say mass for my mother Helena from time to time. But I
do not offer you my service, since I am entirely yours. Farewell, most
excellent father. At Nuremberg, January 2, 1517.

Christoph Scheurl, 1) Doctor of both rights.

**No. 31 .**

Wittenberg. January 27, 1517.

To Christoph Scheurl in Nuremberg.

Answer to the previous letter. Luther accepts the praise given to
Staupitz, he rejects the praise given to him in the feeling of his
unworthiness. He forbids all praise for the future, because GOtte alone
must be given all honor.

The original is in the Scheurl family archive in Nuremberg. Printed in
Prof. Christ. Gottl. Schwarz\' program, Altorf 1740, p. 3; in Gottfr.
Schütze, \"Luthers bisher ungedruckte Briefe\" 2c., vol. II (1781), p.
10; in *Strobel-Ranner*, *Luth. epistolas, Norimb*. 1814, p. 34; in De
Wette, vol. I, p. 49 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 82. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, p. 566.

To the respectable and highly learned Mr. Christoph Scheurl, Doctor of
both Laws, the famous Nuremberg Advocate, his special friend in the
Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I have received your letter, highly learned and kind Christoph,
which is indeed very pleasant to me, but also very distressing. Why are
you frowning? For what could you have written me more pleasantly than
that you have raised the venerable father, yes, Christ in his
instrument, our Vicarius, with such well-deserved praise? For nothing
can be more pleasing to me than that the word of Christ should be
preached, heard, and accepted, nay, what is more, even lived, em

1\) Christoph Scheurl (his father had the same name), born Nov. 11,
1481, at Nuremberg, died there June 14, 1542. He was never heartily
devoted to the Reformation; after some years he turned away from it
completely and entered into ever closer contact with its enemies. In
1528, he even offered to provide Duke George of Saxony with a copy of
Luther\'s letter to Wenceslaus Link of June 14, 1528, which gave rise to
\"Luther\'s Writing of Secret and Stolen Letters. See St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XIX, Einl., p. 20a f.

and understood. Again, what could you write more bitterly than that you
desired my friendship and honored me with so many quite trivial titles?
I do not want you to become my friend, because this friendship will not
be for your glory but for your danger, if the saying is true: Friends
have everything in common. If then through this friendship mine becomes
thine, thou shalt not be richer in any thing than in sins, and likewise
in iniquity and dishonor. For these are my things, which (as I have
said) thou hast adorned with the opposite titles. But I know that you
are Christian-minded, and will say: Not you, but Christ do I admire in
you. To this I say: How can Christ, the true righteousness, be in sins
and unrighteousness? Yes, this is the highest presumption, when someone
has the presumptuous opinion of himself that he is Christ\'s dwelling
place, and this glory cannot easily be granted to any other state than
the apostolic. Therefore, I wish you happiness in the desired
circumstance that you are connected with this man, our father, through
friendship and intimate contact: but take care of your honor, and, I beg
you, do not be out of sorts, and put yourself into my friendship,
although even this same venerable father, not without my fear and
danger, praises me everywhere and says: I praise Christ in you, and I am
forced to believe it. But this is a difficult faith. For this is a
misfortune of this exceedingly miserable life, that the more rulers and
friends there are, and the more closely they are associated with us, the
more harmful they are, as it is written \[Matt. 10:36.\], \"A man\'s
enemies shall be his own householders,\" and again \[Ps. 102:9. Vulg.\],
\"They that praised me sware against me,\" and \[Ps. 38:12. Vulg.\],
\"My friends and my neighbors stood afar off from me, and stood against
me.\" For God\'s favor recedes as much as man\'s favor is added. For God
wants either to be alone or not to be a friend. To make matters worse,
if you humble yourself and refuse praise and favor, the more praise and
favor you will receive.

**62** Letters from the year 1517. no. 31. 32. 33. 34. **63**

Favor (that is, danger and destruction) follows it. How much more
salutary is hatred and blame than all praise and love, since hatred is
only once a danger, but love is twofold danger. Nothing is more like a
loving, even a senseless woman, who, when she is rejected, desires all
the more furiously than this temporal praise and glory. See, therefore,
with how much effort Solomon, Proverbs 7 and elsewhere, dissuades me
from this adulterous and wicked woman, whom he describes as a stranger,
a foreigner and a seductress of the young.

I am not writing this, my dear Christoph, as if I wanted to despise your
sincere and benevolent mind, but because there is also something to fear
for my mind. You fulfill the task of a godly and Christian man who
should despise no one entirely but himself; but I, too, must strive to
be a Christian similar to you (if the friendship is to become a firm
one), that is, a despiser of myself. For not he is a Christian who
regards a man because of his learning, virtue, holiness, fame (for this
is also done by the pagans and paltry poets, as they also give their
names in our time), but he who loves the meager, the poor, the foolish,
the sinner and the wretched, as the Psalm says M. 41,2\]: \"Blessed is
he that taketh care - not of the learned, the highly educated, the holy,
the well-fortified, but - of the needy\" and of the poor and the like.
Yes, Christ confesses that what was done to His least was done to Him,
whereas He could have said: to the greatest and to His high ones; \"for
what is high among men is an abomination in the sight of God\" \[Luc.
16:15\]. To this abomination, I beg you for the sake of Christ our Lord,
do not drive me and force me, if you want to be a friend. But you can do
this very easily if you do not praise me to my face or before others in
any respect. If you really think that Christ must be praised in me, then
also mention his name and not mine. Why then should the cause of Christ
be defiled by my name, even deprived of his? If no one speaks of things
other than by their own names, then why should the cause of Christ be
stained?

men, why then do we praise the things of Christ without the name of
Christ? See how talkative your friend is, therefore be a patient
friendly reader. Fare well in Christ. From our hermitage at Wittenberg,
January 27, 1517.

Brother Martin Luder, a part of the Association of Hermits of St.
Augustine.

**No. 32 .**

Wittenberg. February 8, 1517.

**To Johann Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 16.

**No. 33 .**

Wittenberg. March 1, 1517,

**To Johann Lang.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 1974, Appendix, No. 4. - The
penultimate sentence of the first paragraph is to be changed thus: \"If
the Psalms, which I have translated and interpreted in German, would
please no one, they would please me best.\" These psalms are the seven
penitential psalms, St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 1654, where it is stated
in the note Col. 1656 f. how the words just mentioned are to be
understood.

**No. 34**

(Wittenberg.) Spring 1517.\')

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends him various writings and repeats his recommendation (No. 27
at the end) of Tauler\'s sermons.

The original is located in the Anhaltisches GesammtArchiv. Handwritten
in *Cod. Dessav*. V, No. 3 and in *Cod. Jen. A*, fol. 7. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 167; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 974; in De Wette,
vol. I, 258 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 90. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 629.

Semem Spalatin.

JEsus.

Hail! I send, as you wish, my dear Magister, the booklet of the
verse^2)^ in Latin; if you also send it in German

1\) All editions except the Erl. The Weimar edition, Vol. I, p.155:
\"Beginning of 1518\"; Köstlin, M.\' Luther (3.), Vol. I, p. 782 ad 118:
\"Spring 1517?\"; in the supplement to De Wette, Vol. Ill,
Veesenmeyer\'s assumption is reported that the letter belongs to the
year 1517. This is undoubtedly correct, as can be seen from the time of
the appearance of Staupitz\'s writings and the Penitential Psalms.

2\) Staupitzen\'s sermons. See No. 30 towards the end.

**64**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 34. 35.

**65**

I will send it, because through Scheurl\'s service, one can also have it
in German, much more ornate than the Latin is. Of the art of dying 1)
(as you call it) I have only this one for myself, all the others have
been distributed. Therefore, use this one, which is mine, for the time
being, I will see to it, if I can, to raise several. The third, namely
the \"Adam\", 2) which is quite short, but whose like (I am not lying)
has not come into my hands; this exceedingly theological book
(*theologicissimum),* behold, I send it to you; but it should make me
regret this mission if you read it industriously. Behold, Erasmus, the
highly learned man, together with his highly praised Jerome: I know
nothing whether they could write such a one; I am sure that they have
not written such a one.

I do not have the seven psalms, but the printer does. But I do not want
you to want them at all, because they are not published for refined
people, but for completely unlearned people, of whom I have many. For
that is why they are so unproven and without testimony of the
Scriptures, then they are very wordy, and (about which I myself am
surprised) not yet interpreted wordily enough. This thing is so unknown
to the people, or rather they are not able to grasp it. Therefore, it is
not for your soul to eat a food that has been chewed two or three times,
as this one is.

You have enough, if you want, of the books just mentioned. If these are
not enough, - I beg you, leave yourself to me only this once
faithfully, - then get also the book of the sermons of Tauler, about
which I have also spoken to you before, in whatever way you can. You
will easily obtain it through the help of Christian Goldsmith,^4)^ a
theologically very educated man. For this is the book from which you
will see.

1\) The book published by Staupitz in. 1515: \"Ein buchlin von der
nachfolgeüg des willige sterbes Christi\" 2c.

2\) Adamum == \"The booklet, what the old and new man is\", a fragment
of the \"German theology\". See St. Louis edition, Vol. XIV, 180.

3\) The Seven Penitential Psalms, St. Louis Edition, Vol. IV, 1654. -
The printer is Johannes Grünenberg.

4\) Christian Döring, a goldsmith, at the same time also a printer and
bookseller, therefore here called *Aurifex,* otherwise also *Aurifaber.*

how the learning of our time is iron, even earthen, whether it be Greek
or Latin or Hebrew, compared to this learning of true godliness. Fare
well.

About Wimpina\'s booklet on predestination, I have the same opinion as
D. Carlstadt, that is, that he has worked in vain, as far as the matter
itself is concerned. For you will be able to judge sufficiently for
yourself about his sought-after daintiness, which he has artificed in
it. For even if his opinion were true, which he endeavors to assert, he
would still not achieve what he has sought through it.

**No. 3 5.**

Nuremberg. April 1, 1517.

Scheurl to Luther.

Scheürl recommends the D. Johann Eck to Luther\'s friendship.

Handwritten in *Cod. ScheurI*. G, fol. 102 (163), Printed by Burkhardt,
p. 5; in Scheurls Briefbuch, vol. II. p. 12 and in Erl. Briefw. Vol. I,
p. 92.

To the Doctor Martin Luder.

My services before. I have informed my friend Johann Eck 6) of your
virtue, therefore he, very eager for your friendship, has not only
addressed a letter to you, but he also sends a booklet with his
disputations. 7) I have no doubt that you will answer him and release me
from my promise, since you would consider it shameful to be defeated in
love and surpassed in kindness. But I ask you to write to him again in
friendship, since I consider him worthy of your friendship. The
venerable father often speaks of you and wishes you the best of health.
I wish that you would put me at the command of your prayers.

5\) *De divina providentia: contra mundi sapientum circa hanc varia et
rnirabilia erramenta, libri tres*. Printed in Frankfurt a. O., March 1,
1516.

6\) Eck was a guest of Scheurl at that time. For Eck\'s personal
details, see the St. Louis edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 23.

7\) namely the one in Bologna (1515) and the one in Vienna (1516). The
theses of both disputations are contained in the *Disputatio Joan. Eckii
Theologi Viennae Pannoniae habita etc.*, printed by Miller in Augsburg,
January 27, 1517.

8\) Staupitz was in Nuremberg at the time and preached there.

**66**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 35. 36. 37. 38.

**67**

The Emperor\'s cause will be explained to you by Otto 1). Farewell,
venerable father. At Nuremberg, April 1, in the year of the virgin birth
1517. C\[hristoph\] S\[cheurl\] D.

**No. 36.**

Wittenberg. April 3, 1517.

To Spalatin.

Intercession for a poor youth for a bequest to clothing.

The original is located in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Printed by
*Buddeus*, suppl. epist. Luth., p. 1; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 833; in De
Wette, vol. I, p. 53 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 94. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 571.

His Georg Spalatin, his special friend in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I understood from Ali\'s statement of good people, dear Magister,
that it had been handed over to you that you distribute clothing or
cloth for the poor in the name of the godly deceased Doctor Reuters.
Therefore, I have been asked to ask you for a young person,
Wolfgang,^3)^ , whom we also feed for God\'s sake; he is an honorable
child, very reliable and gives good hope. Therefore, if you have not
been called upon before, you will assist his poverty, rather our
poverty; you see that vain beautiful opportunity is presented to you.
Therefore I do not insist on it, since I am sure that you will do what
is right according to your judgment. Farewell. In haste, from our
monastery, 1517, on Friday after Judica \[April 3\].

Brother Martin Luder, Augustinian.

**No. 37.**

(Wittenberg.) (April 9, 1517.)

To Spalatin.

Luther gives several books that deserve to be read during Easter week.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 346; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 833; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 53
f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 95. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 572.

1\) Otto Beckmann.

2\) Kilian Reuter, Doctor of both laws, from Mellerstadt, inscribed in
the winter semester 1505 (\^16. p. 18). He died in the winter of 1516.

3\) Wolfgang Sieberger from Munich, inscribed in the winter semester
1515 (Alb. p. 59), later Luther\'s famulus.

To his Georg Spalatin, the exceedingly righteous servant of Christ and
friend.

JEsus.

Hail! I thank your very good heart, my dear Spalatin. For this alone I
regard, which is rightly preferred to all gifts. Incidentally, that you
wish me to indicate to you what you should primarily read in these days:
according to my judgment, either Augustine on the grace of the New
Testament to Honoratus, in which he at the same time acts the 22nd
Psalm, \[Vulg.\] \"My God, my God, look at me\" 2c., which is
appropriate for this time, or Hilarius on Octonarius, 4) and Cyprianus
in his Homilies is not inappropriate either, or Augustine on John from
the 13th chapter where the incidents of these days begin. I will take
pains, if I can, that tomorrow I teach that Christ is seen as \[the
representative\] of men in any piece. 5) Be well. \[On the day before
Char Friday (April 9, 1517). 6)

Martin Luther.

**No. 38.**

Wittenberg. May 6, 1517.

To Christoph Scheurl.

This letter is the answer to No. 35. Luther thanks Staupitzen for the
writing sent to him, considers his own work on the Penitential Psalms
not worthy of dissemination, and sends Carlstadt\'s theses.

The original is in the Scbeurl family archive in Nuremberg. Printed by
Schwarz, in his program (see No. 31), p. 6; by Schütze, Vol. II, p. 13;
by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 36 ; by De Wette, Vol. I, p. 54 and in Erlanger
Briefw., Vol. I, p. 96. Teutsch by Walch, Vol. XX1, 572.

4\) The 119th Psalm is meant, which consists of octonaries, that is,
divisions of eight verses each. Luther himself calls it *Octonarius*.
See St. Louis edition,

Vol. V, 1252, note.

5\) In the original, the reading here is: *Christum in quoquo hominum
videri,* whereas in the editions (except the Erl. Briefw., which
reproduces the original): *Christum in cruce quoque hominem videri.* -
The assumption of the Erl. Briefw., that \"die Predigt vom Leiden
Christi\", St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1176, does not belong to the year
1518, but to the year 1517, seems to be correct. Accordingly, we have
accepted the time determination of this letter given in all editions.

6\) This time designation is missing in the original, but is included in
all editions except the Erl. Briefw.

**68**

Letters from the year 1317. No. 38. 39.

**69**

Your esteemed Mr. Christoph Scheurl, doctor of both rights, defender
(*patrono* == advocate) of the citizens of Nuremberg, his! true friend
in Christo.

JEsus.

Hail! First of all I thank you, dear man, for your gifts, namely the
writings of Staupitz, 1) but I am sorry that my little works are spread
among you by the venerable father \[Staupitz\]. For they were not
published for Nurembergers, that is, for finely educated and exceedingly
clever people, but for the coarse (as you know) Saxons, to whom the
Christian doctrine cannot be presented and chewed over with however many
words. But, even if I wanted to, I could not manage anything that would
be bearable to Latin ears: how much less now, since I have deliberately
wanted to serve the slow understanding of the common people. Therefore,
I ask you to remove them from the eyes of learned men as much as you
can. By the way, as far as your reminding me that I should write to our
corner in a friendly manner is concerned, I have done so with the
greatest possible care; whether the letter has reached it, I do not
know.

These sentences, which are called theses, I send to you, and through you
to the father Magister Wenceslaus (link), and if there are others who
delight in this kind of delicacies. It is these (if I am not mistaken)
not exactly Cicero\'s 3) paradoxes, but of our Carlstadt, rather of St.
Augustine, which are so much more admirable and worthy than Cicero\'s,
than Augustine, rather Christ, is worthier than Cicero. But these
paradoxes punish all their carelessness.

1\) The booklet mentioned in No. 30, von der Versehung, both in Latin
and in German, which has meanwhile been completed in print and, as only
we learn here, was sent to Luther as a gift from Scheurl, your editor.
That this writing was already in Luther\'s hands before, we see from No.
34.

2\) The Seven Penitential Psalms, St. Louis Edition, Vol. IV, 1654.

3\) Cicero wrote *Paradoxa ad M. Brutum*. - On the Sunday of
Misericordias Domini (April 26), when the solemn display of the relics
took place in the collegiate church at Wittenberg, Carlstadt proposed
152 theses for a disputation, which was held to glorify this day.
(Jäger, \"Carlstadt,\" p. 7.)

or ignorance, to whom they may have seemed more paradoxical (whimsical)
than orthodox (orthodox), to say nothing of those whom they will rather
condemn with insolent sacrilege as bad propositions (*cacodoxa),* who
read neither Augustine nor Paul, or read in such a way that they do not
understand him, and neglect themselves and others with them. They are
therefore strange propositions (*paradoxa*) for the limited and those
who do not know them, but good propositions (*eudoxa)* and beautiful
propositions (*calodoxa)* for those who know them, but for me the very
best propositions (*aristodoxa*). Praise be to God, who again commands
the light to shine out of the darkness.

I assume that the venerable Father Vicarius is not with you, but we are
expecting his arrival. The Doctor Kilian Reuters has departed from
mortal life; God grant that he may be in eternity. 5) Amen.

Greetings from Amsdorf and all the friendly cooperative. We greet again
through you all who deserve to be greeted. Farewell. From Wittenberg,
May 6, 1517.

Brother Martin Luder, Augustinian.

**No. 39.**

Wittenberg. May 17, 1517.

**Au the provost in Leitzkau, Georg Mascov.**

How the provost should act against a fallen monk.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. I; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 835; in De
Wette, vol. I, p. 56 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 99. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 574.

JEsus.

Hail! I also regret, venerable father, the miserable fall of your, yes,
our brother; but that yesterday, we today, yes, that yesterday, we
yesterday and healed, and always we are Adam\'s children, therefore we
do the works of Adam. But one must not despair of the mighty hand of
God. Therefore, it is difficult for me to judge and advise you what to
do with him, because I do not know the content of your statutes. ^6)^ If
they are the

4\) See No. 36.

5\) Here Walch has, by wrong readings, senseless translation.

6\) The monastery at Leitzkau was not an Augustinian, but a
Premonstratensian monastery.

**70**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43.

**71**

If you are so kind that you do not punish such a transgression with
eternal imprisonment or with immediate death penalty, it seems to me
that you should impose all your severity on him. For it is not you, but
justice and the law, over which you are not a judge, but its servant,
who punish in this way. Therefore you need not be moved by the fact that
you are either an equally great or a greater sinner; it is enough that
this should be known to God. But here, for the sake of building, we must
almost always punish people who are better than we are, teach more
learned ones, preside over more worthy ones, so that the saying of the
Lord may stand \[Luc. 22, 25. f.\], that the rulers of the Gentiles rule
over their own as over their inferiors, but the rulers of the faithful
serve them as their superiors. He who is greatest among you, he says, be
your servant 2c. Therefore keep hearty humility and kindness toward him,
but show severity of hand and violence, for your violence is not yours,
but God\'s; but the humility must not be with God, but with you. Who
knows whether he was not allowed to make the stink of his sin public for
the sake of it, because the hidden thing could not be healed, which can
very well be healed by public shame. God is wonderful in His counsels
over the children of men. He heals many from sins by sins, as one poison
is cast out by another. Therefore, do not be frightened; it is the Lord
who works all this; praise and love him, and pray for that poor man and
for me all the more devoutly. Fare thee well. From Wittenberg, given on
Sunday Vocem Jucunditatis \[May 17\] 1517.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 40.**

(Wittenberg.) May 18, 1517.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1968, annex, no. 1.

**No. 41.**

Wittenberg. July 16, 1517.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1970. annex, no. 2.

**No. 42.**

Gates of Heaven. August 6, 1517.

**To Joh. Lang.**

At Staupitzen\'s command, Luther recommends several studying brothers to
him and challenges him to obtain the dignity of licentiate.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. V 399, fol. 130. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 36; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 816; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 59 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. I, p. 103. -German in Walch, vol. XXI, 546. In
Löscher and Walch erroneously placed in the year 1516.

To his brother Johann Lang, Prior of the Hermits of St. Augustine in
Erfurt, Baccalaureus of Theology, his beloved in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! These studying brothers, venerable father, are recommended to you
by the venerable father Vicarius, yes, by the Lord Jesus in him. Receive
them, therefore, and see to it that they increase on both sides, as the
Lord Jesus sees fit to do for you. It is also the express and firm will
of the venerable father Vicarius that you, as soon as it can happen and
time permits, receive the dignity of a licentiate of theology, which the
same has also ordered you orally in Eisleben, and now announces in
writing from the gates of heaven, 1) so that you know that the venerable
father desires not words, but action. Fare well and pray for me. From
Heaven\'s Gate, Aug. 6.

Brother Martin Luder, Augustinian.

These brothers have five gold florins; see that they show them to you
and that an account is kept for the vestments to be purchased. And if
they need anything more, spend it for them, on account of the venerable
father Vicarius, who has ordered that this be inserted in this letter.
For it will be faithfully returned to you. Farewell.

**No. 43.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of August 1517.)

**To Spalatin.**

Invitation to dinner.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. A, fol. 233. Printed in Löscher, vol. I, p.
843; in *Buddeus, p.* 2; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 63 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. I, p. 105. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 585.

1\) Himmelspforte near Wernigerode, three and a half German miles from
Halberstadt.

1517\. no. 43. 44. 45. **73**

**72** Letters from the year

Au his Spalatin in the castle. 1) JEsus.

Hail! You and that confessor 2) with his companion come after nine
o\'clock. If the envoy, Mr. Christoph, 3) is with you, he can come with
you, otherwise the order to invite him has been given to our Otto^2)^ .
Farewell. But see to it that you also get us wine, for you know that you
will come from the court to the monastery, not from the monastery to the
court.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 44.**

Wittenberg. September 4, 1517.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther offers to discuss the theses sent by Otto Beckmann in Erfurt. At
the same time, he sends his sermons on the Ten Commandments for use in
the pulpit and reports the death of the Antonite preceptor Johannes.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 26. The beginning of the last
paragraph should be improved: \"I believe that you know that Magister
John, the Antonite preceptor, died at Brieg\" 2c.

**No. 45.**

Wittenberg. September 11, 1517.

**To Christoph Scheurl.**

Luther reported that he had given away some of Staupitzen\'s writings
and sold some of them, and that he wanted to use the proceeds, which
were intended for the poor, for himself and his brothers. He orders more
copies, which he wants to pay for, and sends his theses against
scholastic theology.

The original is in the Scheurl family archive. Printed by Schwarz in his
program, Altorf, p. 7; by Schütze, vol. II, p. 15; by *Strobel-Ranner,
p.* 39; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 61 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 108.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 577.

1\) Spalatin was in the entourage of the Elector in Wittenberg.

2\) Jakob Vogt. See No. 27.

3\) Scheurl. His legation must have fallen between August 18 and
September 27, because on these two days he writes again from Nuremberg
(Scheurls Briefb., Vol. II, No. 135 and 136). Since Luther writes again
to Scheurl on September 11, as to a friend he \"recently met\" (No. 45),
and Otto Beckmann had traveled to Erfurt before September 4 (No. 44),
the date we have set according to Erl. Briefw.

4\) Otto Beckmann. See No. 30 and St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 567, Note
4.

To his special friend, the highly learned and finely educated man
Christoph Schenrl, Doctor of Both Laws, the respected Nuremberg
advocate, his sincerely esteemed \[friend\].

**JEsus.**

Hail! Although, dearest Christoph, I had no occasion to write to you
that seemed worthy that I should write to you, such an important man,
this has nevertheless been a sufficiently great motive for me that,
putting aside the titles of your high dignities with which you are
adorned, I wrote to a friend, and indeed to such a friend who is pure
and completely sincere and exceedingly friendly, and, what is most to
the point, only recently got to know and found. Therefore, if silence is
to be counted as a fault anywhere, the silence of one friend against
another is to be respected as such, since dallying and joking do not
warm up friendship any less, not to say complete it, than doing serious
things. Yes, this is precisely what St. Jerome urges on his friend,
namely, that he write that he has nothing to write. Therefore, it has
also been my intention now that I would rather say unrhymed things to a
friend than remain silent. But, dear God, when does this brother Martin,
who is falsely called a theologian, ever write anything in which he does
not speak unrhymed, since he has not at all increased in the things that
belong to an educated language under the din and confusion of reasoning,
so that even if he has ever tasted something of erudition or eloquence,
the very long and constant use in writing has brought this completely
back to childhood and slurring. But this is already enough and over
enough of prefaces, so that I do not rather seem to write a whole book
than a letter, that is, to be nonsensical even in unrhymed speeches and
twofold, since it is already too much for a theologian to be nonsensical
once. The purpose of this letter is that you may realize how high an
opinion I have formed of you and your faithfulness, not that I demand
the same for myself from you, since I certainly believe that I already
possess this,

**74**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 45. 46.

**75**

but only that you keep yourself convinced that you cannot promise
yourself wavier from me than you could from yourself.

But meanwhile it occurs to me that you have sent me the writings of the
venerable father Vicarius through this Ulrich Pinder 1) almost to the
value of two gold florins, which I have admittedly partly sold, partly
given to good friends of the venerable father for free; but the money
which I have redeemed from the sold ones I have (as you have ordered)
given to the poor, that is, to myself and to the brothers, because I
have not yet got to know a poorer person than myself. By the way, I ask
that, if it can be done, I be sent some of the same books, through your
good will, for one guilder, which I will faithfully repay you when they
are sold. For there are people who desire and expect these books. I also
send our theses,^2)^ which are quite strange (*paradoxas*), and as it
seems to many, very bad sentences (xxxxxxdocus), which you can present
to our corner, the very learned and perceptive man, so that I may hear
and see what name he gives them. Many greet you and remember you best,
especially the licentiate Amsdorf, Doctor Hieronymus (Schurs, and a
certain part of your friendship, the well-known Peter Barbierer. 3) Fare
well and pray for me. From Wittenberg, 1517, on the eleventh of
September.

Brother Martin Luder, Augustinian at Wittenberg.

**No. 46.**

Nuremberg. September 30, 1517.

Scheurl to Luther.

Reply from the previous letter. About the traffic on the left with the
Patricians of Nuremberg. Praise of Hieronymus Ebner. Scheurl sends his
own writing and promises to send Staupitzen\'s writings.

Handwritten in *Cod. Scheurl.* G, fol. 115 (176). Printed by Burkhardt,
p. 6 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 111.

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1970, note.

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 18.

3\) About \"Peter Balbirer\" see St. Louis Edition, Vol. IX, 1821 ff.

To Martin Luder, Augustinian (Aurelianum 4) theologian.

Hail in Jesus Christ! That you write to me in friendship and excuse your
silence, venerable father, highly learned man, you certainly do well,
because I am, as many know, an Augustinian who considers it very
shameful to be defeated in love. This is also testified by Wenceslaus
\[Link\], our special friend, the good and learned man. He has not only
as listeners, but also as guests at the table, the Losunger 5)
Hieronymus Ebner and the Septemvir Hieronymus Holtzschuher, since the
venerable father Vicarius, through his famous virtue, has an
extraordinary reputation among our nobles, whom he has brought to the
point that they are certainly very devoted and favorable to the
Augustinians (Aurelianis); this is not only to our honor, but also to
our benefit. Among the rest, the Losunger, of whom I have spoken,
Hieronymus Ebner, distinguished by his erudition and holiness, stands
out, if I am not mistaken, the honey and the delight of the Nuremberg
people, a man who is above all exceedingly affable and irreproachable.
He also takes pleasure in your excellence; at table he often hears and
talks about dix; he has the Decalogue,^6)^ the disputations and the
other results of Luther\'s untiring activity (*vigilias*) in his hands,
reads and admires them. Like you, he has nothing in mind but Christ and
the commonwealth. Not only to this superior of the community, but also
to me, you would do the most pleasant service, which would certainly not
be unworthy of you at all, if you would attribute something Christian to
him, 7) as you tend to do either publicly or privately. The other
circumstances concerning this man you have learned from the biography of
Anton Kreß 8).

4\) Aurelius is the first name of Augustine.

5\) *duumvirum* == Losunger. The two Losunger stood at the head of the
community and were elected from the *septemviri*, the seven older lords
s \"Elteren Herr\"). (Erl. Briefw.)

6\) In the Codex: *catalogum* See St. Louiser Ausg., Bd. Ill, 1132, note
Köstlin, M. Luther (3.), Bd. I, p. 123. According to this passage
together with the words in the letter to Lang, from Sept. 4, 1517 (St.
Louiser Ausg., Vol. XVIII, 28): \"I have sent you the interpretation of
the Ten Commandments in both languages,\" one would like to assume that
this writing did not appear in print only in 1518, but already in 1517,
but that this edition did not come down to us.

7\) Luther complied with this request by the interpretation of the 110th
Psalm, which he dedicated to Ebner. St. Louis edition, Vol. V, 888.

8\) This book of Scheurl\'s, which he dedicated to Hieronymus Ebner, has
the title: *Vita Reverendi patris.*

**76**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 46. 47. 48. 49. 50.

**77**

which was sent to our Otto. I will again send you fifteen of the
Vicarius\' books as a gift, as soon as I can do so by messenger. I will
send the Eck the disputation, 1) which we received a long time ago; I
wish I could also send it to the Cologne and Heidelberg theologians; I
am known to many learned people. But you are well. September 30, 1517.

**No. 47.**

Wittenberg. October 31, 1517.

To Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz.

Luther asks the archbishop to control the lack of indulgences and sends
him the 95 theses he posted that day.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 390, no. 114.

**No . 48.**

Nuremberg. November 3, 1517.

Scheurl to Luther.

Similar\" contents to No. 46.

Handwritten in *Cod. Scheurl*. O, fol. 133 (194b). Printed by Burkhardt,
p. 7; in Scheurl\'s Briefbuch, vol. II, p. 35 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
I, p. 119.

To Martin Luder.

Restore Christ\'s theology and walk in his law! Since I am completely
devoted to the Augustinian community, I have not been able nor allowed
to be guilty of the fact that my housemate brings letters to most
friends, but you, who hold the castle of scholarship and are counted
among my dearest friends because of your excellent kindness, do not
receive any letters from us. Our common father, the Vicarius, has won
the hearts of my fellow citizens in an extraordinary way by his zealous
efforts, and has left a great desire for him. Daily I am asked if he
will return in a short time. It follows his footsteps and presents him
quite beautifully, in his whole being, our good and trusted friend
Wenceslaus. Hieronymus Ebner, the joy of the Nuremberg people, Caspar
Nützel 2) (*Nutzel*), Hieronymus Holtzschuher, the Septemvirn, three

Dn*. Anthonii Kressen, J. V. D. et, praepositi Sancti Laurentii
Nurenbergn. per Christophorum Scheurl Juris utriusque Doctorem condita*.
Printed at Nuremberg by Friedrich Peypus in 1515. Kreß died on Sept. 8,
1513.

1\) See the previous number.

2\) later a zealous promoter of the Reformation in Nuremberg; he died in
1529.

Legal scholars, and other very many followers of Staupitzen. A more
distinguished (digniorem) company has no one with us. These also often
dine with him and invite themselves, while we are the dining masters,
since I have never been an unfaithful mediator of the Augustinian
friendships. In this way, the reputation, the love, the favor of your
brothers with us has increased not a little; but I am pleased, because I
respect this for something common, and will write to you once in more
detail. Your theses are approved by the Dean of Eichstädt, 3) a learned
man, and many others. Hieronymus Ebner, as he is a learned and
God-fearing man, so he also loves and praises you, whom he knows by
reputation, whose writings he has in his hands, reads and admires, he,
the second ruler of our community. You will do something worthy of your
reputation, and very pleasant for us, if you write to him, his wife
Helena,^4)^ my *consobrinam,* or also to both of their sons and namesake
\[his father\] Jerome 5) something from your religious, Catholic,
Christian workshop, which serves the salvation of souls, for which they
thirst exceedingly much. Farewell, venerable father, and if I can serve
you or yours in any matter, you have me entirely as yours. Given as
above. ^6)^

**No. 49.**

Wittenberg. In the first days of November 1517, to Spalatin.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2402, annex, no. 11.

**No. 50 .**

(Wittenberg.) (Before November 11, 1517.) 7)

To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.

Luther reminds the Elector of the promised new dress, seeks to
invalidate an unfavorable prejudice of the Elector against Staupitz, and
advises against an intended new tax.

3\) Erhard Truchsess. Scheurls Briefbuch, p. 15.

4\) a native of Fürer; her mother Anna, a native of Tucher, was the
sister of Scheurl\'s mother.

5\) A strange request, Luther should dedicate a writing to a
ten-year-old boy! Hieronymus Ebner, the younger, born in 1507, died in
Paris in 1532.

6\) This version of the time determination comes from the copyist who
made the copy for Scheurls archive. It refers to the previous letter,
which has the date set by us and repeated by Luther in his reply (No.
53).

7\) The justification of the time determination is to be looked up at
the previous number, St. L. Ausg., Vol. XV, 2402, Note.

**78**

Letters from the year 1517. no. 50. 51. 52. 53. 79

The original can be found in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv. Printed in
the supplement to the Leipzig edition, p. 27; in Walch, vol. XXI, 2; in
De Wette, vol. I, p. 77 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 1.

To My Most Gracious and Dear Lord, Duke Frederick, Elector of Saxony, at
Your Grace\'s Hand.

Most gracious Lord and Prince! When E. F. G. promised me before this
year through the Hirsfelder to give a new dress, so I come now and ask
F. G. to be mindful of the same.

But ask, my lord, as before, if Pfeffinger is to deliver this, that he
deliver it by deed and not by friendly promise; he can almost spin good
words, but will not make good cloth out of them.

It has also been revealed to me, my lord, namely through the prior 1) at
Erfurt, who understood it from E. F. G.\'s confessor, how E. F. G.
should have received disgrace about D. Staupitz, our worthy dear father,
because of some letters; when he was here and sought E. F. G. at Torgau,
I spoke to his dignity and reproached me that I would not like it if E.
F. G. received disgrace about his \"dignities. F. G. at Torgau, talked
with his dignity, and reproached that I would not like it, E. F. G.
Unglimpf about his \"dignities, I have found in truth in many words not
different, which we had the evening full E. F. G., because that E. F. G.
is a dear prince to him, and is indeed especially favorable to E. F. G.,
so that he finally said: \"I do not think that I have ever angered my
most gracious lord, I would have done so because I loved S. G. too much.
Therefore, I ask, my lord, for his sake, as he also recommended it to me
several times, that E. F. G. provide himself with all favor and loyalty
to him, as E. F. G. has undoubtedly often found the same in him.

Also, most gracious lord, that I also show my loyalty to E. F. G. and
earn my court dress: I have heard that E. F. G. wanted to write another
and perhaps more difficult one after the end of this essay. If E. F. G.
does not want to despise a poor beggar\'s prayer, I beg you, for God\'s
sake, do not let it come to that, for I am full of heart.

1\) Johann Lang. - The confessor is Jakob Vogt.

2\) According to Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth. lib*. I, p. 67a, this tax was
the tithe on beverages proposed by Pfeffinger, which seemed so heavy to
the people.

and many of those who favor E. F. G. are sorry that this estimation has
robbed E. F. G. of so much good gossip, name and favor in recent days.
God has indeed gifted E. F. G. with great reason, so that she sees
further in these matters than I or perhaps all of E. F. G.\'s subjects
do; but it may well be, indeed God wills it so, that great reason may at
times be guided by lesser reason, so that no one may rely on himself,
but only on God our Lord, who will save E. F. G.\'s health for our good,
and then E. F. G.\'s souls for salvation. Amen.

E. F. G. submissive Capellan, D. Martinus Luther, at Wittenberg.

**No. 51.**

Wittenberg. November 11, 1517.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther sends him his 95 theses against indulgences and defends the
earlier ones against scholastic theology against the Erfurt.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 394, no. 115.

**No. 52.**

Wittenberg. November 11, 1517.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 28.

**No. 53.**

Wittenberg. December 11, 1517.

**To Christoph Scheurl.**

This letter is the answer to No. 48. Luther indicates to him that he has
no writing in stock that is worthy of being dedicated to a man like
Ebner. The expected copies of Staupitzen\'s writing had not yet arrived.

The original is in the Scheurl family archive at Nuremberg. Printed by
Schwarz in his program, Altorf 1740, p. 9; by Schütze, vol. II, p. 17;
by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 41 by De Wette, vol. I, p. 78 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 129. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 580.

To the worthy and sincere man, the highly learned Doctor of Law
Christoph Scheurl, Advocate of the City of Nuremberg, his special
friend.

JEsus.

Hail! Your letter, which you addressed to me on November 3rd, highly
learned and highly

**80**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 53. 54.

**81**

The letter from you, my dear man, has shown your sincere heart, which is
far more benevolent than our merits, towards ours and my humble self.
But also the letter itself, a true reflection of your heart, was nothing
else than sincerity and indicated nothing else than a sincere man. I
rejoice and give thanks to the Lord Jesus that your Nurembergers,
especially the nobles, so venerate and honor the venerable Vicarius and
his (as you write) happy emulator, our Wenceslaus, and do this not out
of any carnal intention or respect for persons, as the common people are
wont to do, but out of a right love of salutary knowledge and out of
zeal for the word of grace. I pray that the Lord will strengthen the
work he has begun and also accomplish it, amen.

By the way, that you admonish me for the second time that I should honor
my studies and produce something from my workshop for Hieronymus Ebner,
the regent (*moderatorem) of* your famous city (since I cannot honor his
name through my studies, but rather his name through my studies), you
give me too much credit and assume too much of me. For I do not lack the
desire and the effort to serve him to the highest degree and to be at
your will, but it is not within our capabilities, nor do I consider
myself worthy of such an honor. You have a high opinion of my studies,
but I have a very low one. And although I must believe that you mean it
quite faithfully from your heart, I am much more obliged to estimate my
powers correctly myself. Yes, that I confess it to you straight out, I
have begun to want to follow your memories, and already searched around
everywhere, what I could probably take in front of my hand first. And
behold, everything that met me in my entire stock (of which I never
realized that it was so poor) was bad and seemed to me quite unworthy
that it should be dedicated to such a great man of mine, such a small
person. For it was not only my great ignorance, in which I seemed to
know nothing, that prevented me from doing so, but also another thing,
namely my impiety, in which

I would not be able to properly present what I would like to know, even
if it is quite valuable. But I consider it a lesser harm if someone
serves good wine in a small vessel than if someone serves cloudy water
in an extremely precious vessel. Therefore, I ask you to excuse me,
since I deserve it very well, and henceforth refrain from praising me.

Your housemate, the bearer of the letter, has told me that you have
again had the kindness to send the books of the Verse to me via Erfurts;
I have not received them yet, but will receive them without doubt.
Therefore, I thank you, and if I can, I will be your representative
(*vicarius*) to God. Fare well in the Lord, my dear Christoph. From
Wittenberg on the eleventh of December 1517.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 54.**

Wittenberg. December 20, 1517.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther answers the question whether other women than the Marys came to
the tomb of Christ, and how the Marys were, and touches on a controversy
(of Wimpina against Egranus) about the legend of St. Anne.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 283. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
43; in Löscher, vol. I, p. 841; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 80 and ini Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 132. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 582.

To his Georg Spalatin, the priest of Christ, his exceedingly honest
\[friend\].

JEsus.

Hail! To your letter, which you wrote to me from the castle at Lochau, I
certainly answered,^2)^ my dear Spalatin, and believed that it had
reached you through the service of the escort or the servant of public
safety. In it, I asked you to thank your most noble prince for me for
the cloth, then I explained to you, as best I could, my strange speech
(*paradoxum*) about the insurmountable ignorance.

1\) Scheurl had commissioned Jodocus Trutfetter in Erfurt to write a
letter on Oct. 23 (Scheurl\'s Briefb., vol. II, p. 29.).

2\) Namely by letter No. 52.

82Letters from the year 1517. No. 54. 83

Now, with regard to what you ask, first of all: whether there were other
women at the tomb of the Lord besides those Marys? you have a clear text
Lucä at the last, not far from the beginning \[Cap. 24,10.\], where it
says: \"Now there was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary Jacobi, and
others with them, who told these things to the apostles\" 2c. Yes, there
seem to have been many, especially those whom he lists in the eighth
chapter \[v. 2.f.\] as those who followed the Lord, of whom he again
said at the end of the 23rd chapter \[v. 55.), \"But the women followed,
which came with him out of Galilee,\" and in the beginning of the last
chapter \[v. 1\]: \"But on the Sabbath very early they came to the
sepulchre, bearing the specimens which they had prepared\" (at any rate
the very same ones of whom he had just before said that they followed
him), and in the Greek it is added here: \"and some with them\", 1) as
Laurentius Valla and Erasmus testify, and these \"some\" seem to me to
be others than those mentioned before.

The other: how many Marys were there? It is certain that it can be
clearly proven from the Gospel that there were only two Marys besides
the mother of the Lord, namely Magdalene and Mary Jacobi. For it is an
obvious error that Mary Salome is any other^2)^ than Salome herself. For
Salome is the name of a woman, not of a man, the feminine of the
masculine, which is called Solomon. Therefore also from Josephus that
Salome is known, the sister of Herod the Great. Read Matthäi Cap. 20,
20. where the mother of the children of Zebedee comes to Christ, where
Chrysostom says: This is Salome. And Marci 10,35. calls the sons of
Zebedäi by name: John and Jacobus. But John Cap. 19, 25. calls the Mary
of Cleophas \[wife\] the sister of the mother of the Lord.

But the same \[namely as Maria Cleophä\] is Maria Jacobi. Because Matth.
13, 55. and Marci 6,3. are called Jacobus, Joses, Juda

1\) These words are missing in the Vulgate.

2\) Instead of *nullam* in [all]{.underline} editions, ullam is to be
read. See Luther\'s shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians, St. Louis edition, vol. VIII. 1404: \"Therefore the error of
those is quite evident who have invented a third Mary, whom they call
Mary Salome.\"

and Simon are enumerated as brothers of Christ, that is, as
mother-sister children of Christ, because they are sons of the sister of
His mother. Therefore John Cap. 19, 25. calls this Mary the \"Mary of
Cleophas\", Marcus Cap. 16,^3)^ 1. \"Mary Jacobi\"; the latter names her
after her son, the latter after her husband\" And see also that John
alone names Mary Magdalene at the tomb, Matthew two, namely Mary
Magdalene and the other, Mary Cleophä or Jacobi; Marcus three: Mary
Magdalene, Mary Jacobi, and Salome; finally Lucas very many. For also
Matthew \[Cap. 28,1.\] said: \"the other Mary\", without name, to
indicate that there was one and another; only two.

I hear that D. Conrad Wimpina 5) I do not know what he is planning
against the preacher in Zwickau§) because of this very thing, namely
because he refutes the history of St. Anne, and especially proves
against those three Marys. It seems difficult to me, however, that the
latter \[Egranus\] can be refuted, although I do not want this history
to be dispelled by argument, but rather, for the sake of the people,
that it gradually grow cold in itself and cease, especially since this
error, which comes from a godly mind (*pietate*), is not so much to be
condemned as that according to which the saints are venerated for the
sake of money. Farewell in Christ, my dear Spalatin. From our monastery,
on the day before St. Thomas \[20 Dec.\] 7) 1517.

Brother Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian. .

3\) Incorrect in the editions: \"*cap. VI*.\"

4\) Instead of *Mary* in *all* editions, *marito* is to be read. See the
genealogical register of Christ, St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 2084, §
136. Likewise the passage of the interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians cited above. - Subsequently, the Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 336
in the misprint index: \"it is probably to be read *a marito*\".

5\) Wimpina, actually Koch, professor of theology at Frankfurt a. O.,
born 1460 at Buchheim near Wimpfen (hence *Wimpina*), died 1531. About
him see St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, introduction, p. 12 b. - About
Egranus ibid. p. 216, and vol. XV, appendix, no. 42, Col. 2465.

6\) In 1518 appeared Wimpina\'s writing: *De divae Annae trinubio et
trium filiarum ejus asservatione Ibb*. III. Here Luther does not speak
of the already published, but of the first intended writing.

7\) Burkhardt\'s remark on this date (p. 9): \"falsch reducirt\", is
erroneous.

**84**

Letters from the year 1517. No. 55.

**85**

**No. 55 .**

Wittenberg. December 31, 1517.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther does not declare the invocation of the saints to be superstition
per se, but only if it is done merely for the sake of bodily goods.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 288. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
130d; in Löscher, vol. II, p. 646; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 201 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 135. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 611. Only the
Erl. Briefw. has the year set by us\'(because at that time the new year
began with Christmas), all other editions: 1518.

His Georg Spalatin, ducal book keeper 1) and book lover, his \[friend\]
to be highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! You want to know from me, my dear Spalatin, what my opinion was
that in certain sentences I condemned the veneration of the saints for
temporal things as superstition. Dear Spalatin, it has never been my
opinion that the veneration of the saints is superstitious, not even
their invocation for the sake of things, however corporeal. For this
opinion is held by the heretics, our neighbors, the Picards in Bohemia.
For it is better for us to obtain all goods of any kind from God through
His saints (since all things are indeed gifts of God) than to seek them
from the devil through sorcerers and witches, as many are wont to do.
But this is what I wanted, namely, that it is superstitious, even
ungodly and wrong, to ask God and the saints only for what concerns the
body, but not to care at all about what concerns the soul and
blessedness, yes, about the will of God, as if we had forgotten or did
not believe the word of him who says \[Matth. 6, 33\]: \"Seek first the
kingdom of God, and all these things will be added to you. Yes,
everywhere Christ teaches the bodies and that which is of the body as
the

1\) *bibliophylaci et philiobiblio*. Here we first encounter the title
\"librarian\" (*bibliothecarius, librarius, a libris, a libellis*),
which later recurs frequently, in the inscription used for Spalatin.

To despise the least. If it is allowed to ask for this, it is only
allowed to those who are imperfect in faith and live more under Moses
than under Christ. Therefore, such a service of the saints is only to be
tolerated for the sake of the weak, but not to be exalted as a matter
very much in the interest of the Christian life. But now see if any of
the saints are celebrated among the people for chastity, for patience,
for humility, for faith, hope, love and other spiritual goods, in order
to obtain these; these are not sought, nor do we have any saints to
whom, for the sake of these things, there would be a great crowd,
churches would be built and services would be held. But because of fire
danger St. Laurentius is venerated, because of the plague Sebastian,
Martin and even the unknown St. Rochius,^2)^ because of poverty St. Anna
with her son-in-law, and the holy virgin because of many and most
things; St. Valentine because of the falling sickness, Job because of
the French scabies; so Scholastica, Barbara, Catharina, Apollonia, yes,
so many of the saints are famous, are famous only because of bodily
salvation, and so famous that they have been preferred to the apostles
in veneration and rendering pious services. Namely, they would become
very unpopular if no one needed bodily things, or if they despised
bodily things. For why do we not call upon St. Paul, lest the soul die
in ignorance of Christ? as St. Christopher is called upon because of
one, I know not what kind, of laughter at night time. Such people, I
say, if they are weak, are to be tolerated, and finally, so that they
become better minded and strive for the spiritual, with contempt for the
bodily things, they are to be instructed, so that we are not always
children under Moses, but finally also take hold of Christ. But if they
have a better faith,

2\) This passage undoubtedly proves that our letter belongs to the year
1517, since Luther, in the interpretation of the Ten Commandments, which
came out in 1518, wanted to have the passage from \"St. Rochius\"
deleted. See St. Louis edition, Vol. Ill, 1160, note 1.

3\) The explanation of this passage can be found in St. Louiser Ausg.

**86** Letters from the years 1517 and 1518. No. 55. 56. 57. **87**

they are to be punished for not seeking worthier things. Therefore it is
a mistake that we promote the service of the saints through the fear of
evils and the desire for temporal goods. For this is not to be said and
persuaded to all in general, as it is done, but, as I have said, to the
children and the weak\'; but to others it is to be persuaded that they
seek from the saints the opposite, namely, torment, sickness, scourging,
the cross, and all kinds of plagues, as David (ille) says \[Ps. 26:2.\]:
\"Try me, O Lord, and try me; purify my kidneys and my heart.\" Now, if
we were all to take hold of what belongs to only a few, would not
everything have to be filled with superstition? Let this be milk for the
weak; let the strong work solid food. You see, therefore, that it is a
superstition and not a superstition to worship the saints for the sake
of bodily things. Those who can desire spiritual things, and see that
they are lacking in them, undoubtedly obtain bodily things under God\'s
wrath by neglecting to ask for the good Spirit. Yes, the Our Father
teaches us in the first three petitions to ask first for what is
spiritual and what is God\'s, and then for what is ours. But it is
certain that this prayer will be perverted by those who do not care
whether God rules or serves, and seek only to be delivered from their
evil, making the first the last and the last the first. Fare well and
pray for me. From Wittenberg, on the day of St. New Year\'s Eve 1518
\[Dec. 31, 1517\]. 1)

Brother Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian.

1\) Because all previous editions except the Erl. Briefw. place this
letter in the year 1518, also Burkhardt does not note anything about it,
we come back again to the time determination. It seems impossible to us
that Spalatin could have addressed the question answered in this letter
to Luther at the end of the year 1518, after Luther\'s writing: \"Die
zehn Gebote, dein Volk zu Wittenberg gepredigt\" 2c. had appeared in
print. Yes, Luther would have referred Spalatin to this writing instead
of an answer. One reads in the St. Louis edition, Vol. Ill, Col. 1159 to
1169; we are convinced that the correctness of this remark of ours will
be acknowledged.

**No. 56 .**

Wittenberg. (Beginning of 1518.) 2)

**To Joh. Aesticampimlus^3)^ in Wittenberg.**

Invitation to a small breakfast.

The original is in the school library in Annaberg. Handwritten in *Cod.
Goth*. 186; printed in *Novis. litter. Hamburg* 1703, p. 29; in
*Wilisch, Arcana*

*Biblioth. Annaberg, Lips.* 1730, p. 29; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 429; in
Kreißig, D. Just, Jonas letter to Johann Friedrich, Churfürst von
Sachsen, about I)r. Wart. Luther\'s last illness and end of life 2c.,
Meissen 1847, p.22 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 138.

To the Lord Doctor Aesticampianus, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord! I ask only one thing of you. Most learned and upright
among men, but this is that you honor me with your presence, at ten
o\'clock or half an hour later, for a small breakfast. For this
intention has always been thwarted when I once wanted to invite you, and
even now I cannot do so. But I assume with good reason (*multum*) that
you know very well our modest circumstances, not to say our poverty. But
I want you to bring your master, whose name I do not know. Farewell,
dear Lord, in the Lord. From our monastery.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 5 7.**

Wittenberg. January 18, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

This letter is found in the St. Louis edition, vol. X, 218 and again,
improved and retranslated from the original, vol. XVIII, 1976, annex,
no. 5.

2\) De Wette places this letter after the one of March 21, 1520 to Joh.
Lang (St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 56), in which it is
reported that Aesticampianus had received the last ovation. He died on
May 31. Therefore, our writing cannot belong to this time, but must
rather be placed not long after Aesticampianus\' entry into the
professorship at Wittenberg, as Seidemann, \"Lauterbach,\" preface p.
XIV, and him after the Erl. Briefw.

3\) On Aesticampianus, see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 396, note 2.

**88** Letters from the year 1518. no. 58. 59. 60/ **89**

**No. 58.**

Wittenberg. Probably February 6, 1518.

**To Hieronymus Scultetus, Bishop of Brandenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 405. Our determination of the time,
which differs from that of the Erl. Briefw. is given there.

**No. 59 .**

Wittenberg. February 15, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2381, annex, no. 4.

**No. 60 .**

Wittenberg. February 19, 1518.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther designates the new books he wishes to have from the Frankfurt
Fair and puts forward the question of what difference there is between
and .

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. A 399, fol. 1156. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 32b (among the letters of 1517); in Löscher, vol. II, p. 605;
in De Wette, vol. I, p. 93 (erroneously: February 18) and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 157. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 587.

To the venerable and devout father Johann Lang, the excellently learned
licentiate of theology, prior of the hermits at Erfurt, his constant
\[friend\] in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! It writes Wolfgang Fabricius, 1) venerable father, that the
proverbs (*Adagia*) of Erasmus are printed again multiplied, \"the
lament of the expelled peace\",^2)^ Lucian\'s conversations, the utopias
of Morus (whose Richard Paceus 3) commemorates), the same Morus
epigrams, 4) likewise the two books of instruction in Hebrew by Wolfgang
himself, and, for whose sake I have this main

1\) Capito, then a collegiate preacher in Basel.

2\) In Strasbourg, an edition of the Adagia was published by Matthias
Schürer in January 1518; in December 1517 in

Basel by Joh. Frobenius an edition of the Erasmus *Querela pacis undique
gentium eiectae profligataeque*.

3\) *regis Anglorum orator*, occurs frequently in the letters of
Erasmus.

4\) These epigrams, together with those of Erasmus and the preceding
writing, were published by Joh. Frobenius in March 1518.

I am actually writing the very decisive defense of Erasmus against Faber
Stapulensis: so that you know what you should recommend to your
booksellers who will travel to Frankfurt. Further, I ask for the Utopias
of Morus and the Hebrew teachings of Fabricius, but most of all for that
apology, if it is not the same one that we have had here for a long
time, 5) namely, that on the sixth verse of the eighth Psalm: \"Thou
hast made him lack a little time of angels\" \[Heb. 2, 7.\];^6)^ in this
matter it is to be regretted that so great chiefs of the good sciences
argue against each other with so great impetuosity. Whether it be
another, or whether it be printed in another manner and increased, I
desire to see. The one I have has never been printed by a Basel press.
7)

We desire of thee, O Greek,^8)^ that thou decide our controversy as to
what difference or distinction there is between xxx

xxxx with epsilon and with eta, and why the Greek dictionaries do not
have xxxxxxx with short *penultimate* syllable (*penultima*), since this
is found everywhere in the New Testament, as, Rom. 9,^9)^ 3., 1 Cor. 12,
3. and Gal. 1 \[v. 8. 9.\] twice. Only that Erasmus uses Rom. 9 with an
eta in the notes, while it stands in the text with epsilon, and is not
found in the dictionaries other than with eta. I do not know the form of
the letters, 10) otherwise I would give my judgment to your judgment.

5\) It was the same; the first edition was published in August 1517.
(Erl. Briefw.)

6\) Faber had claimed that the Epistle to the Hebrews was originally
written in Hebrew, and that the translator had interchanged the correct
with. Erasmus refuted this in his *Annotationes in Novum Testamentum,*
printed in 1515. Erasmus responded to Faber\'s vehement rebuttal with
his Apology.

7\) In February 1518, a second edition of the *Apologia ad Jacobum
Fabrum Stapulensem was* published by Joh. Frobenius in Basel *(Panzer,
Annal.* VI, 204, No. 214.) Whether the first edition was also published
there, we do not know.

8\) In Walch: \"We ask of you Greek.\" Immediately following xxxxxxx
*penultirna correpta* is so given:

\"Anathema not in the last syllable without a short have.\"

9\) In the editions: *Rom*. VIII, but there this word does not occur.

10\) *figuras literarum pingere*. This is difficult to explain, It seems
to us the reading is corrupted. Perhaps it should be read instead of
*pingere*. After that we have translated.

**90** Letters from the year

1518\. no. 60. 61. 62. **91**

prefer. But because an eta denotes something set aside and separated, so
called by \"lay\", so would like to

with an epsilon meaning \"to put out of the community\", or to put out
of the country, or one driven out of the country 1), from the Greek
expression meaning a country (*regionem*), without country, xxxxxxxx a
distinction from \"being without country\", that is, excommunication.

When the wretched Agathe comes to you, show mercy to the sinner, she has
sinned shamefully. Be well and pray for me. February 19: Brother Martin
Luther.

**No. 61.**

Wittenberg. February 22, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2399, annex, no. 10.

**No. 62.**

Wittenberg. March 5, 1518.

**To Christoph Scheurl.**

Luther complains that he did not send the indulgence thesis to Scheurl.
He announces a German writing on indulgences, thanks Dürer for a gift,
and praises Staupitzen\'s writing \"von der Liebe GOttes.

Handwritten in the Scheurl family archive. The original was given by
Christoph Scheurl III. (b. 1535, d. 1592) gave it to M. Laurentius
Dürnhofer, preacher at St. Aegidien. Printed by Chr. Gottl. Schwarz,
Programm, Alters 1740, p. 10; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 19; in *Strobel-
Ranner, p.* 43; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 95 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I,
p. 165. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 589.

To the esteemed and highly learned Christoph Scheurl, Doctor of both
Laws, Public Advocate at Nuremberg, his \[friend\] to be highly honored
in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I have received two briefs from you, dear and highly learned
Christoph, the vain one in Latin, the other in German, at the same time
also the gift of the excellent man Albrecht Dürer, likewise my Latin and
German theses. ^2)^ First

1\) *exterrem* == *extorrem*. Löscher has the latter reading.

2\) Luther\'s theses spread quickly and were printed many times, among
others also in Nuremberg. Caspar Nützet had translated them into German
(Scheurls Briefbuch, Vol. II, p. 43, last line), but this translation is
not bibliographically verifiable.

I answer that it was neither my intention nor my wish that they should
be published, but that they should first be discussed with a few who
live with and around us, so that they might be either rejected and
dismissed, or approved and published, by the judgment of many. But now
they are printed and circulated so often, far beyond my expectation,
that I regret this production, not as if I were not in favor of the
truth becoming generally known, yes, that is what I sought above all
things, but because this way is not suitable for informing the people.
For I myself am doubtful about a number of things, and I would have
asserted or omitted a number of things far differently and more
certainly if I had expected this to happen. But I can see enough from
this dissemination that everyone everywhere has an opinion about
indulgences, even if it is a secret one, namely out of fear of the Jews.
Thus I have been forced to prepare proofs 3) of the theses, which I have
not yet been allowed to publish, however, because the venerable and
gracious Lord, the Bishop of Brandenburg, whose judgment I have
consulted in this matter, has been very much prevented and has kept me
so long. Yes, if the Lord should give me leisure, I wish to publish a
booklet in German on the power of indulgences, 4) so that I can suppress
these quite indefinite theses. Of course, it is not doubtful to me that
the people are deceived, not by the indulgence, but by its use. I will
send them \[the explanations\] as soon as they will be finished.

Meanwhile, I ask you to recommend me to the worthy man Albrecht Dürer
and to tell him that I am grateful and mindful of him. But that is what
I ask of you and him,

3\) The \"Explanations on the Disputation on the Power of Indulgences,\"
St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 100.

4\) This is the \"Sermon on Indulgences and Grace\", St. Louis edition,
vol, Kolde, \"Martin Luther\", Vol. I, p. 375 f. has convincingly proven
that this writing is meant here/ So far all authorities, e.g. Köstlin,
M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 181; the Weimar edition, Vol. I, p. 239; the
Erlanger Briefwechsel, Vol. I, p. 167, have pronounced \"that this
sermon is hardly meant here\". But see St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII,
introduction, p. 14b f.

**92** Letters from 1518.

No, 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. 67. **93**

that you give up your quite unreasonable opinion of me and do not think
of me in greater terms than I am able to do; however, I am not able to
do and am not able to do anything thoroughly and am becoming more and
more of a nothing every day. I recently wrote to D. Joh. Eck and to all
of you, but I do not realize that the letters have arrived. How much I
wish that the booklet of our venerable father Vicarius \"von der Liebe\"
1), which came out very recently and was preached in Munich, would be
printed again. For we hunger and thirst greatly. Fare well in the Lord.
At Wittenberg, 1518 the fifth of March.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 63.**

Wittenberg. March 11, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

Cover letter to a draft for the improvement of university studies.

Handwritten in *Cod. Dessav*. No. 7; in *Cod*. *Jen*. a, fol. 26.
printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 52; in Löscher, vol. II, p. 606; in De
Wette, vol. I, p. 96 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 167. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 591 (probably due to a printing error: 1517).

His best friend, Georg Spalatin. JEsus.

Hail! The other day we were at Doctor Carlstadt\'s, dearest Spalatin,
and began to discuss what you had already presented to us long ago,
namely the new^2)^ or lectures to be established at our university. And
that I have not written to you about this for a long time is the reason
that it seemed to us almost all to be a matter in which we would have to
despair, especially because we fear that our most noble prince would be
burdened with such great expenses. But so that you and your will may be
satisfied, I send you a note here, in which you can read what seemed
good to us at that time. But, if in such a way

1\) This writing originated from sermons that Staupitz had held in
Munich during Advent 1517, and appeared under the title: \"Am säligs
newes jar. Uon der lieb gottes\" (1518). Luther gave a copy of it to his
mother.

2\) We have followed the reading of the Erl. Briefwechsel: *initiandis*,
instead of *mutandis in the* other editions.

If our educational institution could be established, dear God, how great
an honor that would be for our prince and for our school, and a right
occasion to reform all universities, yes, also to eradicate all
barbarism all the faster and to increase all scholarship in the most
abundant way. In this you use your concern. Farewell. Wittenberg, March
11, 1518.

Brother Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian.

**No. 64.**

Wittenberg. March 21, 1518.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2379, annex, no. 3.

**No. 65.**

Wittenberg. March 23, 1518.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther sends him his \"Asterisks Against the Obelisks of Eck\".

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 536.

**No. 66.**

Wittenberg. March 24, 1518.

**To Joh. Sylvius Egranus, preacher at Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2465. annex, no. 42.

**No. 67.**

Wittenberg. March 31, 1518.

**To Staupitz.**

Luther complains about the misinterpretation of his teaching by his
opponents, who are especially hostile to him because he prefers the
Church Fathers and the Bible to the scholastics.

Handwritten in *Cod. Seidel.* in Dresden, p. 217. Printed in Schütze,
vol. II, p. 21; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 101 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I,
p. 175. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1356 without the address.

His father and superior in Christo, Staupitz.

JEsus.

Hail! Since I am busy with many things, I am forced, dear Father in the
Lord, to write very little. First

**94**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 67. 68. 69. 70.

**95**

I have the firm conviction that my name stinks with many, for good
people have long been accusing me of this, that I condemn the rosaries,
the crown prayers, 1) the little psalters, even other prayers, and even
all good works. So it also happened to Paul from those who said that he
said \[Rom. 3:8.\], \"Let us do evil, that good may come of it.\" I have
certainly followed Tauler\'s theology, and the booklet,^2)^ which you
recently gave to our Christian Goldschmied to print. I teach that men
should not trust in anything else but in JESUS Christ alone, not in
their prayers and merits or in their works, because it is not by our
running but by GOD\'s mercy that we are saved \[Rom. 9:16.\]. From these
speeches those people sang the poison, which, as you see, is spread by
them. But for the sake of good or bad talk I have not begun, nor will I
desist from it. God will have mercy. The same people bring hatred on me
because of the scholastic teachers, because I prefer the church teachers
(*ecclesiasticos*) and the Bible to them, so they are almost nonsensical
with heated zeal. I read the scholastics with good judgment, not (as
they tend to do) with closed eyes. This is what the apostle commanded
\[1 Thess. 5, 21\]: \"Examine everything and keep what is good.\" I do
not reject all their things, but I do not approve of everything either.
But in such a way those chatterers are wont to make the whole out of one
part, a conflagration out of a swift, and an elephant out of a gnat. But
I, by God\'s grace, do not respect those larvae in the least. They are
words, they will remain words. If Scotus, Gabriel and his kind were free
to have other opinions than St. Thomas, again the Thomists are allowed
to contradict the whole world, yes, among the scholastics there are
almost as many sects as heads, rather as many as hairs on each head: why
do they not allow me the same against them, what they arrogate to
themselves as a right against themselves? But if God

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 1319.

2\) Staupitzen\'s writing \"von der Liebe GOttes\". See No. 62 at the
end. - Christian Goldschmied is Christian Dornig, goldsmith and
publisher.

works, there is no one who can turn it around. When he rests, no one can
wake him up. Farewell and pray for me and for the truth of God, wherever
it may be. Wittenberg, March 31, 1518.

Brother Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian.

**No. 68.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of March 1518.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2374, annex, no. 1.

**No. 69.**

(Wittenberg.) (Shortly before Easter (April 4) 1518.) To Spalatin.

Luther reports that the Bishop of Brandenburg released him from his
promise.

Handwritten *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 233. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 3; by
Löscher, vol. I, p. 843; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 75 (in November 15l7)
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 180. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 585
(1517).

His Spalatin 2c.

JEsus.

Hail! In short, everything you write, I will do. For the venerable
bishop has answered and released me from my promise. Only I do not know
whether I will be able to preach these three consecutive days, 3) but I
will see; if not, then Amsdorf will step in as my assistant.

Brother Martin Eleutherius.

**No. 70.**

(Wittenberg.) (After April 4, 1518.)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a letter to the Elector, to which he expects an answer.
Soon he will leave for Heidelberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 234. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 4; by Löscher, vol. II, 637;
by De Wette, vol. I, p. 203 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 180. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 602.

3\) This can only go to the Easter feast. After that, the time
determination.

**96**

Letters from the year 1518. no. 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75.

**97**

His Georg Spalatin in the castle at Wittenberg.

JEsus.

Hail! Behold, here is my letter, my dear Spalatin, which I have written
to the most illustrious prince in response to your faithful reminder and
out of necessity. It is now up to your faithfulness and concern that you
show friendship and love, so that the most illustrious prince receives
it as soon as possible, and that you inform me of it, if you should hear
any answer to it. Farewell. Next Friday 1) I will go out, God willing.

Brother Martin Eleutherius.

**No. 71.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early April 1518.)

**To Joh. Sylvius Egranus.**

Luther gives his verdict on the dispute Egranus had about St. Anne\^
(See No. 54 and No. 66.).

This letter is first printed on the title back of the following writing:
\"*Apologetica responsio contra dogmata. que in .M. Egranu a
calumniatoribus inuulgata sunt. E. R. 2) Impietas est ad impietatis
crimen esfe mutu.\" At the end: \"Impress: Wittenburgij* Anno 1518.\" 4
leaves in 4. Printer: Joh. Grünenberg. In August of the same year, a
reprint appeared in Basel by Pamphilus Gengenbach. Also printed in
Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 122; in Löscher, vol. II, p. 613; in De Wette,
vol. I, p. 103; in the Weimar edition, vol. I, p. 315 and in Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 181. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 592.

Brother Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian, \^wishes\^ his Johann Sylvius
Heil.

See, there you have my expert opinion on your doctrines, as you wanted,
my dearest Sylvius. First of all, I like the fact that you subject
everything to the judgment of the church, especially of your Ordinary 3)
(as he is called). For even the truth must be spoken with fear in the
Church of God. Secondly, I believe that everything is true, and I myself
have read and taught almost \[the same\] for a long time, even though it
is new and sharp, and therefore (as it is wont to happen) to the
unlearned.

1\) On April 9, Friday before Quasimodogeniti, Luther left Wittenberg
for Heidelberg. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 4.

2\) \"E. R.\" == Erasmus Roterodamus.

3\) This was Philip, the bishop of Naumburg-Zeitz and Freising.

obnoxious. Thus I would have done enough for a friend; you may see
whether you have also done enough for the friends, much more for the
enemies. For I fear that it might seem to the friends, that is, to the
scholars, as if you had consulted a kind of Midas 4); the unscholars or
enemies (of this I am certain) will judge you as if one heretic had
consulted another and, as they say, one ass itches another. For this
Martin has a much worse name among these people than Sylvius, both
because of these common things and because of his own, which I believe
you know. But just as the kind Savior Christ bore us exceedingly
wretched sinners, and bears us to this day, so it behooves us also to
bear those people, however much they may be our adversaries. For we must
not despair of them, even as we ought not to be presumptuous of
ourselves, being among one another bone of the same bone, and flesh of
the same flesh \[Gen 2:23\]. Fare well.

**No. 72.**

Wittenberg. April 15, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 418, no. 133.

**No. 73.**

Würzburg. April 19, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 420, no. 135.

**No. 74.**

Erfurt. May 9, 1518.

**To Jodocus Trutfetter, professor in Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 410, no. 131.

**No. 75.**

Wittenberg. May 18, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2392, annex, no. 7.

4\) Midas, king in Phrygia, was chosen as arbitrator between Apollo and
Pan to decide whether Apollo could play better on the zither or Pan
could blow better on the shawm. Since he preferred the latter, Apollo
made him grow donkey ears.

**98** Letters from the year 1518. No. 75a. 76. **99**

**No. 75a.**

Wittenberg. May 19, 1518.

**To Johann Eck.**

Luther reproaches him for having attacked him so deceitfully with his
obelisks.

From a copy in the Nuremberg City Library, No. 406, p. 2, No. 2, printed
in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 1.

Martin Luther to the highly learned theologian and philosopher Johann
Eck, Pro-Chancellor of the University of Ingolstadt, Canonicus of the
church at Eichstädt, a special one among his friends.

Several obelisks have come to me in which you have tried to destroy my
theses on indulgences, and this is a testimony to your faithful
friendship, which you freely offered me, yes, of evangelical love, by
which we are commanded to admonish the brother before we accuse him. How
could I, a simple man, believe or suspect that you would act backwards
against me, since you have been so flattering against the brother? And
thou also hast fulfilled the scripture \[Ps. 28:3.\], \"He that speaketh
kindly to his neighbor, and hath evil in his heart.\" I know you did not
want such a thing to happen to you from me, but you did it and were
able; you may see what your conscience tells you. I am very surprised at
the audacity with which you alone can presume to judge my opinions
before you know and understand them. This presumption is certainly a
very faithful witness that you alone seem to be a theologian, and so
alone that not only your opinion is to be preferred to all, but also
everything that you have condemned, although not understood, is to be
condemned because it does not please the corner. I beg you, let us at
least live and rule by God. But lest I deal much with thee, because thou
art altogether mad against me, behold, I have sent the asterisks 1)
against thine obelisks unto thee, that thou mayest see and know thine
ignorance and iniquity, in which, of course, I have been so

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 536. - From this passage it seems
that this writing will have to be set almost simultaneously with our
letter.

I do not want to publish them, but address them to you privately, so
that I do not want to repay you for the evil you have done to me. I have
written them only for^2)^ , through whom I have received your obelisks,
so that you receive the asterisks through him. Otherwise, if I had
wanted to let them go out into the public, I would have written more
carefully and appropriately or also in a firmer manner against you. If
now still the confidence from your trivial things should stand firm with
you, then do it and write; I will meet you with no less confidence. Then
it may be that I will not spare you either, although, God knows, I would
rather that you would get along again, and if you disliked something
about me, would first act amicably with me, as you should have known was
proper for a theologian. For what whore, who is a little angry, could
not spew the same vituperations and disparagements that you have spewed
against me? and still you do not regret this at all, that you also boast
and seem to have done right. You have the choice; I will keep the love
if you want. I will cheerfully accept your attack, because, as I see,
you know nothing in theology except the trumpery of scholastic opinions.
What you will accomplish against me, you will realize when you begin to
prefer peace to war and love to raging. But the Lord give thee and me a
good mind, and bid them both be well. Behold, I lay down my arms, even
though I am wounded, not because I fear you, but because I fear God;
according to this, the blame will not be on me if I am forced to defend
myself publicly. But good words. Farewell. From Wittenberg, May 19,
1518.

**No. 76.**

Wittenberg. May 30, 1518.

**To Staupitz.**

See Sk. Louiser Ausg., Vol. X V, 414, No. 132.

2\) Wenceslaus Link, to whom the asterisks are attributed.

**100** Letters from the year

1518\. no. 77. 78. 79. **101**

**No. 77.**

(Wittenberg.) (May 30) 1518.

To Pope Leo X. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 400, no. 127.

**No. 78.**

Wittenberg. June 4, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther writes about the request of Petrus Mosellanus for the Greek
professorship in Wittenberg; about Ubersandten\'s books, and about
Tetzel\'s rebuttal, to which he wants to reply.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 10 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 29. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 71; in Löscher, vol. II, p. 616 ; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 122
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 202. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 593.

His Georg Spalatin, ducal librarian, his learned friend, in Altenburg.

JEsus.

Hail! I beg you, my dear Spalatin, not to be displeased that I write
either very late or very seldom. I am not sufficient for half of my
business, which, I do not know through what fruitfulness of time, is
constantly increasing contrary to expectation. Petrus Mosellanus has
been with us, ready to accept the condition and the office of professor
of the Greek language, and has asked me to write this to you in his
name. Since I did not know whether anything had been traded between you
and him in the meantime, I promised to write, and behold, I write. It
will be up to you to proceed in this matter, as God has given you the
knowledge and the ability.

Among my things from the chapter, this booklet also came with me, which
you instructed me to hand over. Among so many thoughts I forgot to whom
it should be handed over. I offered it to everyone I knew, but no one
could be found. If I can still deliver it through the subordinate
brothers of our order, let me know and it will be done.

I sent you two books the other day, but incomplete, which discuss
theology in un

serer German language contain. 1) I send the remaining sheets
(*duerniones*); if, in addition, something should still be missing, then
write. For the whole is ten sheets 2) strong. Fare well and pray for me.
My proofs 3) are under the press.

Johann Tetzel has published against my German Sermon 4) likewise a
German booklet, an excellent witness and herald of his ignorance, to
which I will add light, 5) so that it may be known by all how it is
constituted, not how he himself regard his booklet zero. Fare well
again. All in our Wittenberg monastery, in the greatest haste, on the
day after the Feast of Corpus Christi \[June 4\] 1518. Martin
Eleutherius, Augustinian.

I send kind regards to all the courtiers, especially to those on whose
behalf you greeted me the other day.

**No. 79.**

Wittenberg. June 4, 1518.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther asks for a carpenter from the Erfurt monastery. He sends a book,
talks about Tetzel\'s rebuttal and requests several books for Längs
Bruder.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. V 399, fol. 427. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 72; in Löscher, vol. II, p. 616; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 124 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 206. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 595.

To the venerable and worthy father Johann Lang, future (*designato*)
Doctor of Sacred Theology, Augustinian Vicar of the Hermits of Thuringia
at Erfurt, his superior.

JEsus.

Hail! We are waiting, Reverend Father, and we are waiting with pain for
you to bring to us the brother carpenter whom, as you know, the
Venerable Father Vicarius has promised us.

1\) \"A German Theologia.\" See St. Louis edition, Vol. XIV, 182.

2\) *duernio* is the name of a folio sheet of two sheets. Folded in
quarto, therefore, four sheets. Forty quarto sheets is the thickness of
this book.

3\) The Explanations of the Theses on Indulgences. St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XVIII, 100.

4\) \"On Indulgences and Grace.\" Tetzel\'s refutation of it is found in
the St. Louis edition, Vol. X VIII, 274.

5\) This was done by Luther\'s \"Freedom of the Sermon, Concerning Papal
Indulgences and Grace. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 296.

**102** Letters from the year 1\^18. no. 79. 80. **103**

considering that we have neither seats nor benches in any part of the
monastery, and your convent can more easily suffer a delay than ours,
especially since it will soon return to you after completing a little
work.

By the way, I am sending here a book, 1) which is a true silen of
Alcibiades, which I give to you, dear father; if you want to have more
of it, then you should know that you have to procure it on Greek credit
2). Against my German Sermon, that Tetzel has published his antics,
against whom I too am again preparing my barrel; God grant that it may
not become a little jar. Farewell and pray for me. From Wittenberg. I
wanted you to get your brother George the Quintilian and the text of
Aristotle; if he also had Pliny, perhaps it would not hurt. On the day
after the Feast of Corpus Christi \[June 4\] 1518.

Brother Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian.

Our Prior Adam asks, 3) that you get this booklet together with the
sermon into the hands of the wife of the Count of Stolberg, who is
staying in Kreuzberg.

**No. 80.**

Wittenberg. 15, June 1518.

**To Scheurl.**

Luther writes about his and Carlstadt\'s dispute with Eck, which could
still be settled through Scheurl\'s mediation if Eck did not reply to
the asterisks given only privately and did not answer Carlstadt too
sharply.

The original is in the Scheurl family archive at Nuremberg. Printed in
Eh. G. Schwarz\' program, Altorf, p. 12; in Schütze, Bh. II, p. 22; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 45; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 125 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 208. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 596.

1\) \"A German Theologia.\" - A \"Silen of Alcibiades,\" according to
the *adagia of* Erasmus, is a thing that at first sight seems small and
ridiculous, but on closer acquaintance is worthy of admiration. Artists
used to have in their workshops larger containers, representing the
figure of Silen, in which they kept the exceedingly beautiful pictorial
works they had made. Alcibiades used this comparison in his own way,
since he wanted to indicate that Socrates contained more hidden in
himself than his appearance promised.

2\) *Graeca fide*, that is, for cash money. The Greeks did not give
credit.

3\) Adam Ulrich, from Langensalza, 1510 prior in Cologne, 1517 in
Nordhausen, 1518 in Wittenberg. (Kolde, \"Die Deutsche
Angustinercongregation,\" p. 257.)

To the highly learned Doctor Christoph Scheurl, well-versed in both
laws, the comforting guardian (*Paracleto*) of the Nuremberg community,
his in Christ exceedingly honest friend.

JEsus.

Hail! What you ask for our Eck, my dearest Christoph, would not have
been necessary in any way, since you are such a great friend to me, if
the matter had still stood, and he himself had preceded you by his
letters. For it has also increased my suspicion that Eck\'s heart is
estranged from me, that he, after having given me such frightening
names, 4) although this was written privately, has sent me nothing,
neither a letter nor a word. But since our Carlstadt\'s \"defense
sentences\" 5) (*problemata*) have already been published, admittedly
without my will and knowledge, I know no good advice as to what both
should do. I know that we love this man\'s intellectual gifts and admire
his erudition; and I am aware and testify that what has happened was
done with sadness rather than out of anger or spite. As for me, I have
written this letter to him, which, as you see, is quite friendly and
full of kind words against him. Not only for your sake, but also because
of his free confession, I am quite conciliatory, because he writes that
he, though not me, dislikes the fact that this incident has happened
either through foreign malice or spite. Therefore, in this matter at
least you have power over me, and he has it too. Only one thing will be
incumbent on you, that you take care that he does not answer our
Carlstadt too harshly, and that he considers that he was first to blame
for the fact that this evil occurred among friends. For I believe that
there is no need for him to answer me, since I have given my asterisk
privately.

4\) In the obelisks. See Letter No. 66, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV,
Annex, No. 42.

5\) \"Carlstadt\'s 405 Defences for the Holy Scriptures\" 2c. St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII, 590. See the introduction there, p. 34k f.

6\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 536.

**104**

Letters from the year 1518. no. 80. 81. 82. 83. 84. 85. 86.

**105**

if he does not feel like it. 1) But if he prefers to respond, I am
prepared for both, although I would prefer peace. Act, therefore, in
such a way that we may know that you suffer with us, that this
affliction is of the devil\'s making, but also rejoice that it is
overcome and satisfied by the mercy of Christ. Fare well. I have also
written to you before, but I see that the letter has not yet arrived.
Wittenberg, on the day of Vitus and Modestus \[June 15\] 1518.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 81.**

(Rome.) Second half of June^2)^ 1518.

**Silvester Primas to Luther.**

Letter to the dialogue of Silvester Prierias.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 312.

**No. 82.**

Wittenberg. July 10, 1518.

To Wenceslaus Link. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2376, annex, no. 2.

The Erl. Briefw., Vol. II, p. 536, brings the following corrigendum in
the misprint list for this brie: \"Vol. I, p. 211, line 34, instead of
*Fuit* read *Fiat*.\" This\" Correctur is a wrong
[Conjectur]{.underline}. Aurifaber, who is the source for all editions
here, reads *Fuit,* which also corresponds to the context. See St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 2377, s 3, line 8 f.

**No. 83.**

Wittenberg. August 8, 1518.

**To Spalatin in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 430, no. 147.

**No. 84.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around August 10, 1518.)

**On New Year\'s Eve Prierias.**

Letter and conclusion of Luther\'s answer to Prieria\'s dialogue.

See St. Louis ed. vol. XVIII, 344 and 411.

1\) Eck followed this hint, therefore Luther did not print the asterisks
either. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 23d.

2\) On the time determination, see St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI ll,
Introduction, p. 17. The Erl. Briefw. has: -\"(First months 1518.)\"

**No. 85.**

Wittenberg. August 21.1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 432, no. 148.

**No. 86.**

Wittenberg. August 31, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports that the sermon on the ban had already been printed when
Spalatin\'s letter arrived. About Melanchthon\'s inaugural address upon
assuming his office. He sends his answer from the dialogue of Silvester
Prierias.

The original is located in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten
in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 33. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 77b; in
Löscher, vol. II, p. 623; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 134 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 220. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 598.

To the highly learned and finely educated Georg Spalatin, librarian of
the Duke of Saxony, his faithful friend in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! Before your letter came, my dear Spalatin, the Sermon on the
Banishment 3) had already been published, but in such modesty, and
supported with such firm proofs of truth, that I cherish the hope that
it will not only not be disapproved of by the lovers of truth, but will
be received with complete favor, even by those whom tyranny itself
delights; so gloriously have I raised that holy power, yet without
flattery, but not without necessity. For I have taught nothing in it
that they themselves have not taught and do not teach.

What you write and remember about our Philip Melanchthon, you shall not
doubt that it has been done and shall be done. He gave a speech on the
fourth day after he came, which was highly learned and completely
without fault, with such great applause and admiration from everyone
that you now no longer need to be concerned about the way in which you
might recommend him to us. We turned our opinion and our sight away from
his stature and his person very soon, and wish in the matter itself

3\) St. Louiser. See also the introduction there, pp. 39 f.

**106**

Letters from the year 1518, No. 86, 87, 88, 89.

**107**

to him happiness and admire him, and say thanks to the most noble prince
and also to your service. But it is more important to see to it that you
can best recommend him to our prince for his studies. I certainly do not
desire any other teacher for Greek, as long as he remains healthy. There
is only one thing I fear, that he, because he is so delicate, may not
bear the way of life of our region well, then, because I hear that he
has been hired for a too meager salary, so much so that the already
boasting Leipzigers hope to take him away from us as soon as possible.
For he was also coveted by them before he came to us. I have the
suspicion, and many others with me, that Mr. Pfeffinger, as is his way,
wanted to prove himself an all too faithful steward of the prince\'s
purse in this matter as well.

Therefore, my dear Spalatin, to speak freely, that is, with my best
friend, see to it that you do not despise his person and his
\[youthful\] age; he is a man worthy of all honor. For I would not want
us and our university to be guilty of such tremendously rude behavior,
from which our enviers could make a quite respectable fairy tale of us.

I send my quite farcical and completely off-the-cuff written dalliances
against Silvester, my quite woodsy (*sylvestrem*) and boorish sophist,
which I poured out in two days. For he did not seem worthy to me that
for his sake I should put the power of my mind and the effort of study
into such trivial and (as mau says) *bullaceous* conclusions for
nothing.

Let my things be in your command, I thank God and you. Farewell and love
me in Christ. August 31, 1518.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

D. Andreas Carlstadt is engaged in an external fight against Eck\'s
defense, 1) and as far as I can grasp, Eck has done nothing by his
defense but show the place where he can best be beaten.

1\) By his defense against Eck\'s Monomachy, St. Louis edition, vol.
XVIII, 632. See also the introduction there, p. 25.

**No. 87.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. September 1518.

**To Staupitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2394, annex, no. 8.

**No. 88.**

Wittenberg. September 2, 1518.

**To Spalatin in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2397, annex, no. 9.

**No. 89.**

Basel. September 4, 1518.

**Wolfgang Fabricius Capito to Luther.**

Erasmus\' verdict on Luther\'s Theses on Indulgences; exhortation to
extreme caution against the impending dangers; how Luther should answer
Prierias to his dialogue; Erasmus\' verdict on Egranus\' writing; von
Eck\'s writing Wider Carlstadt.

Printed in the Abraham Scultetus *Annul. Evang. renovati Decas prima, p.
27 and in des Cel. Hasaeus Bibliotheca \[Bremensis\]
Historico-Philologico-Theologica* (1719), p. 920. Partially in
Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth., lib*. I, p. 176, aM. In Erlanger Briefwechsel,
vol. I, p. 228 after the two prints cited above.

Hail! In my last letter I answered your love from Strasbourg by adding
Erasmus\' judgment about you, namely how honorable, how sincerely he
admires your disputation on indulgences. In the meantime, I have seen
your sermon on repentance^2)^ , and the other on pardons, 3) both of
which fight with flying colors against the traditional way of our time.
I have been beside myself with fear for the safety of my friend, since
you present your chest so unprotected to the dense hosts of the enemy,
even though you appear to be exceedingly well armed with weapons of
truth. But you will, I fear very much, be fought with far different
\[weapons\], and there is danger that the cause will be carried out by
force. If thou wilt therefore condescend to lend thine ears to him who
counsels thee out of a faithful heart, I admonish thee as one who has
experienced that thou hast brought the cause of Sertorius 4) to the dei

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1220. (Instead of 1517, the year 1518 is
to be placed.)

3\) *de condonationibus*. This is probably the \"Sermon on Indulgences
and Grace\". St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 270.

4\) Sertorius, follower of Mariu\^ and good general, when Sulla
prevailed, fled to Spain and fought bravely for a long time until he was
deceitfully killed by Perperna.

**108**

Briese from the year 1518. no. 89.

**109**

lie. Believe me, piece by piece, you will bring about what you could not
even have shaken with all your strength. As you see, they have a castle
fortified on all sides. Surrounded by a triple rampart, they snore, as
it is said, out of range (*extra tela*): from the papal prestige, that
is, from the prestige of the general church, from the power of the
tyrants, and from the obstinate concord of all the schools. Truly, you
will not easily ever break this exceedingly thick triple rope of the
evil spirit. It is necessary for an Alexander to confidently untie the
Gordian knots with the sword; it is difficult for this to be done by
reason or rationality. The simplicity of the godly depends on the
beckoning and counterbeckoning of the imaginary church. Tyranny takes
away the courage of the more astute. Furthermore, we theologians, who
sell to all a greater holiness and knowledge of Christ, surrender Christ
to our hope, gather up all the filth of religion, and under the pretense
of godliness take care of our best. Therefore, lest this excellent
endeavor be destroyed, may you, I beseech you, prevent any pretense by
which you can more quickly pin the reader\'s neck before he thinks he is
being followed.

In this way, the apostles did nothing suddenly, nothing so openly;
everywhere they preserved a delicate subtlety. For through what hidden
passages does Paul enter in the letter to the Romans, what does he not
do in order to gain favor with them? He says something, he hides it
again, he leads in, he leads out again, he shows the rich supply from
afar, and then he hides it again, and he weighs his speech in every
detail so that either hatred or displeasure does not arise. The Acts of
the Apostles are rich in examples of this kind. Thus St. Paul \[Acts
23:6\] responds in the uproar like one who seeks excuses; he does not
say, \"I speak nothing against the law,\" but, \"I am accused because of
the resurrection,\" while in the meantime he gives an account with
wonderful cleverness in his speech that he has observed the law. For
great things are surely accomplished in crooked ways. How I wish that
you always kept open a window from which you could escape, even if only
troubled with a disputation. ^2)^

1\) Instead of: *decorem et* in Erl. Briefw. we have adopted the reading
of Scultetus: *decoram.*

2\) From the foregoing it is exceedingly clear what a different spirit
Capito has than Luther!

In these days I have received the booklet of Silvester de Prierio from
Rome, which he has published quite ludicrously against your theses of
indulgences (*venias*). If he is to be answered, I would like it to be
done in careful speech, and that you present a true image of Christ from
the Gospels. The origin and progress of religion, the custom of the
ancients, the cause of the ingrained error, and the changed decrees of
the popes and even of the conciliarities you may relate with explicit
indication, so that the speech may acquire faith through the senses, as
drawn from the source of truth. Then you may more often ridicule the
individual nonsenses than treat them seriously. Carefully refrain from
injuring the pope; rather, cast off all spite against that man as an
insolent flatterer, as one who raises things unworthy of the papal
dignity only for the sake of the belly; you oppose open intrigues; you
strive to cut off the occasion for evil. Everywhere, as the occasion may
bring when giving the answer, you may bequeath the approaches, so that
he can only strike again in vain. See, where I, forgetting myself, am
carried away by the heat of friendship, that I, like a teacher,
prescribe laws to you ! But forgive this, whatever it may be, to him who
is concerned for you in every way. You have more than one Theseus, 3)
Andreas Carlstadt, Georg Spalatin, Johann Egranus and Philipp
Melanchthon, the wonderfully gifted man; if you will cultivate Raths
with these, you will publish nothing that could be shaken or that would
be weak. Where does my much talk drive me! But it shall only serve to
testify my sincere affection for you.

Erasmus praises Egranu\'s booklet extraordinarily: how powerfully it
presents, how straight it goes to the goal, how clearly it proves. He
wanted it to be published again in Basel, 4) which he would not have
read without displeasure if it had been printed here first. Johann Eck
wrote against Andreas Carlstadt. 5) You will not dispute before cheap
judges; try as much as you can to make us safe. I answer Eck in a
private letter with great freedom. For this

3\) Theseus is said to have assisted many extremely brave men in their
battles.

4\) This is the edition of Gengenbach in Basel mentioned in No. 71.

5\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 25.

**110** Letters from the year 1518. no. 89. y0. **Ill**

For the sake of the mass (nundinas), I am given letters every day that
have to be written at night. I wish God that they would be as useful as
I wish with all my heart to greet every dear friend with my words, to be
commanded, as it were, by name. Farewell. Basel, September 4, 1518.

The one you know.

**No. 90 .**

Augsburg. September 5, 1518.

**Spalatin to Luther.**

This letter is the answer to No. 85 (Vol. XV, 430). About Cajetan\'s and
others\' attitude toward Luther; he urges confidence, thanks for the
\"explanations\" sent, whose dissemination is taken care of; expresses
disapproval of the dissemination of the theses of the excommunication
(foisted on Luther) and writes about Staupitz\'s concerns about Luther.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, fol. 276. Printed in Burkhardt,
Briefwechsel, p. 11 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 231.

To his venerable father in Christ, Martin Eleutherius, Augustinian,
Doctor of Theology.

Good health! I have no doubt, my dearest Doctor Martin, that soon after
the departure of Magister Johann, your colleague from Nuremberg, you
received the letter of our most noble Prince and thus also mine.
Cardinal Cajetan, if he does not deceive the prince as well as me, is
not so hostile to you that he should make such a great offence against
you to the emperor and the great ones of the Holy Roman Empire. For
since he recently spoke confidentially and much with our most noble
prince, who had gone to him, this gave me great hope that he would be
much more lenient and tolerant in your cause than I feared. For although
I believe that many, I do not know what, have done against you, I do not
know, but rather hope that God will graciously assist you and destroy
all the counsel of the adversaries, however hostile and various and
dangerous things they may have in mind against you. I also have no doubt
that, God willing, like the prince, you will also escape this danger
from the dignitatis. In my opinion, you have offered yourself lawfully
enough to have your cause recognized in an unsuspicious place before
unsuspicious judges. A heretic

calls you only the Tetzelian rabble (Tetzeliastri), that is, the people
who do not understand anything about all fine arts and sciences. The
most noble prince refuses a rescript, as you have requested it, for such
a reason that even you could not blame. For I believe that there will be
no lack of a way to protect your name and your welfare. You, therefore,
be confident in the trust of God and your clear conscience. However much
the shortness of time may press, however other things may hinder, it may
be that he will overcome all difficulties. Therefore, have a theological
courage.

For the \"explanation\" of your theses on indulgences, I thank you
eternally. For it pleases me extraordinarily such a learned gift.
Therefore, I will see to it that several copies given to very learned
men make your opinion on this matter better known than that you could
justly be brought into such great spite. Five days ago I sent a copy
received from a friend as a gift to the Cardinal of Sion, Mr. Matthew 1)
of the title St. Pudentianä, who is staying with the Swiss and is a very
learned and righteous man. He is, as I hear from those who returned from
the man within a few days, extraordinarily devoted to you. Christoph
Langenmantel is very devoted to you, but so are many others of whom you
might not suspect this. I cannot say, however, how much evil, how much
spitefulness the sentences from the ban 2) seem to have brought you. I
cannot be surprised enough that they were sent here from there, and all
the more so because (I write what I have seen) an exceedingly bitter
mockery against Roman avarice had been attached to them. For that which
has been sent hither has been delivered into the hands of both apostolic
legates. I fear that it has been sent to Rome and has done you
tremendous harm. But God will help His own in due time. However, be
careful not to irritate those wasps even more, either in preaching or in
disputing or in public teaching. For I know that if you only avoid the
danger 3) that the future way to

1\) Schinner. Instead of. *Seducensi* in the text is to be read
*Sedunensi*, and immediately following instead of: *H. S. Potentiana* to
read: *tit. S. Pudentianae*, because since 1511 he was Cardinal-priest
of this title.

2\) They had been foisted on Luther. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX,
Introduction, p. 39 d f.

3\) Instead of *perculi* we have assumed *periculo.*

**112**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 90 to 98.

**113**

The teaching will be both salutary and already and very good. In the
meantime, be well with yours, yes, with all of ours, to the very best.
Greetings from Mr. Pfeffinger, B\[ernhard\] Hirschfeld and all other
friends. In a hurry. At Augsburg, on the Sunday after the birthday of
St. Aegidius \[Sept. 5\] 1518.

You have the venerable father Johann Staupitz as one who is very
concerned for your life, 1) as well as all the others, and others who
are exceedingly watchful for your welfare, your good name and your
dignity. Georg Spalatin.

**No. 91.**

Salzburg. September 14, 1518.

**Staupitz to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2412, annex, no. 15 b.

**No. 92.**

(Wittenberg.) September 16, 1518.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2410, annex, no. 15a.

**No. 92a.**

Ingolstadt. September 20, 1518.

**Johann Eck to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Response to No. 75 a. Luther judges in his own cause. Luther accuses him
of immodest behavior, while the most important men give him the
testimony of modesty. He would answer Luther\'s verdict in the next
letter, since the messenger was hurrying. He does not completely reject
Luther\'s answer to the Dialogus of Silvester Prierias, but he does not
approve of it in its entirety. Carlstadt is preparing a new war against
him, but he is as little afraid of him as an elephant is of a mouse. He
wishes that the quarrel in writings between them would come to an end,
so that the study of theology would be strengthened and flourish.

From a copy in the Nuremberg City Library, . No. 406, p. 12, No. 7,
printed in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 3.

**No. 93.**

(Nuremberg.) (October 3 or 4, 1518.)

**To the Wittenberg friends. (?)**

(Fragment.)

Pusillanimous people try to dissuade Luther from the trip to Augsburg,
but he remains firm.

1\) Compare Staupitzen\'s letter to Spalatin of Sept. 7, 1518. St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 551.

Printed in *Chr. Eberh. Weismanni introductio in memorabilia
ecclesiastica historiae sacrae Novi Testamenti etc.. Halae Magdeburgicae
1745. partis primae, p.* 1465; in Seidemann, \"Lutherbriefe,\" Dresden
1859, p. 1 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 238.

I have found quite a few fainthearted people in my cause,^2)^ so that
they also began to tempt me not to go to Augsburg. But I remain firm.
May the will of the Lord be done. Even at Augsburg, even in the midst of
his enemies, Jesus Christ reigns\.... Let Christ live, let Martin die,
and let every sinner die, as it is written. Let the God of my salvation
be exalted. Be at ease and persevere, because one must be rejected
either by men or by God. But God is true, but man is a liar.

**No. 94.**

Augsburg. October 10, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2412, annex, no. 16.

**No. 95.**

Augsburg. October 11, 1518.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 554, no. 189.

**No. 96.**

Augsburg. October 14, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2416, annex, no. 17.

**No. 97.**

Augsburg. October 14, 1518.

**To Carlstadt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 565, no. 199.

**No. 98.**

Augsburg. October 14, 1518.

**To the Cardinal Thomas Cajetanus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 571, no. 203.

2\) Compare Myconius\' report, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 553, no. 188.

**114**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 99 to 106.

**115**

**No. 99 .**

Augsburg. October 17, 1518.

**To Cajetan.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 589, no. 209.

**No. 100 .**

Augsburg. October 18, 1518.

**To Cajetan.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 592, no.,210.

**No. 101.**

Augsburg. October 25, 1518.

**Cajetan to the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 634, no. 237.

**No. 102.**

Wittenberg. October 31, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2408, annex, no. 14.

(Rom.)

**No. 103.**

Beginning of November 1) 1518.

**Silvester Primas to Luther.**

(Replica\'s attribution.)

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 412.

**No. 104.**

Eilenburg. November 5, 1518,

**To Spalatin.**

Spalatin had ordered Luthern to Eilenburg, but had not come himself.
Luther asked, if he would still come, to give news to the prior Zeschau
in Grimma.

The original is in the Anhaltische Gesammtarchiv. Printed by *Buddeus*,
p. 4; by Löscher, vol. II, p. 634; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 167. German
by Walch, vol. XXI, 603.

To his Georg Spalatin, the extremely honest and highly learned friend.

JEsus.

Hail! You have deceived me, my dear Spalatin, or I have understood you
nothing.

1\) For the date, see the St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, introduction,
p. 18b; the Erl. Briefw. places the writing: \"First half of September
1518.\"

2\) *non is* missing in the original.

Last night I came to Eilenburg on your word, and you did not come, while
they say you are staying in Grimma. If you will come today, I ask you to
report this to the prior of our monastery in Grimma, Wolfgang Zeschau,
if he wants to negotiate with me, because it is said that he has been
looking for me in the past days. Fare well in the Lord. Eilenburg from
the house of the bear (*Ursi*), on the day before Leonhard \[Nov. 5\]
1518.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 105.**

Wittenberg. November 12, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2420, annex, no. 19.

**No. 106.**

(Wittenberg.) 13, November 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks for game for the doctor\'s feast promised by the Elector to
Johann Frosch of Augsburg .

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Printed by Buddeus,
p. 5; by Löscher, vol. II, p. 635; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 170 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 279. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 603 f.

His Georg Spalatin zu Altenburg 2c, who was extremely favorable to him.

M. Spalatin \"zu Handen\".

JEsus.

Hail! We have tried, my dear Spalatin, that the doctor\'s banquet of the
father Johann Frosch could be brought about at some citizen\'s house,
but we fear that we are trying in vain. Therefore, so that we do not let
the man, who is most worthy of honor, go without honor, we have turned
our eyes to our monastery, and will rather provide the meal with our
burden, of course with the reservation of the prince\'s promise. For we
are in truth poor, and very many, so that we cannot do it for nothing.
Now we ask you to see to it that the prince provides us with game.

3\) See No. 102 (St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2410, § 5).

**116**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 106 to 112.

**117**

pret be supplied on Thursday, rather on Wednesday \[Nov. 17\]. If this
cannot be done, let it be done on the next following Monday \[Nov. 22\].
And what is deemed good in this matter, write back by this messenger as
soon as possible, lest we incur expense in vain. Fare well in Christ.
Saturday after Martinmas \[Nov. 13\] 1518.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

Beware lest you err in the appointed day. Thursday, I say, will be the
day of the meal, if you can procure venison; but if not, on the
following Monday; therefore, the meat must be at hand either on Saturday
or on Sunday.

**No. 107.**

(Wittenberg.) 15. November 1518.

**To D. Johann Eck.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 809, no. 359.

**No. 108.**

Wittenberg. November 19, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2418, annex, no. 18.

**No. 109.**

Wittenberg. November 19, 1518.

**To the Elector Friedrich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 637, no. 238.

**No. 110.**

Wittenberg. November 22, 1518.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther, as dean of the theological faculty, had conferred his doctorate
on Joh. Frosch, and Melanchthon had stayed away from the doctor\'s
banquet held at noon. Now, on the same day, Luther invited him to dinner
and asked him to bring D. Veit (Warbeck) and Joh. Schwertfeger with him.

From the Cyprian collection at Gotha, printed by Schütze, vol. II, p.
24; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 14; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 171 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 301.

To Philipp Melanchthon, \"Schwarzerd\", the Greek, Latin, Hebrew,
German, but never barbarian.

Hail! Today you have (which the Muse and Apollo may forgive you for)
despised both me and the new (*novellum*, as it is called) Doctor. Now,
although this matter was not entirely mine, I have forgiven you; but
because you do not appear at this hour before Doctor Andreas Carlstadt
and Licentiate Amsdorf, but especially before the Rector, not even the
Greek (*Graecitas*) will be able to excuse you, let alone Martin, that
\"little brother\", as Cajetan says. ^2)^ The new doctor believes that
he (as he likes to joke) is held in extremely low esteem as a barbarian
full of Greeks. You see what you do, for I myself have promised that you
will certainly come at this hour. You will do me a service if you come;
but I would very much like you to bring D. Veit 3) and Johann
Schwertfeger with you. For that evening I will be the host, to whom they
are very well known, indeed, very dear friends. They shall come with you
according to your judgment and advice, but primarily at my command (if
otherwise that little brother still counts for something). Farewell.

The little brother Martin Eleutherios.

**No. 111.**

(Wittenberg.) November 25, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2427, annex, no. 22.

**No. 112 .**

Wittenberg. November 25, 1518.

**To Christoph Langenmantel in Augsburg.**

Luther reports his happy return home and says thanks for the love shown
to him. About Cajetan\'s letter to the Elector and Luther\'s answer to
it, as well as about the state of his affairs, the golden rose 2c.

1\) Bartholomäus Bernhardi von Feldkirchen.

2\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 637, § 15.

31 According to Seidemann - De Wette, vol. VI, 702, this D. Veit is:
Warbeck; but ibid. p.703, according to De Wette, vol. I, p. 171,
\"Winsheim\" is retained. The latter can here

**118**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 112.

**119**

Handwritten in the Aargauer Kantonsbibliothek ans the original. Printed
in the \"Neuen literarischen Anzeiger\", Munich 1806, No. 9, Sp. 143; in
Kurz and Weissenbach, \"Beiträge zur Geschichte und Literatur\" 2c.
1846, vol. I, p. 428; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 6 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 305.

To the man of proven faithfulness, Mr. Christoph Langenmantel, Abbey
Lord, 1) his Lord, dearly beloved in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I have come home safe and sound, my dear Christoph, by God\'s
grace. But the services of your peculiar kindness and godliness, which
you have so abundantly rendered me unworthy? have made the opinion of
you and your name an exceedingly pleasant and lovely odor among our
people. For I have, as is fair, praised your faithfulness and that of
Doctor Auer^2)^ , but in doing so I did not want to glorify you, but
only to praise the example of such great faithfulness to the outsiders.
By the way, the Lord Jesus, who has given you to think, to will and to
do this, will acknowledge and approve his works in you. Pure loyalty and
sincere friendship is indeed a rare bird. Recently, the Lord Legate
wrote to our prince, 3) accusing me of having left fraudulently, and
expressing his displeasure at my having been accepted by an escort
letter.

He was born in 1501 and inscribed only in 1523 (*Alb.* p. 119). -
Schwertfeger, professor of law, later helped to produce the signatures
to the pictures of the \"Passionals\". See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV,
192 f. He died on May 10, 1524.

1\) Luther calls here Langenmantel a *Canonicus*, Seiffert on the other
hand in his genealogical tables of the family of Langenmantel, plate 2,
a Carmelite at St. Anna, which is confirmed by *Gasser, Annal. August*,
is confirmed. Others make him, probably by confusion with his father
Georg, who was nine times mayor of Augsburg, a Rathsherrn.

2\) The appeal left behind by Luther on his departure from Augsburg, St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 594, was written with the help of D. Auer; see
the introduction there, Col. 595.

3\) No. 101, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 634. This letter arrived at the
Electoral Court only on November 19, 1518, and was answered by the
Elector on Dec. 8. Dec. *Ibid.Col.* 654.

He condemns everything I have done, but most of all that I have not
recanted my invectives, especially concerning indulgences, and that I
have not spared the holiness of the pope, saying that it abuses the
Scriptures. In the end he gives the advice that he should send me to
Rome or expel me from his lands, so that he does not add a stain to his
honor because of a (so he says) very little brother. For this is what
the Jews did to Christ before Pilate, wanting to be believed before they
brought an accusation with named crimes. So he, too, said: \"Believe me,
Your Serene Highness, I speak out of certain knowledge, not out of
uncertain delusion. I will keep the rule of Jesus Christ. 4) [I
understand this as the rule of the wounded Christ,]{.underline} because
he seeks nothing but to wound the truth. The golden rose sent by the
pope (as the rumor went) to our prince is nowhere, nor has the prince
learned anything about the same. I see that the Romans have made a firm
resolution to condemn me. I, in turn, have made up my mind not to give
way. So I await the church punishments. The Lord will be a counselor and
a helper for me. When they have killed me, they will not pursue the flea
that was killed (1 Sam. 24:15). But I have answered the letter of the
Lord Legate, 5) the copy of which the Prince had sent to me, and wanted
the Legate to see meiixe answer, which should be attached to his letter.
And now my *Acta Augustana* 6) will be published, because the Prince has
advised against its publication. Other things you will learn fully from
the worthy father Prior Johann Frosch, who has recently been awarded
(*insignito*). It remains to know the awards

4\) The following words, which we have blocked out, are in brackets in
the original, which are often used to emphasize something. In the
Erlangen correspondence, it is not clear whether these and the following
are Cajetan\'s or Luther\'s words.

5\) By the letter to the Elector Frederick, No. 109 (Vol. XV, 637).

6\) The *Acta Augustana are* found in the 15th volume of our edition,
No. 176.177. 200. 224. 225 and 226. For the correct order of these
pieces, see No. 176.

**120**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 112 to 119.

**121**

to learn. 1) I wish most earnestly that Doctor Johann Auer may be well
in God, and as a grateful one I commend myself to him. Sincerely
greetings from D. Andreas Carlstadt, Nicolaus Amsdorf, Otto Beckmanu and
all acquaintances. May you also be well in Christ, who will keep you for
eternity, just as He has kept you in time. I greet the noble, and truly
noble, Johann Schenk through your mouth. Wittenberg, on the day of St.
Catherine \[Nov. 25\] 1518. Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 113.**

Wittenberg. . December 2, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 687, no. 270.

**No. 114**

(Altenburg.) December 8, 1518.

Elector Frederick of Saxony to Cajetan. See St. Louis edition, Vol. XV,
654, No. 241.

**No. 115.**

(Wittenberg.) December 9, 1618.

**To Spalatin.**

About a change in the Wittenberg curriculum.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 122b; in Löscher, vol. II, p. 640; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
190 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 312. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 605.

To his extremely dear Georg Spalatin, the protector of studies and the
liberal arts.

JEsus.

Hail! We, the Rector and I, have agreed, my dear Georg, that it seems
good with regard to the lectures, that not only the Thomistic^2)^
Physics, which Magister Gunkel is now leaving, falls, and the text

1\) The words *Signa supersunt cognoscenda* are somewhat obscure;
however, the meaning seems to us to be: Let Frosch tell you how it
happened with his doctorate.

2\) In the Interpretation of the Ten Commandments, St. Louis Edition,
Vol. Ill, 1331, Luther lists four kinds of interpreters of Aristotle\'s
books, namely the Thomists, the Scotists, the Albertists, and the
Modernists. The two

We are of the opinion that the Scotist philosophy and logic together
with the text of physics and logic are sufficient until the chair of the
Scotist sect, which teaches Magister Premsel of Torgau, falls, so that
this Magister lectures on Ovid\'s Metamorphoses instead, since he is
well versed in the fine sciences. For we think that the Scotistic
philosophy and logic together with the text of physics and logic are
sufficient until the chair of the Scotistic sect, which is just as
useless and unfortunate for good minds, falls away, if in some way the
names of the divisions are finally completely destroyed, and pure
philosophy and theology and all subjects are drawn from their sources.
We want to hear your advice in this matter. Farewell. On the day after
the Conception \[of Mary\] \[9 December\] 1518.

Brother Martin Eleutherius.

**No. 116.**

(Wittenberg.) December 9, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2433, annex, no. 26.

**No. 117.**

(Wittenberg.) II December 1518.

**To Link.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2429, annex, no. 24.

**No. 11 8.**

(Wittenberg.) December 13, 1518.

**To Staupitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2428, annex, no. 23.

**No. 119.**

Wittenberg. December 14, 1518.

**To Joh. Reuchlin.**

Luther wished Reuchlin luck for the happy consequences of his dispute,
through which many in Germany had been awakened to the study of the Holy
Scriptures. Now he followed him in the dispute, although with less
strength. At Melanchthon\'s instigation, he wrote to him.

The first ones had remained in the study plan at Wittenberg. Now, in
this letter, Luther advises to abandon also the Thomistic way of
explanation and to keep only temporarily the Scotistic one besides the
simple textual explanation of Aristotle, the *textualis lectio.*

**122**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 119. 120.

**123**

Manuscript in *Cod.* First printing in *Illustrium virorum epistolae
hebraicae, graecae et latinae ad Ioannem Reuchlin*, *Phorcensem etc.*,
printed at Hagenau by Thomas Aushelm in May 1519. Also (from the
autograph) in Löscher, vol. II, p. 643; in *Maj, vita Reuchlini, p.*
223; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 47; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 196 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 320. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 606.

Martin Luther, Augustinian, to Johann Reuchlin of Pforzheim.

The Lord be with you, exceedingly brave man! I wish you happiness for
the mercy of God that is with you, most learned and worthy man, through
which you have finally prevailed and stopped the mouths of lies \[Ps.
63,12\]. You have indeed been an instrument of divine counsel, which, as
it was unknown to you, was highly desirable to all those who are zealous
for pure theology; so much more was done by God than seemed to be done
by you. I was one of those who wished to be with you, but no opportunity
presented itself; yet with my prayers and wishes I have always been
present with you. But what was denied to the companion at that time has
now been given to the successor in the most abundant way. The teeth of
this Behemoth 1) are attacking me (Job 40, 10), if they could in any way
wipe out the disgrace they have suffered from you. I also meet them,
though with far less gifts and powers of learning than you met them with
and threw them down, but with no less confidence of heart. They refuse
to fight with me, they refuse to answer, but set out against me with
pure force and violence. But Christ lives, and I can lose nothing
because I have nothing. Not a few of the horns of these bulls have been
broken through your steadfastness. For it was through you that the Lord
worked, so that the tyrant, the sophists, finally learned to resist the
right studies of theology more cautiously and more gently, and Germany
began to breathe again through the teaching of the Scriptures, which,
alas, had not only been suppressed but also eradicated for so many
hundred years. This beginning of the very beautiful studies did not have
to be

1\) Compare Vol. XV, 612 f., § 2. Similarly Vol. VIII, 1729.

But just as God destroyed the greatest mountain of all, Christ, to the
dust of death, but from this dust so many great mountains grew up, so
you too would have borne little fruit if you had not been killed and
turned to dust, from which so many great ones in the sacred sciences are
now rising. And the prayer of the groaning church has been heard \[Ps.
12:2\]: \"Help, O Lord, the saints have decreased, and the faithful are
few among the children of men,\" for the worst among the children of men
have been exalted to the majesty of God.

But see, am I not impertinent that I speak to you so confidentially,
without an honorable preface? But this is due to my extremely servile
disposition towards you, which is also very close to you, both through
the remembrance of you and through the reading and contemplation of your
books. In addition to this, what has also moved me to finally write that
our Philipp Melanchthon, 2) an admirable person, indeed, who has almost
nothing that does not go beyond a human being, and yet is very familiar
and close friends with me, has demanded this letter to you par
excellence, and vouches that you will certainly not take it badly, but
will also recognize with gratitude whatever I blather to you. I wanted
you to attribute to him what you want to attribute to him; I only wanted
to testify to my completely sincere feelings toward you through this
letter. Farewell and be happy in the Lord, who in truth is a teacher to
be revered. Wittenberg, the day after Luciae \[Dec. 14\] 1518. 3)

**No. 120 .**

Wittenberg. December 20, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2432, annex, no. 25.

2\) The latter was a relative of Reuchlin.

3\) Reuchlin, who was always far from the cause of the Reformation,
even, several years later, harshly opposed to it, did not answer this
letter. Only once did he greet Luther through Melanchthon in a letter of
Sept. 12, 1519. (Karl Krafft and Wilhelm Krafft, Briefe und Documente,
p. 14, where the Bries is erroneously dated Sept. 13. Compare Hutten\'s
letter to Reuchlin of 22 Feb. 1521).

**124** Letters from the year 1518. no. 121. **125**

**No. 121 .**

Nuremberg. December 20, 1518.

Scheurl to Luther.

On the news of Luther\'s appeal, Scheurl gives some examples of earlier
appeals; expresses his joy that Luther has resumed his preaching
activities; reports the arrival of Pfeffinger and Miltitz and the
latter\'s attitude against Luther. He exhorts him to act thoughtfully
and not to trust in the King of France; exhortation to peace, which
Miltitz will offer him. Request to write something to Hieronymus Ebner
and to send his Sermon vom Leiden Christi.

Handwritten in *Cod. Scheurl*. C, fol. 184 (220) d. Printed in
Scheurl\'s Briefbuch, vol. II, p. 70 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. I, p.
325.

To Martin Luther. 1)

The other day, after I had received the very sad news that you had bid
farewell to the people,^2)^ appealed to a concilium, fled helplessly,
abandoned by all protection: then I suffered with many good people, but
also remembered that in Antonius, 3) Title 22, Cap. 1, § 3, Barbadorius,
for his Florentines, turned his face towards the image of God 4), had
appealed to God from the present Pope Gregory XI. to God, approximately
with these words: God, we, the envoys of the Florentine people, appeal
to you and your equity from this unreasonable judgment of your governor:
You, who cannot be deceived nor influenced by anger, who do not love the
servitude of nations, but freedom, and hate tyrants and lusts, will come
to the aid of the Florentine people, who defend their freedom, and will
graciously assist them as a protector. And what can make even more
impression: in Baptista Fulgosus, 5) \"Of memorable speeches and
deeds\", book 1, under the title: of miraculous things, in the chapter
of the knight of Jeru

1\) Scheurl sent this letter as an insert of a letter written on Dec. 19
to Otto Beckmann.

2\) See vol. XV, no. 269. 270 and ibid. annex, no. 26. - The appeal vol.
XV, no. 243.

3\) Antonius, called Antoninus because of his small figure, of Florence,
born 1389, Dominican, 1445 Archbishop of Florence, died 1459, canonized
by Hadrian VI in 1523. The passage cited here is in his *Chronicorum, P.
III. (ed. Lugd. 1586, fol.* 832). - Donatus Barbadorius was a famous
jurist and town clerk of Florence. The matter took place in Avignon in
1376.

4\) That is, the Crucifix.

5\) also called Fregoso, Campofregoso, was doge of his hometown Genoa in
1478, was deposed in 1483 and expelled to Frejus, where he died.

salemer (*Hiero\[solymitani*\]) order, I read that a Neapolitan man of
war, a Templar, in Bordeaux (*Burdegala*), which is a city of the
Basques, being condemned to death by fire, and seeing in a window
Clement V and Philip the Fair, exclaimed: You most cruel tyrant Clement,
since there is no one left to me among mortals to whom I can appeal for
the severe death penalty with which you unlawfully impose on me, I
appeal to the righteous judge Christ who redeemed us, before whose
judgment seat I call you, together with King Philip, who has advised
such a great evil that you both appear before him within a year, where I
will present my case, and justice will be administered without any ill
will, - and in the appointed time, Clement died suddenly, and not long
after, Philip was also carried off by death. This is what those writings
report.

But after a few days we heard with immense pleasure (for we love you
dearly and want you to be well) that you were well, and heard from
letters that you were preaching again, and, as is your way, had preached
extremely salutary also about the conception \[of Mary\] 6) and on
December 15 we unanimously read your Acta, also the word 7) \"I appeal\"
in large letters. On December 15, we unanimously read your Acta, also
the 7) word \"I [appeal]{.underline}\" in large letters, but I am
unwilling about the slowness of mine in sending them.

Meanwhile, Carl von Miltitz, apostolic chamber clerk, came to us with
Pfeffinger. We got to know the man five years ago, so we have spent
these two days and a large part of the night with him very
confidentially. All conversation concerned Luthern alone; hear in a few
words the short epitome of it. Carl is a Meissen knight, a German. He is
a human being; he thinks that nothing that concerns human beings is
foreign to him. He will not dispute except about one thing: that one
must not contradict the pope, but rather obey him. He does not
disapprove of the disputations, the theses, the explanations as
vehemently as the German sermon on indulgences, 8) by which he is not to
be contradicted.

6\) December 8. The sermon has not been preserved.

7\) *cancellatum*. To this the Erl. Briefw. has the note:
\"*cancellare*, actually to cross out a writing with grids (X) to make
it invalid\". It seems to us that the word (*cancellatus* here cannot
have the meaning \"crossed out\", \"crossed out\", but rather:
[highlighted]{.underline}.

8\) Sermon on Indulgences and Grace, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 270.

**126** Letters from the year 1518. no. 121. **127**

He says that Caspar of Ancona, a learned man, after reading the Sermon
of Repentance 1), which is also translated, approved more of the
invention in you. He says that Caspar of Ancona, a learned man, after
reading the Sermon on Penance 1), which is also translated, approved
more of the invention in you than of scholarship. He says that he gave
news of the \"ringing penny\"^2)^ to the pope, who indignantly
exclaimed: O *ribaldo! o porcaccio*! \[and he also rebuked Silvester
Prierias for writing so childishly; it did not take three days to
consider this, but three months, *ha dato uno bono rabuffo fr hat ihm
einen guten* Wischer gegeben\], that I use his words, and the man is
held up to ridicule. He claims that after your reply was received on the
fifth or sixth day 3) of November, Pope Leo issued a decree explaining
the *unigenitus* to Cardinal St. Sixti, and he will publish the same
with you in both languages (*utroque* sermone == Latin and German), and
that he left the rose and a sack full of graces, which further postpone
the Jubilee 2c., at Augsburg, and wants to inquire into the Prince\'s
mind. He does not deny that he is an apostolic commissioner
(lmandatarius) in this dispute, equipped with written orders, but he
goes to the Prince not as a commissarius, but as the private man of
Miltitz, at the request and promise of Pfeffinger, whether perhaps an
agreement can be reached, which in my opinion he can hope for sooner
than if the rose and the letters of grace were at hand. I have read the
letters of Leo X. and the Vice-Chancellor to Pfeffinger 5) in which they
recommend Carl \[von Miltitz\] to the man so that this weed may be
eradicated; I have read the Prince Frederick\'s) own handwritten letter
in which he orders Pfeffinger to turn to the Emperor and ask him to

1\) Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1210, there erroneously with the
year 1517 instead of: 1518. That here not, as the Erl. Briefw. thinks,
is the \"Sermon on the Sacrament of Penance,\" see Weim. Vol. II, p. 709
f.

2\) in the 27th indulgence thesis. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII,
74.

3\) In the text: *quinta vel sexta decima Novembris*, which cannot be
far from correct, since Leo\'s new Decretale is dated November 9. See
St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 631. Instead of *decima* we have assumed
*\[mensis\].*

4\) Luther\'s Response to the Dialogue of Prierias, Vol. XVIII, 344.

5\) See documents No. 251 and 252 in the 15th volume.

6\) See Vol. XV, 665, No. 247.

that he write for you to the pope; in which he praises you and the large
number of students; that it would be shameful for him to send you away
unheard, since you are willing to be instructed and corrected.
Pfeffinger says that the pope must be obeyed; you would easily have a
bishopric or some other dignity if you only recanted. The pope could not
suffer this; during the whole pontificate there had been nothing more
worrying; he had promised his own the cardinalate for Luther if they
could bring about the recantation. But I have not seen this letter, but
I have contradicted that you would recant for the sake of the pope; but
you would do it voluntarily, but in vain, if you were only taught
otherwise. What Tetzel preached we often repeat; about the souls granted
to the nuns and the men of war Carl is indignant beyond measure; he
would write it to the pope, if only it could be proven by witnesses. He
is troubled, displeased and bothered by many disputations, since he
praises you to the pope.

It only remains, excellent man, that you diligently take care of your
cause by foreseeing the future, as it were, from a vantage point, that
you do not act recklessly, that you do not act in a careless manner,
that you take care, that you are content, that you do not despise, that
you do not reject the peace that is offered to your house. Consider:
Where would you be able to go if the prince left you? Many do not trust
the French very much; Carl considers it certain that King Francis would
not stand by you for three days 7) if the pope contradicts. The Emperor
also agrees with him, who, I am told, advises you to obey the Pope.
Pfeffinger says that he has gone many thousand steps for your sake; he
will return in a month at the latest; the legate will not return for
your sake alone, he follows the emperor; he spends 1200 gold florins a
month. However great the power of truth and the Gospel, I doubt whether
any prince will finally fight with his danger. How much to trust in
this, your royal seer \[Ps. 118, 9.\] gives information about. Have the
Emperor and the Frenchman given the Cardinals, who have fallen away
\[from the Pope\], the occasion to assemble a Concilium 8) and given
orders for it? Is it then

7\) The Erl. Briefw. has by a set comma *triduo* referred to the pope.

8\) This goes back to the Concilium of Pisa in 1511.

**128** Letters from the year

1518\. no. 121. 122. **129**

that, although he had received great money, remained on the side of
Julius? And 1) the Cardinal Sanctae Crucis,^2)^ when he returned and
wanted to recant, testified to this: even if he believed that he had not
erred, he still acknowledged an error if an upset had resulted from it.

If thou desirest to be heard, that is fair; but with those ignorant of
the law, *in the* written reports (*in notoriis*) it is not necessary to
proceed according to order, where the perverse order is the highest
order, and the \"to make known and to know\" (*declarare notorium*) is
with the mighty, because the law is in arms. Your conscience moves you
to obey the Scriptures more than the pope; but to many it seems that it
is given to the pope to interpret the Scriptures, and everything must be
done prudently and wisely, consideration must be given to order, for
nothing is more detestable to our governor than worry. If the princes
refuse thee, what wilt thou do? You have shown enough what you are
capable of: Rome fears you! A wise man has always kept himself in such a
way that he sent himself into the time; the rest can be saved for a more
occasional time. I like this word: It is more praiseworthy to yield with
gain than to conquer with harm. What I have written with a sincere
heart, venerable father, I ask a friend to interpret in the best
possible way, for it is in no way intended as if I wanted you to do
something unworthy, shameful, disgraceful, but only to seek with the
utmost diligence some honorable means by which the pope and you would be
satisfied. And I do not doubt that this can be found, in view of the
obedience to which one must return, that aggravation is to be avoided,
that the pope who declares such is to be honored, and that effort is to
be expended so that the minds of the prince, the courtiers, the people
\[are\] not alienated from you. There are people who consider the appeal
all too hopeful. One must strive that Carl does not leave indignantly,
but rather that your and the university\'s cause becomes one, that they
recommend you again, that the abuses of the opponents and all that is
yours be brought to the pope either through an orator or procurator.

1\) Here we have followed the reading of the Codex: *Et*, which is
changed in the editions in *Ad.*

2\) Cardinal of the title of St. Crucis was Bernhardin Carvajal, the
soul of the Pisan Council; declared unworthy of the purple by Julius II
at the Lateran Council, reinstated to his dignity by Leo X in 1513.

so that the matter is discussed longer and kept in abeyance, whether it
could perhaps be settled, so that the lightning is not necessary, which
he \[Miltitz\] has in his hands; as I said, he is a man, he is good and
kind, he does not praise the legate; he wanted him to be there,
believing that an undeserving Carl would be sent to you by God: In such
a kind way he praises everything; he will not dispute; the man must be
dealt with kindly, lovingly, politely, if his heart can be softened, and
I have no doubt that this will happen.

Your dear friend Hieron greets you from the bottom of his heart. Ebner,
who has a share in all your fortunes; if you love us, write something to
Ebner, who is the governing mayor of the city this month, privately,
about how things stand with you, also about the affairs of war, about
the government of the community, about the administration of the
*magistracy.* I also ask you to finally send me the sermon on the
suffering of the Lord, 4) which you promised and which I desire with all
my heart. I am told that Pfeffinger goes first, Carl will follow after a
few days. Farewell, highly famous man, and love me as you do, love me,
and forgive my coarse, yet sincere pen. I have faithfully sent your
letter to Basel. If I can be of use to you, use me as a brother, for you
will find me exceedingly willing. Greetings to our Otto and our
Melanchthon. Nuremberg, 20 December 18.

Venerable Father, your most devoted C\[hristoph\] S\[cheurl\], Doctor.

**No. 122.**

(Wittenberg.) December 21, 1518.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther answered the question whether the Turkish war could be approved
and advised according to the Holy Scriptures. First, one should overcome
the internal enemies; the Pope was doing worse than the Turk. He wants
to wait in Wittenberg for the outbreak of the Roman fury. From the
sermon held in Weimar.

The original is in *Cod. Goth*. 122; manuscript in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol.
296. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 126b; in Löscher, vol. II, 645; in
De Wette, vol. I, p. 199 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 332. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 608.

3\) Instead of *immania* we have assumed in *manu.*

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. XII, 1342.

**130**

Letters from the year 1518. No. 122. 123.

**131**

His best friend, Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, but his master.

Hail! If I understand you correctly, my dear Spalatin, you ask whether I
can protect and advise a war campaign against the Turks from the Holy
Scriptures. If it is that it is not undertaken for the sake of money,
but out of a true zeal for godliness, then I confess to you that I
cannot promise this, but that I can promise the opposite in abundance. I
recently published a sermon on the same matter at the request of a
friend, which I know has come into the hands of the Brandenburg heroes
(for whose sake, I assume, it was desired by me at the time), where I
acted so that such a war would not be undertaken in any way. I am still
of this opinion, unless I change my mind through better evidence.
Erasmus is of the same opinion in many places, as you know better than I
do. I believe that if we are to fight with the Turks, we must first
begin with ourselves. We wage carnal wars abroad in vain as long as we
are overcome by spiritual wars at home.

Then, because neither in the old nor in the new testament no war has
been waged with human forces other than always with an unhappy and
ignominious outcome; but if something has gone out well, then it has
been waged from heaven, as I could prove exceedingly abundantly. But
since the Roman court nowadays surpasses the tyranny of all the Turks
(with such great abominations it fights against Christ and His Church),
and the clergy is sunk in the depths of covetousness, ambition and
indulgence, and the appearance of the Church everywhere is very
miserable, there is no hope for a good war or a happy victory. God (as
far as I can see) is fighting against us; he should first be overcome by
tears, by pure prayers, by holy life and pure faith. But of this
elsewhere.

I will undoubtedly stay in Wittenberg and wait to see what the
unfortunate Roman entity brings with it, although I hope that they will
not rush into their fury for fear of their evil conscience. About the

I will consult the legal experts on the appeal in all places.

The sermon at Weimar, 1) which you desire, I have completely forgotten,
only barely one rag is left of it; this is that I am sure that I have
acted the gospel against the hypocrites and those who deal with their
own righteousness (*justitiarios*) (as I am wont to act everything), of
whom I know at your court one particularly outstanding; but although I
do not name him, you also know him. For nothing is more harmful to the
great and powerful than this kind of people, who, although they have
learned absolutely nothing, nevertheless teach everything, even some
clergy of the angels. I wanted to counteract this intention with all due
care. This much I know. However, I will make an effort, because my
memory still holds something further, and will send it as soon as
possible; but listen! on condition that you do not also laugh at me as
an unlearned master craftsman, just as some have also laughed at me
there, because I would not have spoken anything about the angels^2)^ .
For this I have carefully kept in my memory, according to the saying
that good deeds are very easily forgotten, and that we keep insults
exceedingly firmly in our memory. For I am of the earth and know only
Christ crucified, and even this not sufficiently,^3)^ those are from
heaven and perhaps know the glorified Christ. Therefore you should not
expect anything from me about the angels. Farewell. On the day of St.
Thomas \[21 Dec.\] 1518.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 123 .**

Nuremberg. December 22, 1518. 4)

**Scheurl to Luther.**

Miltitz came with peaceful intentions, Luther also had to do something,
at least change the harsh letter to the legate Cajetan. The Cardinal was
not staying in Germany because of Luther\'s cause, but because of the

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XII, 1768.

2\) The sermon was preached on Michaelmas.

3\) In all Latin editions a punctuation mark is missing here. Only Walch
has a punctum here correctly.

4\) This date results from the position of the letter in the Codex.

**132** Letters from the years 1518 and 1519. No. 123. 124. **133**

preceding Imperial Diet. Luther may act with humility and seek the
intercession of the university.

Handwritten in *Cod. Scheurl*. 6, fol. 188 (224) d. Printed in
Scheurl\'s Briefbuch, vol. II, p. 75 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p.
335.

To Martin Luther.

My Carl \[Miltitz\] assures us that he has of course demanded the rose
for three years, and that this task has been assigned to him. He fei not
legate, but commissarius alone, but with the order that he use the
council of the legate. Forty *brevia* had been left \[by him\] at
Augsburg for the rulers of Germany, by which they are ordered to render
assistance against the unarmed; the helpful hosts will be blessed, those
who resist will be eternally damned. He will not make use of these; he
will do, as far as it can be done, what pleases the prince; he comes as
a private citizen, not as a judge, but as a friend, but to inquire what
is the prince\'s decision, what is Martin\'s opinion, what is the favor
of all. 1) He would report all this to the legate and to the pope; in
ten years the apostolic see has not had a more difficult, frightening,
anxious and humiliating 2) matter. You must do something, at least make
up for the very vehement letter to the Cardinal; he is unwilling about
the Vicarius \[Staupitz\] and your departure \[from Augsburg, without
welcoming him, as if you had him for your best. I have excused this; he
admits that you should not have returned if you had not gone into
yourself. The Cardinal says that he is not staying in Germany for the
sake of this matter, but is waiting for the assembly of princes which
will take place at Worms or Frankfort about Easter, and the Emperor has
made plans to come to Augsburg for Epiphany. In my opinion, the legate
from Linz will also follow. He says he must meet with you; he will
confer with you in the friendliest manner, there is nothing to fear.
Since this is certain, we do not yet have to fear the thunderbolts, and
not everything must be easily believed, but \[everything\] must be
handled with the greatest humility and the greatest effort must be made
that you may be heard, so that the matter may be settled,

1\) That is, whom they are favorably disposed toward, whether your pope
or Luther.

2\) In the manuscript: *reges humiliatos*. The conjecture of the
letterbook is: *res humiliantes*; we have assumed *magis humiliantosem.*

that the university and the superiors (*consules*) recommend you, you
will be a son of the Church, you will do everything you have to do and
can do with God. I do not doubt that God will give His grace, who has
never abandoned those who fear Him. Again, be well.

**No. 12 4.**

Nuremberg. I. January 1519.

**Scheurl to Luther.**

Scheurl urges caution in responding to the Prierias\' reply, especially
in dealing with the question of the Pope\'s authority. The Ebner family
sends a consecrated casel to the monastery in Wittenberg. Recommendation
of two young Nurembergers. Request for the sending of one of Luther\'s
writings.

Handwritten in *Cod. Scheurl*. C, fol. 193 (229). Printed in Scheurl\'s
Briefbuch, vol. II, p. 81 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 338.

To the Lord Martin Luther.

Hail! I have no doubt that you read the letter I recently gave to
Pfeffinger for you, venerable Father, 3) in the same spirit as we wrote
it, that is, my friendly, faithful, devoted and completely sincere one.
Meanwhile, I would have sent the replica 4) of the New Year\'s Eve, if
Wenceslaus \[link\] had not preceded our service. I would like you to go
to the port. Of indulgences the talk began; \[now is\] the spiteful
disputation of the pope\'s violence, the judges are suspicious. He who
postpones, does not cancel. Enough has been shredded in danger. Believe
me, in a short time there will be another and more convenient time to
discuss these things. I do not doubt that you will answer against the
Prierias in the most humble way, so that we will be seen as people who
seek what is JEsu, not what is ours; but what does the sow teach the
goddess of wisdom? But consider also your order, and I ask you to
carefully guard yourself against reproaches, to despise nothing; show
this to the fatherland and the community. If the Trent, Bernhard
Clesius, 5) becomes Commissarius, I think, no suspicion is to be
entertained. He is a learned and good man in the law, and after the

3\) This is the letter of December 20, 1518, No. 121.

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 412.

5\) In the manuscript: (*Gleser*. Bernhard Clesius (de Clos, also
Glesius) from Tyrol, councillor of Maximilian I and promoted by him to
Bishop of Trento in 1514, later one of the more important councillors of
Carl V, Cardinal in 1530. He died in 1539.

**134**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 124 to 128a.

**135**

who had been our fellow student for a long time, was finally appointed
our successor in the Bologna Syndicate. Through the letters of certain
people I have learned that Adrian and Urbino, deprived of the
cardinalate, the priesthood and the dukedom, have fled to the Turks with
a large amount of gold and have fallen away. Ebner and his men are
sending your monastery a consecrated casel, which you can use for
worship; if we once make trouble \[for you\], we will send greater
things. Meanwhile he \[Ebner\] commands you his nephew Conrad Volckamer,
2) and also I Joh. Tücher, the son; see to it that we can consider them
both safe. For the head of the family, Mr. Hieronymus Ebner, is
extraordinarily devoted to you. He holds Martin so dear that he
considers your fate to be his, so that those who send him yours send him
the most pleasant. We therefore expect your comments on Paul, \[your\]
flattery against Rome, 3) at least a private gift, and also letters from
you. I wish in the name of the wife, of the son, who has the same name
as the father, and in the name of all of us, that it may go well with
you in Christ Jesus. Nuremberg, January 1, 19, C\[hristoph\]
S\[cheurl\], D.

**No. 125.**

(Altenburg.) (January 4 or 5, 1519.)

**Luther\'s transcript for the negotiations with Miltitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 691, no. 276.

**No. 126 .**

(Altenburg.) (January 5 or 6, 1519.)

To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 696, no. 279.

1\) Adrian Casteleschi, named after his birthplace Corneto ; since 1503
Cardinal tit. 8t. He let

In 1517, he joined the conspiracy of Cardinal Petrucci against the life
of Leo X, received a pardon, but was sentenced to a fine of 10,000
thalers and fled from Rome; where to? is uncertain. - The \"one of
Urbiuo\" is Francis Maria della Rovers, Lord of Sinigaglia and Duke of
Urbino, nephew of Julius II.

2\) The same was the son of Ebner\'s sister, Margaretha.

3\) This could be the answer to Prieria\'s replica that Luther was
expecting, which, as we see above, Scheurl knew had reached Luther\'s
hands through Wenceslaus Link.

**No. 127.**

(Altenburg.) (January 6 or 7, 1519.)

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 698, no. 280.

**No. 128.**

Leipzig. January 7, 1519. 4)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends him the replica of the Prieria, but soon asks for it back
because he only has this one copy.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 233. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 3; by Löscher, vol. II, p.
597; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 209 (in all these prints under the year
1518) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 344. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
586 (also 1518).

His Spalatin, priest of Christ, librarian to the Prince of Saxony.

JEsus.

Hail! The note you asked for, my dear Spalatin, is not with me; I will
see if it is at Wittenberg and send it. By the way, I am sending the new
larvae of Silvester 5) from Rome, which I have now received through the
Nurembergers. As soon as you have read them, send them back to
Wittenberg immediately, so that I, as the friends advise, either answer
or remain silent. I have only this one copy. Farewell. Leipzig, January
seventh. 6) Martin Eleutherius.

**No. 128a.**

Leipzig. January 7, 1519.

**To Johann Eck. 7)**

Luther informs him that the theological faculty at Leipzig has refused
permission for the disputation. He expects him to prove that even the

4\) On this timing, see St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, Introduction, p.
18 b f. and p. 17, note 2.

5\) The Replica, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 412.

6\) The original has no year. Löscher correctly names the replica in his
table of contents, but nevertheless places the letter in the year 1518.
Despite the *novas larvas,* De Wette is under the misapprehension that
this is the *[Dialogus]{.underline}*.

7\) Eck mentions this letter in his *Dispututio et excusatio etc.,* St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 818 f. Until now it was thought to be lost,
compare Seidemann, Leipziger Disputation, p. 26. According to this, l.
c. Col. 813, note 6 to be corrected.

**136** Letters from the year 1519. No. 128a. **137**

Luther argues that the foundations in his \"Explanations\" are not valid
because he relies solely on Tauler, whom the church does not know.
Luther takes Tauler\'s side.

According to a copy in the Nuremberg City Library, No. 406, p. 7, No. 4,
printed in Erlanger Briefwechsel, Vol. V, p. 4.

Martin Luther to Johann Eck, one of the first philosophers and
theologians, the famous man, pro-chancellor at Ingolstadt, his lord and
superior.

We have tried many times, my dear Eck, that the Leipzig gentlemen would
like to grant us the permission you write about, but they simply refuse,
claiming that it is not in their power to perform this service in this
matter, but that this decision is up to the ordinaries. For this is how
the Dean of Theology answered my letter; hence it is that this
disputation (as I fear) will be thwarted if you do not have another
council. By the way, I expect, and indeed very eagerly, what you promise
\[darzuthun\] that you have found that in my \"explanations\" 1) even my
fundamentals are useless. For you wonder that I have preferred the one
Tauler, you say: \"I do not know whom,\" your Thomas, to Bonaventure, to
Alexander 2) 2c. and it seems ridiculous to you that I demand that this
one of you be accepted with me, who, moreover, is unknown to the church,
while I have rejected so many men. But I beg you to read him through
before you declare him a dreamer, unless you too, through the lukewarm
habit of doing trivial things, are one of those exceedingly clever
people who call the pope, the bishops, or the teachers of the
universities the church, and immediately declare everything that may be
unknown to them to be unknown to the church, although I wonder who may
have told you that he is unknown to the church. But you are the church,
everything is known to you! Do you not see, 3) how you presume on such
things, which you have not considered, and make them

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 100.

2\) Alexander of Haies (*Alesius*), died 1245.

3\) Instead of *vides neque soleas*, we have assumed *videsne quae* or
vielesne *quam.*

you are in the habit of condemning? Therefore, if you want to admonish
me, I ask you to apply sharpness of judgment and carefully consider
every detail. Consider that I knew very well that he was unknown to your
church, since I said that I did not have him in the public schools, nor
was he written in Latin; then, in what way I preferred him to the
scholastics, namely that I learned more from this one than from all the
others. How wisely you have passed by these words of mine 4)! And yet I
do not know what thunderbolts you had finally promised by attacking my
unlearnedness, as if I had not read or known yours either, but you at
least knew yours; of mine, however, you say: \"I do not know whom. But
now, that you may know whom? 5) Read first, lest you be found an
unrighteous judge, condemning that which you do not know. And so that I
do not demand what is beyond your powers, I do not wish that you, with
the help of all and every one of your scholastics, write even one sermon
equal to that man\'s; I do not demand that, because I am sure that this
is impossible for you. But for this alone I urge you: use all the powers
of your intellect with all the fullness of your scholastic erudition,
and all that you are and have, whether you can understand one or the
other of his sermons correctly. Then we will believe you that that man
is a dreamer, but you alone are a waking man, or at least one who
slumbers with open eyes. I am writing this, my dear Eck, because I do
not want you to take the trouble to admonish me in vain, but to put into
action something that cannot be overturned by me and that drives me to
change my mind, that is, something worthy of your talent and effort, so
that we both do not spend our time in a bad way. Farewell, my dear Eck.
At Leipzig, January 7, 1519.

4\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 150.

5\) We have placed the comma after *quem.* The Erlangen correspondence
reads: *ut non nescias*, *quem legas* prius etc..

6\) Instead of *egaet* we have assumed *urgeat.*

**138** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 129. 130. **139**

**No. 129 .**

Wittenberg. January 10, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports that a young man suitable for the Hebrew professorship
has arrived in Wittenberg and asks for Spalatin\'s advice. He wishes to
have back some writings and the letter of the Elector to the legate.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 22 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol.46. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 137 k; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 952 (8 Jan.); in De Wette, vol. I,
p. 209 (11 Jan.) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 346. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 614 (wrong: Tuesday instead of: Monday).

To the worthy man, the highly famous protector, Georg Spalatin, in the
Lord Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I came to Wittenberg and found a man who wants to teach Hebrew (he
is almost still a youth) and is quite learned. 1) For at the hour when I
arrived, he immediately delivered a Latin speech decorated with Hebrew,
and he pleased \[us\], and therefore it seemed good to us that if that
old man 2) ever brings about his resignation, this one will be accepted
in his place, and his resignation will be permitted. Perhaps the Lord
also takes care of our university and deliberates without us. Therefore,
answer as soon as possible what seems good to the most noble prince.

You also want to send back Silvester\'s forest ignorance, and add your
advice whether I should strike again; also the dialogue of Lucian, which
was sent to you from Leipzig. But listen! I have forgotten the copy of
the letter, both in Latin and in German, which the most noble prince
wrote to the legate 3) and left it at Altenburg in your house; I need it
urgently. I have learned that the German letter is with many, but with
the highest praise and admiration.

1\) Bartholomäus Caesar from Forchheim near Bamberg. He did not come to
Wittenberg.

2\) Böschenstein. He had first recommended Caesar, but had suddenly
turned into the opposite, since he did not want to leave Wittenberg.

3\) No. 114.

4\) Spalatin\'s apartment as a canon in Altenburg was under the castle.
There Luther negotiated with Miltitz.

for the prince; all of them raise extraordinarily the good head and the
extremely fine chest of the prince. For the letter is not only made
known to Amsdorf from my copy, but also from yours, which you lent to D.
Hieronymus at Jena 5). Farewell. Wittenberg, about an hour after I came
home, on Monday after Epiphany \[Jan. 10\] 1519. Martin Eleutherius.

**No. 130 .**

(Wittenberg.) January 13, 1519.

**To Scheurl.**

Luther writes that he himself would like to see the dispute ended, but
it is not possible because the adversaries seduce by force. He would not
answer Prierias; he had reached a peaceful agreement with Miltitz.

The original is in the Scheurl family archive. Printed by Schwarz in his
program, Altorf 1741, p. 13; by Schütze, vol. II, p. 25; by
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 49; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 211 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I, p. 348. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 615.

To the highly experienced and extremely learned man in law, Doctor
Christoph Scheurl, the Nuremberg commonwealth\'s advocate, his very
faithful \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I have stolen this hour from myself and my business; I am writing
at last, lest, with so many letters from you, I should appear
ungrateful, and as if I never wished to answer. Now I thank you most
sincerely for the advice of your real and true friendship and for your
concern for me. But I would gladly have an end to this unrest if the
same could be seen in the adversaries. For they have set themselves (as
I see) to bring the matter to an end not with kindness but only with
violence and noise. Hence it is that from day to day they stir up
greater things and toil in vain. For by force they will never be
subdued, that I know.

5\) There, the Elector and Duke John of Saxony held a meeting with
others, as D. Schurf, Spalatin 2c., in order to give your legate a final
answer regarding the requested help for the Turks. See No. 117 (St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, appendix, No. 24).

**140**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 130 to 136.

**141**

enough. Through kindness, I know, it would have an end. To Silvester\'s
antics, if they originate otherwise from Silvester, it does not seem at
all worthwhile for us to respond, for they are childish and effeminate
and nothing other than lamentations of his pain. With Carl \[Miltitz\] I
have agreed most amicably, 1) first, that this matter be completely
covered with silence on both sides; second, that by order of the pope
some bishop of Germany report the erroneous articles to me, which I
should revoke. But if God does not intervene, nothing will happen,
especially if they should begin to press me with that new decree 2)
which I have not yet seen; but I have heard that it speaks of a complete
authority \[of the Pope\], without any confirmation of Scripture or the
Canons, which I certainly cannot grant to anyone, not even to the oldest
decree. Who knows what God has set before Himself to bring forth from
these monstrosities. I, as much as there is in me, am not afraid of it,
nor do I wish the matter to be dragged out. There are still many things
that can set the Roman swamp in motion, which I would like to suppress,
if they allow it. But if God does not want them to allow it, then let
the will of the Lord be done. To Ebner\'s patrons I wish from the bottom
of my heart good health and say thanks for the casel received. I hope
that your Nuremberg \[young people\] will correspond to your wishes in
the best possible way, since they are both under the best teachers and
attend the most select lectures. Fare well in the Lord, and cast your
care also for me upon the Lord, that you may not be too anxious for me.
January 13, 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 131.**

(Wittenberg.) January 14, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2385, annex, no. 5.

1\) See No. 127 (St. Louis edition, Vol. XV, 698, No. 280).

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 626, no. 234.

**No. 132.**

(Leipzig.) January 18, 1519.

**Dungersheim to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 462.

**No. 133.**

Wittenberg. After January 18, 1519.

**To Hieronymus Dungersheim.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 470.

**No. 13 4.**

(Wittenberg.) January 19, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 708, no. 284.

**No. 135 .**

(Wittenberg.) On or after January 19, 1519. To the Elector Frederick of
Saxony. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1726, no. 536.

**No. 136.**

(Wittenberg.) January 20, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Intercede for Peter Elen as he seeks a parish position.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 237. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 6; by Löscher, vol. Ill, p.
954; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 213 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 370.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 644.

To George the Divider,^3)^ the one initiated into truth, his \[friend\]
sincerely to be loved in Christ.

**JEsu s.**

Hail! Overcome, I pray thee, even thou the impetuous attempts of men.
For this is how God has ordered us, so that we are forced to be of the
greatest service to the impetuous. There is here a measuring pope, who
has been

3\) This means: \"von Spalt\", because Georg Burkhardt (Burckardt)
called himself after his birthplace [Spalt]{.underline} an der Rezat iü
Mittelfrauken [Spalatin]{.underline}. In the original there is xxxxxxxx
(after analogy of the nominative xxxxxxxx). De Wette and the Erl.
Briefw. have changed this to xxxxxxxx.

**142** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 136. 137. **143**

Most noble prince the small priestly position, which is now vacant \"in
Peltz\" 1); Peter Elen has asked that I address the prince in his name.
But you alone are a shore to me, and, to speak with Homer, a sandbank in
the inhospitable sea. Therefore, whatever foam and mischief this sea of
mine brings me, I hurl at you alone. I know the man well enough, but I
have not wanted to press so hard as to heap trouble upon trouble. You
will do what God will give you. Be well. On the day before the feast of
St. Agnes, virgin and martyr \[20 Jan\].

Martin Eleutherius.

**No. 137.**

(Wittenberg.) January 24, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends Spalatin an instruction on how to confess. His view of the
so-called memorial at Mass. About letters from Miltitz. Melanchthon
teaches Hebrew. Luther asks for help in collecting the interest for the
monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 23 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 47. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 138 d; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 955; in De Wette, vol. l, p.
214 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 371. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
618.

To His exceedingly dear Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant and priest,
His superior and preferable in the Lord.

. JEsus.

Hail! I send what you have wanted, yes, what I have been able to, about
the employment of the confession. 2) You see what I have accomplished. I
also enclose a small disputation about which we are still in dispute.
But how completely true I consider it, you will see in all that, where
it is brought with the ecclesiastical affairs by the frogs of Egypt, yes
rather by the Egyptians.

But that you desire a form to celebrate the (so-called) memorial in the
mass:

1\) \"Peltz\" - Beltitz, Belzig, 5\^ German miles southwest of
Potsdam. - *Alb*. x. 24 (winter term 1507): *Petrus Elen de Beltitz,
dioc. Brandenburg*.

2\) The \"short instruction on how to confess. St. Louis Edition, Vol.
X, 2158.

I beg you, do not let these trifles trouble you. Pray for those whom the
Lord will give you, and keep your mind free in these matters. This
matter is not so great that it would be necessary to bind the spirit of
freedom anew by decrees and statutes; the mass of the already abundant,
all too much, mighty statutes is sufficient.

I have not yet seen any of Carl\'s \[von Miltitz\'s\] last letters;
perhaps you were wrongly informed that he had written two letters to me.
Our Philip teaches the Hebrew sciences, as with greater fidelity, so
also with greater fruit than that John, 3) the apostate, that is, the
runaway. Man\'s faithfulness and diligence are so great that he hardly
allows himself any time.

I would finally like to know what I can write back from you for Herr
Sigismund von Chlumma.

And finally, to remember us, although I do this only reluctantly,
Christoph Bressen, our interest man in Motterwitz, who lives under the
Leisniger Amt, has long since failed to pay us the interest owed. For
the past year he has not yet fully paid, and now in the new year the
later interest is piling up on top of the earlier. I have spared the man
so that I would not bring him into disfavor with the most illustrious
prince, but the extraordinary danger in which both the matter and we
stand forces me to trouble the prince again. Therefore I ask you to do
something for us in this matter. The sum of the interest owed to us,
both taken together, amounts to 120 florins, and we are poor, as you
know, and, what is worse, we have many debts. Help us, therefore, but in
such a way that the prince\'s mind, as much as it is possible, is not
upset against the man. I know that the debt will be attributed to us,
which we have sold, but we again attribute it to God, since he has
taught us to care little for temporal things and to act in good faith.
According to the flesh we have been foolish, but perhaps God has
revealed His wisdom in this way.

3\) Böschenstein. Luther\'s verdict on him can be found in his letter to
Joh. Lang of April 13, 1519.

**144** Letters from the year 1519. no. 137 to 142. **145**

as he is wonderful in all his works, holy with the saints, perverse with
the perverse. Be well and answer. On the day before St. Paul\'s
(conversion) (Jan. 24), of the chosen armor in Christ our Savior, 1519.

Martin Eleutherios.

**No. 138.**

(Leipzig.) (End of January ? 1519.)

**Dungersheim to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 472.

**No. 139.**

Wittenberg. End of January or beginning of February 1519.

**To Andreas Carlstadt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 810, no. 361.

**No. 140.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. February 1519.

**To Joh. Sylvius Egranus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2440, annex, no. 30.

**No. 141.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. February 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2467, annex, no. 43.

**No. 142.**

(Wittenberg.) \' February 7, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

About changes in the curriculum of the university and an increase in
Melanchthon\'s salary. About Eck\'s disputation note, in which his
hostile behavior against him was shown, and that it could become serious
against Rome.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A No. 24 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 48. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 142; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 958; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
221 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p. 411. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 620.

To the esteemed Georg Spalatin, his best friend who is highly esteemed
in the Lord. JESUS.

Hail! That we are concerned for our educational institution, and you, my
dear Spalatin, with Ge

I hope that you will suffer not only with equanimity, but also with a
grateful mind. We repeat, however, what we said the other day 1) about
the abolition of such lectures, which take up good hours without
benefit, and the introduction of better ones, especially of Ovid\'s
Metamorphoses, and the increase of the salary for our Philip, by giving
up a lecture on physics, and that the salary for this be added to his
salary, which we believe we have mentioned to you. 2) Now, so that the
matter does not grow cold, or (as mau likes to say) become old iron (*in
spongium cadat*), we ask you to let what the Lord has begun through you
also be carried out through you, so that an unfortunate fate does not
intervene and frustrate your godly wish.

By the way, our corner, the little fame animal,^3)^ has published a
note, 4) in which he wants to dispute against Carlstadt after Easter in
Leipzig. And since the man, in his inconsistent, crooked way of acting,
wants to make up for his already lukewarm spite against me, he hurls
himself against me and my writings: he names one as his opponent, with
whom he wants to argue, but he attacks another, who has to deal with
this matter. I dislike the so cowardly hypocrisy of this man, that is
why I have published a rebuttal against him, as you will see in this
print 5). Perhaps Eck will be the cause that this matter, which has so
far only been treated playfully, will finally be treated seriously, and
the Roman tyranny will be unfortunate. Fare well in the Lord, 1519, the
day after Dorothea \[Feb. 7\].

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

1\) In Letter No. 115.

2\) Already on Dec. 8, 1518, Carlstadt had asked Spalatin for a salary
supplement of 20 florins for Melanchthon.

3\) *animalcuIum gloriae*. Compare Vol. XV, 2442, § 5 at the end.

4\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 26.

5\) This is Luther\'s letter to Carlstadt, No. 139, to which twelve
counter-theses by Luther were attached. See Vol. XV, 810 f.

**146**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 143 to 148.

**147**

**No. 14 3**

(Wittenberg.) February 12, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2390, annex, no. 6.

**No. 1 44.**

(Wittenberg.) (February 12, 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

Probably enclosure to the previous letter. See St. Louis edition, vol.
VIII, 258. on the locations, Erl. Briefw., vol. I, 414 to be added\...,

**No. 145.**

Basel. February 14, 1519.

**Joh. Frobenius to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1374, no.425.

**No. 146.**

Basel. February 18, 1519.

**Capito to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 689, no. 272.

**No. 146a.**

Wittenberg. February 18, 1519.

**To Johann Eck.**

Luther says that it is now proven by public evidence that Eck\'s
friendship was a pretense. He points out Eck\'s ambiguous behavior, that
the latter, while pretending to want to dispute with Carlstadt about
penance, is rather raging against Luther about indulgences. He asks him
to determine the date of the disputation.

According to a copy in the Nuremberg City Library, No. 406, p. 1, No. 1
in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 6.

Martin Luther, Augustinian at Wittenberg, wishes the highly learned
theologian Johann Eck, Pro-Chancellor of the University of Ingolstadt,
his superior in Christ,

Hail and that he finally ceases to seduce the Christian people! I am
sorry, dear Eck, that finally, through such obvious evidence, your
friendship towards me is found to be a hypocritical one. You boast that
you seek the glory of God, the truth, the salvation of souls, the growth
of faith, and you teach about indulgences, the abatement of the truth,
and the redemption of the faith.

of faith, salvation and the glory of God. Your head is so nailed up and
your brain so clouded that, as the apostle says \[1 Tim. 1:7\], you
neither understand what you say nor what you say, and (that I may use
your logic) you do not even know how to pronounce the predicate of the
subject. Either hatred against me or the desire for fame has pushed you
into this blindness. Therefore, you must ascribe the fact that you are
now called a loutish man and a sophist in the whole world to your
intemperate behavior, not to me, who was so concerned about you that I
first suppressed my asterisms for your sake and made an effort to
reconcile \[you\] with Carlstadt. You, as a fighter for the
\[indulgence\] graces, pay for all this quite nicely, and since you want
to dispute with Carlstadt about penance, you rage against me about
indulgences, that is, about the remission of penance, and take things
completely opposite to the matter. You may think what kind of man might
do such things! By the way, I want you to fix the day for the
disputation, or indicate it, if you want me to fix it. Everything else
at the disputation. Farewell. Wittenberg, February 18, 1519.

**No. 147.**

Leipzig. February 19, 1519.

**The University of Leipzig to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 836, no. 367.

**No. 148.**

Wittenberg. February 19, 1519.

**To Duke George of Saxony.**

Luther asks that he be admitted to the Leipzig disputation.

From the original in the Dresden Main State Archives in J. K.
Seidemann\'s Thomas Münzer. Dresden und Leipzig l842. 8., p. 159; in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 10 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56,
second supplement, p. I.

1\) Instead of *intemeritati*, which gives no sense, we have adopted
intemperiei.

2\) In the transcript: *Obeliscos*.

3\) In the manuscript, there is an \"illegible word here: *mistes*?
*misces?*\" We have assumed *miles.*

**148** Letters from the year 1519. no. 148 to 151. **149**

To the noble, highborn prince and lord, Lord George, Duke of Saxony,
Landgrave of Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen 2c., my gracious lord and
patron.

JEsus.

My submissive prayers and humble wishes are always before Eurn F. G..
Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! The worthy Doctor Johannes
Eckius writes how he is planning to hold a disputation at Leipzig in E.
F. G. University. F. G. University against the worthy Doctor Andream
Carlstadt and graciously grant it.

But because Doctor Johannes Eckius calls out to dispute against Doctor
Carlstaden, and yet the same article, little challenged, falls into my
position with all seriousness, it will behoove me to receive the unarmed
giant and to represent my position or to let myself be taught the
better. Therefore, my humble prayer to E. F. G. is that E. F. G. will
graciously grant such a disputation for the sake of truth. For the
worthy gentlemen of the university have written to me, as they promised
Doctor Joh. Eckio, which I had heard from him earlier. But that they
credit me with having let my disputation go out before I asked E. F. G.
for it, happened out of confidence, E. F. G., and hoped that E. F. G.
would not deny it to me, especially if they had already promised Doctor
Eckio, as he boasts. Please, E. F. G. will graciously forgive and pardon
me for this. God will mercifully save and keep E. F. G., amen. Given at
Wittenberg, on the 19th day of Februarii 1519.

E. F. G.

Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian
Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian
Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian
Augustinian Augustinian Augustinian.

**No 149.**

Ingolstadt. February 19, 1519.

**Joh. Eck to Luther.**

See St. Louiser Augsabe, vol. XV, 842, no. 372.

**No. 150.**

Wittenberg. February 20, 1519.

**To Staupitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2442, annex, no. 31.

**No. 151.**

Wittenberg. February 20, 1519.

**To Scheurl.**

About a dialogue between Pope Julius and the apostle Peter; about Eck\'s
open hostility. Recommendation of Ulrich Pinder; of the undertakings of
the Swabian League against Ulrich of Würtemberg.

Printed in Schwarz\' Programm, Altorf 1741, p. 14; in Schütze, vol. II,
p. 27; in Strobel-Ranner, p. 51; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 230 and in
Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 432. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 622.

To the highly learned and knowledgeable jurist, Doctor Christoph Scheurl
of Nuremberg, his very dear patron.

JEsus.

Hail! I accuse myself sufficiently, best Doctor, that I, so often
greeted by you, nevertheless write to you only rarely, but again I
excuse myself with the fact that I am prevented by so many, almost
monsters of business. The very learned dialogue between Julius and
Peter 1) was exceedingly pleasant to me. It contains indeed much fruit,
if it is read with seriousness. I am sorry that it is not known in Rome;
I would almost like to wish for its publication, since it does not
reveal the abominations of the Roman court at first, but confirms those
that have been known everywhere for a long time, unfortunately, so that
even through such antics the Roman great ones would be reminded of their
tyranny and exceedingly ungodly sacrilege, which they see being
practiced throughout the world.

Our corner, which has hitherto hidden its nonsense against me quite
nicely, has finally revealed it. See what it means for

1\) Luther (St. Louis edition, vol. I, 1618, § 5) considers Erasmus to
be the author, as does Mathesius (St. Louis edition, p. 12), also
Scheurl (Briefbuch, vol. II, p. 42), but Erasmus rejects the authorship
from himself. *Bindseil, Colloquia, tom. II, p. 115,* gives the title
thus: *lulius. Dialogus viri cuiuspiam eruditissimi, festiuus, sane ac
elegans, quomodo lulius II. P. M. post mortem coeli fores pulsando, ab
ianitore illo D. Petro, intromitti nequiuerit: quamquam dum uiueret
sanctissimi, atque adeo sanctitatis nomine appellatus totque bellis
feliciter gestis praeclarus, dominum coeli futurupa se esse sperarit.
Inter- locutores. lulius. Genius. D. Petrus. Lector, risum cohibe.*
3-1/2 sheets. Small octavo, no year. According to the Erl. Briefw.,
*F\[austi\] A\[ndrelini\] F\[oroliviensis\] Poetae Regii libellus de
obitu Julii P. M. is* meant. Are both the same writing? Compare also
Tischreden, cap. 27, s 4. St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 846.

**150** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 151. 152. **151**

is a human being. But God, who is in the midst of the gods, knows what
he wants to bring out of this heavy trade (*tragoedia*). In this matter
we will not be of service to each other in anything, neither Eck to
himself, nor I to myself. It seems to me that God\'s counsel is being
carried out here. I have often said that I have been playing so far, now
we will finally get serious against the Roman pope and the Roman
arrogance.

I recommend our Ulrich Pinder, an extraordinarily righteous and learned
man, to you most earnestly. For your own sake, because he is your
compatriot, you will also recommend him to the senators, whether their
lordships might deign to invest him with any office. We hear that the
great men of the Swabian Confederation have set out against the
Würtemberg prince. This is a beginning of trouble. May God not punish us
in anger, but chastise us in mercy, amen. Greet all of our people. Fare
well in the Lord. Wittenberg, February 20, 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 152 .**

Wittenberg. February 20, 1519.

**To Wilibald Pirkheimer in Nuremberg.**

Luther recommends Ulrich Pinder to him; comments on Eck, likewise on the
Basel printing of his writings, in which Prierias is mocked.

From the original first printed by *Theod. Frid. Freytag, virorum
doctorum epistolae selectae etc.. Lips*. 1831, p. 18; in De
Wette-Seidemann,vol. VI, p. 12 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. I, p. 435.

To the in every way highly respected man, Mr. Wilibald Pirkheimer, 1)
Patrician, Nuremberg Councilor, Doctor, his highly revered patron.

JEsus.

Hail! I have sent my trifles to you, highly learned man. 2) Now, while

1\) Wilibald Pirkheimer, from an old Nuremberg Patrician family, born in
Eichstedt on Dec. 5, 1470, was a city councilor from 1504 to 1522 and
frequently represented Nuremberg at the Imperial Diet. His house was the
center of Nuremberg scholars. Initially enthusiastic about the
Reformation, he later withdrew from it more and more for selfish
reasons. He died as a private citizen on Dec. 22, 1530.

2\) Freytag (in Dorpat) assumes the \"instruction on several articles,
which are imposed and attributed to him by his patrons\", St. Louis
edition, Vol. XV, 699.

I have answered too slowly before, I will write first. My love and
intimate acquaintance with Ulrich Pinder, a righteous, honorable and
also learned man, has driven me to recommend him diligently to you,
worthy Lord, since he needs an office and your kindness. If he deserves
to be given an income or a small priesthood in your excellent senate, I
ask and beg for it, if you are able to do something; but you are able to
do a lot. But I ask first for me, that after your kindness you bear this
my impetuous behavior with equanimity; then for him, because man is
worthy of the favor and service of a good man.

By the way, I received the tendril 3) of my exceedingly lovely corner
with great thanks. I send again what I opposed to him. As you can see,
the matter is directed against the holy canons, that is, against the
unholy corruptions of holy scripture, which I have long desired, but
have not dared to advance of my own free will. The Lord draws me, and I
do not follow unwillingly. If the Roman court has suffered over the
dying indulgence, what will it do when (God willing) the decrees give up
their ghost? Not that I will raise a cry of victory before victory,
trusting in my powers, but that I will place my confidence in the mercy
of God, who is angry against human statutes. I will maintain and confess
the authority and majesty of the pope, but I will not suffer the
corruptions of the holy scriptures.

I believe that you have seen my trifles printed at Basel, which are
decorated with such great wit and learned noses for New Year\'s Eve that
they are beginning to please me, too. So much indeed have those very
good alchemists made gold out of copper. These jokes will increase the
torment of the Roman flatterers. They call the Silvester exceedingly
wittily the cook (*magirum*) of the palace instead of *Magistrum
palatii, by a* so lovely as well as learned \[print-\]

3\) The disputation theses of Eck. Luther sent his counter-theses, which
were attached to the letter to Carlstadt (Vol. XV, 810).

**152** Letters from the year 1519. no. 152. 153. 154. **153**

I believe that he, too, has written something that is more similar to a
cook than to a theologian. Greetings from Philip, for I believe that he
also wrote. 1) Farewell. Wittenberg, February 20, 1519.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 153.**

Wittenberg. Feb. 23, 1519.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony, together with the Rector and the
Professors of the University:**

About improvements in the curriculum of the university; about
Melanchthon\'s salary increase and request for a printer.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* pag. 124, ZZ. The same
has no personal signatures, but is provided with Luther\'s larger seal.
Printed in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, second supplement, p. V ff,
no. 832, and in De Wette- Seidemaun, vol. VI, p. 13.

To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Fridrichen, Duke
of Saxony 2c, our most gracious lord.

Most Serene, Highborn Elector! Your Lord is preceded by our prayers to
God with submissive and obedient service. Most gracious Lord! After we
have so manifoldly found out and daily experienced E. C. G.\'s great
favor and inclination towards this laudable E. C. G. University, and
having always shown a kind patron and father, we are comfortingly moved
and caused with all confidence to give E. C. G. what we want. C. G. what
may be of more use, praise and honor to the named E. C. G. University,
hoping to show E. C. G. a submissive favor, obedient service. There is a
Thomistic lecture, namely in Physica, which itzo Magister Johannes
Gunckel reads, which we consider good to do away with completely as an
unnecessary one, so that the same Magister Johannes Gunckel reads textum
Aristotelis for the completed lecture, at her pay, as our Rector
Magister Bartholomäus Bernhardt read it until now. And that the pay of
the completed lection would be given to Magister Philippo

1\) Melanchthon did not write to Pirkheimer until the following day, and
that was a Greek letter. See *Corp*. *Ref.*, Vol. I, 67.

for the sake of his faithful, surpassing diligence. For although he did
not seek this and he is highly famed in E. C. G.\'s favor and grace, it
should nevertheless behoove us to apply and present such his diligence
gratefully to E. C. G., so that he may honor us beyond measure and
praise the university far and wide. Above this is another Lection
Thomistica in Logica, which is read by Magister Jacobus Premßel for 20
Flor. Pay. It would be our wish that such wages and hours would be
fruitfully spent and that the same lecture would be transformed into
*Ovidium Metamorphoseon libr*. 2), so that there would be enough of the
Scotistic and textual Logica and Physica, and the youth would not be
overloaded with so many of the same lecture and prevented from
improving, especially since there are so few auditors and students. We
present all of this only in E. C. G.\'s concern and pleasure, since we
also find some of the university not entirely inclined to it. It is also
considered good by many that we have an honest printer here in
Wittenberg, for this should not be of little benefit to the university
and to E. C. G.. C. G. honor. The text of Aristotle and other lectures
could be promoted with it, which otherwise, without books, might not be
so comprehensible and useful. God wants E. churf. G. to live long and
save blessedly, Amen.

Datum Wittenberg, Wednesday after Cathedra Petri \[23 Feb\], *Anno Dni*
1519.

Under my Martini Luther Doctoris Pittschaft.

E. C. G.

subservient chaplain and servants.

Mgr. Bartholomäus Bernhardt, Rector.

M. Martinus Luther.

M. Andreas Carolstadt. D. Petrus Burchhart. M. Nicolaus Amsdorf.

**No. 154.**

(Wittenberg.) (February? 1519.)

**To Dungersheim.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 498.

2\) In the Erl. Edition: \"*Metamorphoseon*, 1) angesehen\", but
correctly placed in the Erl. Briefw. after Seidemann.

**154** Letters from the year 1519. no. 155 to 159. **155**

**No. 155.**

(Altenburg.) Probably at the end of February 1519.

**To Pope Leo X.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 705, no. 283.

**No. 156.**

Dresden. March 4, 1519.

Duke George of Saxony to Luther.

Answer to No. 148: If Luther unites with Eck because of the disputation
and applies again to Duke George, he wants to be heard with a gracious
answer.

From the Canzleiconcept in the Dresden Hauptstaatsarchiv printed in Joh.
K. Seidemann, die Leipziger Disputation im Jahre 1519 (Dresden und
Leipzig 1843), p. 129, Beilage 21, and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. I, p. 145.
We give the text according to Seidemann.

George au Doctorem Martinum Lutther.

Dear scholar, dear, devout one! We have received your letter regarding
the disputation that Doctor Egkio and Karlstadt are to hold at our
university in Leypzigk, together with your apology, all the contents of
which we have read out, and after the aforementioned Doctor Egkke
indicated to us by letter that he had come to an agreement with Doctor
Kärlstat regarding such a disputation and requested that it be held in
Leypzigk, we have not wished to refuse him such a request. If you do not
agree to dispute with each other and make further requests to us, we
will then listen to you as much as is appropriate and due to us, with
our wise gracious reply, and let you take the matter before us. We do
not wish to hold this against you in response to your letter. Given at
Dresten on the Friday of *Adriani Martyris* \[March 4\], Anno etc. xix.

**No. 157.**

(Wittenberg.) March 5, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2445, annex, no. 32.

**No. 158.**

Wittenberg. March 13, 1519.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 720, no. 296.

**No. 159.**

Wittenberg. March 13, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks that Melanchthon be relieved of certain lectures that were
unnecessary anyway. He apologizes for not being able to work on the
Lord\'s Prayer in Latin because of his busy schedule. He is busy editing
the Epistle to the Galatians and is studying the papal decrees because
of the upcoming disputation. Finally, all kinds of news.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 49. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 155; in Löscher, vol.
Ill, p. 966; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 238 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I, p.
448. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 624.

To the worthy man, Christ\'s priest, Mr. Georg Spalatin, ducal Saxon
secretary, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! It will go beyond the strength of our Philip, my dear Spalatin, to
occupy himself with so many lessons, since he is already more than
overburdened. For even if you think that one day should be read after
the other, nevertheless the mind must be occupied with so many worries.
Moreover, Aristotle\'s physics is a completely useless subject for any
age; the whole book is a kind of argument about a trivial matter and
about a merely assumed material. The rhetorical exercise is of no use,
unless you want to see an example of rhetorical shouting, as if someone
wanted to exercise his head and art over the dung or another trivial
matter. The wrath of God has willed that the human race should be
occupied for so many centuries with these antics, and quite
misunderstood ones at that. I know the book inside and out, since I have
already interpreted it twice privately to my brothers, leaving aside the
glosses. Yes, we think that it should be read only for the sake that
Ulan would finally (and soon) stop reading it, since it would be far
more useful to read some speech exercise of Beroaldus 2) himself;

1\) The people who are in favor of reading *nihili* with the editions,
against *nihil of* the original and of the manuscript.

2\) Philippus Beroaldus the Elder, born in Bologna in 1453, died there
in 1505, taught eloquence in Parma, Milan and Paris.

**156**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 159 to 164.

**157**

In it, there is no science of natural things at all. His metaphysics and
his book \"Of the Soul\" are of the same ilk. It is therefore
unreasonable that such a head \[as Melanchthon\] should occupy himself
with such dung of trivial things; it is better to read it misunderstood
(only to have gone through it) than understood.

I send the letter of Eck, 1) the boastful and already certain of triumph
in the Olympic Games. Johann Frobenius sent us my small writings,
printed by him, with a letter; if you want to see them, I will send
them.

I cannot do the Lord\'s Prayer 2) in Latin because I am busy with so
much work. Every day in the evening I recite the commandments and the
Lord\'s Prayer to the children and the simple, then I preach; now I also
address Paul to the Galatians (for printing,^3)^ besides the prescribed
prayers 4) and lections. I certainly do not have time enough, let alone
superfluous. I have a sermon in mind \"on the contemplation of the
passion of Christ\", 5) but I do not know if I will have so much leisure
left to write it down; however, I will make an effort.

I also go through the decrees of the popes for my disputation, and (I
say it into your ear) I do not know whether the pope is not the
antichrist or his apostle, so miserably (that is the truth) Christ is
corrupted by him and crucified in decrees. It torments me
extraordinarily that the people of Christ are so deceived by the
pretense of the laws and the name of Christ. I want to share with you my
remarks about the decrees, so that you may also see what it means to
give laws by setting aside the Scriptures, for the purpose of usurping
the reign of power, to say nothing of other works that are quite similar
to those of the Antichrist.

1\) Eck\'s letter is No. 149; Frobenius\' No. 145.

2\) Interpretation in German of the Lord\'s Prayer for the Simple Laity,
St. Louis Edition, Vol. VII, 752.

3\) See the first note to Luther\'s \"shorter interpretation of the
epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians,\" St. Louis ed. vol. VIII, 1352.

4\) By *orationes ceremoniales* will probably be understood the *horae
canonicae,* hardly what Walch offers, \"public speeches\".

5\) St. Louis edition, vol. XI, 574.

The Roman court is pouring out the same kind of things. For me, the help
and support for the holy scripture grows from day to day.

Our Erasmus has published a way and instruction for the study of the
holy scripture; this Frobenius has sent us. Send back the letter of
Frobenius, the Ecks, and others.

The Rector also wishes to be excused from his lecture so that he can
take care of his household (which, when he is absent, is in danger) and
the office of a shepherd, ^6)^

Christoph Bressen, our interest man, has not yet shown himself, neither
in deed nor word. Fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, Sunday Invocavit
\[March 13\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 160.**

(Leipzig.) (March? 1519.)

**Dungersheim to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 502.

**No. 16 1.**

(Wittenberg.) (March? 1519.)

**To Dungersheim.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 528.

**No. 162 .**

Wittenberg. March 27, 1519.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 206.

**No. 163.**

Wittenberg. March 28, 1519.

**To Erasmus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1582.

**No. 164.**

Rome. March 29, 1519.

**Pope Leo X to Luther.**

Citation of Luther that he personally appears in Rome to recant
according to his promise given to Miltitz.

6\) Bartholomäus Bernhardt was appointed pastor in Kemberg in December
1518. See No. 117.

**158** Letters from the year 1519. no. 154 to 167. **159**

Printed in the \"Fortgesetzten Sammlung von Alten und Neuen
Theologischen Sachen\" 2c. (Innocent News), 1742, p. 134; in Fr. Siegm.
Keil\'s \"Des seligen Zeugen Gottes, D. Martin Luthers, merkwürdige
Lebensumstände\" 2c. Leipzig 1764, vol. 1, p. 82, § 31; in Joh. Theod.
Lingke, \"D. Martin Luthers merkwürdige Reisegeschichte\" 2c. Leipzig
1769, p. 337 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. I, p. 491.

To the beloved son of Martin Luther, of the Order of the Hermit Brothers
of St. Augustine and professor of theology.

Leo Pabst X.

Beloved son, greetings and apostolic blessings! It has pleased us most
highly to hear from the letters of the beloved son Carl Miltitz, our
Nuncio, who is seconded to the beloved son, the noble man Frederick,
Duke of Saxony, that what has been less properly written or orally said
by you, was not written or said with the intention and intent that you
should offend us or the apostolic see and the holy Roman church in
anything, but that you, irritated by a certain monk who was sent by our
beloved son Albrecht, Cardinal - priest of the title of St. Chrysogoni,
for the proclamation of certain indulgences, to answer the same, 1) and
you, by pursuing him too vehemently, had gone further than you would
have wished, had transgressed the bounds of respectability and truth,
and, having considered this carefully, had regretted and lamented with
exceedingly bitter pain what had happened 2) and you were ready to
recant everything also by writings, and to denounce your error to the
princes and others to whom your writings have reached, that you would
refrain from the same things in the future, and that you would also have
recanted everything before that legate of ours, if you had not
feared^3)^ that this legate would be too favorable to the said monk,
who, as you claim, was the cause of your error, against you and would
want to proceed very harshly against you. Considering then that the
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak, and that in the heat of anger
many things are brought forward which must thereafter be set right on
better reflection, we give thanks to the Almighty God, who has
condescended to enlighten your heart and also to take care that the
faithful of Christ, in these things which concern the salvation of
souls, trusting in

1\) It seems to us that instead of *respondens it* must be read:
*responderes,* otherwise *ut* would float in the air.

2\) Instead of *tactum we* would like to read *factum.* 3) Instead of
*timuisse* we have assumed *timuisses.*

Your reputation and doctrine could be drawn into such grave and
pernicious errors: and therefore we, who represent him on earth, who
does not want the death of the sinner, but that he should convert and
live, admit your excuses in a fatherly spirit, and after the benevolence
which we bestow on all men learned in any science, and especially in the
holy Scriptures, we desire to see and hear you personally, so that you
may safely and freely make the recantation before us, Christ\'s
governors, which you have shied away from making before our legate.
Therefore, after receiving this letter 4) you may set out on your
journey and come to us without delay. We hope, however, that with all
hatred aside and with a reconciled mind, not even in some passion, but
only filled with the Holy Spirit and fortified by love, you will so
consider the praise of Almighty God that we may rejoice that you have
been an obedient son, but you may rejoice that you have found in us a
godly and gracious father. Given in our Villa Magliana (*Manliana*),
under the Fisherman\'s Ring, on the 29th day of March 1519, of our
Pabbacy in the seventh year.

Jo. Sadoletus..

**No. 165.**

(Wittenberg.) (After February 24, 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 835, no. 366.

**No. 166.**

(Wittenberg.) (After February 24, 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 831, no. 365.

**No. 167.**

Wittenberg. April 5, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports that Bressen has paid the interest; writes that he wants
to despise \"the very gross inconsistencies of Cajetan\"; sends new
books.

4\) This letter never reached Luther\'s hands. It must have been caused
by exaggerated reports that Miltitz, full of good hopes, had sent to
Rome in January. But as things were quite different at the time of the
arrival of this letter than he had thought, he withheld it (Köstlin,
Martin Luther, Vol. I, p. 146 f.).

**160**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 167 to 169.

**161**

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 27 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 52. Printed by Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 168b; by Löscher, BLd. Ill, p. 968; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
252 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. II, p. 8. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
626.

To his extremely dear Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, canon of
Altenburg.

JEsus.

Hail! Since I had already delivered the letter dealing with Christoph
Bressen to be brought to you, my dear Spalatin, he came himself almost
at the same hour and paid us. Therefore, we thank you for your service
and your advice. By the way, I have decided to despise these very gross
Cajetan inconsistencies, since our Wenceslaus writes to me from
Nuremberg that they are ridiculed by the common people as well as by the
nobles. Then they serve me not a little with their tremendously great
imprudence, in that they do not know what they are talking about or
against.

I am sending the Sermon 1) and the Lord\'s Prayer. Erasmus\' \"Way of
Theology\" is not with me, Egranus at Zwickau needs it and will send it
back soon. I have postponed writing again because the sermon was not yet
finished. Farewell. Wittenberg, Tuesday after Lätare \[April 5\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 167a.**

Wittenberg. April 5, 1519.

**To Johann Eck.**

Luther informs him that Duke George has made his consent to Luther\'s
disputation conditional on his coming to an understanding with Eck, and
asks him to give the prince the relevant news. The university had
already given its consent.

From a copy in the Nuremberg City Library, No. 406, p. 10, No. 5,
printed in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 7.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian, to the theologian and philosopher,
the excellent and noble Johann Eck, Canonicus zu Eichstädt, Prokanzler
zu Ingolstadt.

I write again, dear Eck, namely for this reason that the most
illustrious prince, Her

1\) On the contemplation of the Passion of Christ, St. Louis edition,
vol. XI, 574. - The interpretation in German of the Lord\'s Prayer, 2c.,
vol.

George of Saxony, has answered me,^2)^ he wants to give me a full answer
to my request,^3)^ in which I asked that I be allowed to fight with you
in Leipzig, if only he would be assured that I had united with you in
this, because he had received letters from you concerning Carlstadt, but
not about me. Since Carlstadt rightly detests your deceitful plots and
perhaps will not stoop to fight with you, because you also feared this,
since you experienced his strength in his answer, - but because you have
so deceived the prince by fighting another than you attacked, it will
now behoove you to inform either the prince or me whether it is so
pleasing to you, so that we no longer leave the prince\'s mind in
suspense. Therefore, make an effort that I receive your letter as soon
as possible, through which I will receive a complete answer, 4) because
I have the consent of the university in writing. Farewell and finally
become a theologian out of a sophist. Wittenberg, Tuesday after Lätare
\[April 5\] 1519.

**No. 168.**

Wittenberg. April 13, 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2468, annex, no. 44.

**No. 169.**

Wittenberg. April 28, 1519.

**To Duke George of Saxony.**

Luther again asks for admission to the disputation.

From the original in the Dresden Main State Archives in J. K.
Seidemann\'s Thomas Münzer, p. 159 f.; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI,
p. 15and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, second supplement, p. II.

2\) No. 156.

3\) No. 148.

4\) Eck did not answer this letter, so Luther wrote twice more to Duke
George (No. 169 and 179) and finally received the answer on May 23 (No.
182): if Luther had united with Eck, he should be allowed to participate
in the disputation.

**162** Letters from the year 1519. no. 169 to 174. **163**

To the noble, highborn prince and lord, Lord George, Duke of Saxony,
Landgrave of Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen 2c., my gracious lord and
patron.

JEsus.

My poor prayer and good fortune are always at the service of your
princely graces. Highborn, noble Prince, gracious Lord! I have received
E. F. G.\'s next letter and gracious reply and have informed him
according to Doctor Johanni Eck E. F. G.\'s opinion. F. G.\'s opinion
and have been waiting for his answer. Since the same named Doctor Joh.
Eck now in an outgoing note not only appeals to both of us, Doctor
Carlstadt and me, but also defies us with horrible words and perhaps
already sings a little song about us, how then I think I have reached E.
F. G., then to E. F. G. as before is my humble prayer that E. F. G. will
graciously grant me to hold the same disputation. Also, since the matter
has made my life difficult and caused me much enmity, I ask for God\'s
sake that E. F. G. provide us with E. F. G.\'s safe conduct to and from,
since I must therefore dare not to tempt God by human ordinary help, I
am always humbly indebted to E. F. G. before God with my poor prayer.
Given at Wittenberg, on Thursday in Easter \[April 28\] 1519.

E. F. G.

The subordinate chaplain D. Martinus Luther, Augustinian at Wittenberg.

**No. 170.**

Coblenz. May 3, 1519.

**Miltitz to Luther.**

See St. Louiser Allsgabe, vol. XV, 724, no. 299.

**No. 171.**

Coblenz. May 3, 1519.

**Miltitz to Spalatin.**

See St. Louiser Allsgabe, Vol. XV, 733, No. 305. - Z\>l the locations is
to be added: Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 21. The original is in *Cod.
Goth*. V, 336, No. 8.

**No. 172.**

Coblenz. May 3, 1519.

**Miltitz to the Elector Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 730, no. 304.

**No. 17 3.**

Dresden. May 7, 1519.

**Duke George of Saxony to Luther.**

Answer to No. 169: Duke George leaves it at his earlier decision that
Luther should first communicate with Eck.

From the Canzleiconcept in the main state archives in Dresden in
Seidemann, Leipziger Disputation, p. 129 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II,
p. 27.

Dignified, dear, dear devotee! We have read all the contents of your
letter once again, and since, as you have to consider, where you want to
dispute with Doctor Eckii, the same Doctor Eckii\'s will and full word
must also be present, we have previously informed you in response to
your letter that you should unite with him, and if we requested from you
and him to make room for such a disputation, that we would show
ourselves against you with an unrefuted answer, we will leave it at the
same answer afterwards, that we do not want to have restrained you to
your letter. Given at Dresden, Saturday after Quasimodogeniti \[May 7\]
Anno 19.

**No. 174.**

Wittenberg. May 8, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther uses Melchior Lotther to establish a new printing press in
Wittenberg. On the establishment of the theological lectures.
Recommendation of a book by Staupitz. Intercession for a woman from
Feldheim.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 28and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 52. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 164; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 971; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
257 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 28. German in Walck, vol. XXI, 627
f.

His in the Lord exceedingly dear Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s priest and
faithful servant 2c.

JEsus.

Hail! Melchior Lotther has come, provided with very good matrices of the
letters which he received from Frobenius, and ready to work at

**164**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 174. 175.

**165**

to establish a printing workshop for us, if our most noble prince will
deign to give his consent to it, as we have also previously indicated to
his Serene Highness. Now we ask you for your service, that you give your
advice and help to the common cause; to us it is an adornment,
especially for our university, then we believe that it is also a benefit
for the audience, especially because Philip is there, who wants to
spread the Greek writings faithfully and in large quantities.

Incidentally, we are now dealing with the theological lectures that are
to be given, and see nothing else yet than that they alone (as before)
are to understand the texts of the individual, 1) because we do not have
the confidence that any candidate of theology 2) will soon be able so
much that he can interpret either the Bible or a church father; then, in
the course of time, it will not seem inconsistent that this should
happen, when, after theology has taken root and the books have been
multiplied, the matter can be more happily promoted.

For our Schart 3)about the preparation for dying, Staupitzen\'s German
booklet \"von der Nachfolge des Sterbens Christi\" would not be useless,
in which he (according to his gift) has also treated the matter better
than I can hope that it can be treated by me until I get more leisure,
4).

The Frau (Domina) von Feldheim has also asked me to work faithfully with
you so that you would carefully present her case to Herr Pfeffinger; she
complains that she is miserably abandoned, and I do not know what kind
of hardship Johann Löser (*Lossor*) is suffering. You do what you know
how to do. Be well. At Wittenberg, 1519) on Misericordias Domini \[May
8\].

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

1\) The *compleat*, which according to the reading of the Erl. Briefw.,
we cannot make sense of it, and have therefore assumed *compleant* with
the other editions.

2\) Does this mean young teachers at the university, as M. Gunkel and M.
Premsel (No. 115 and 153)?

3\) On Schart, see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2447, note 3.

4\) In November 1519, Luther sent through Spalatin to Schart his
\"Sermon von der Bereitung zum Sterben,\" see St. Louis edition, vol.
XV, annex, no. 46.

**No. 175.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around mid-May 1519.)

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Luther asks for permission to build a building for his monastery, and
for a black and a white robe for himself.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 398. fol. Printed in De Wette, vol. I, p.
283 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 9. - We have set the time
determination according to De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 579, note 2
and Burkhardt, p. 20.

For the attention of my most gracious lord, Duke Friedrich, Elector of
Saxony 2c.

JEsus.

Most Serene Prince, Most Gracious Lord! We are forced by necessity to
build a room, we have humbly asked the lords of the council of
Wittenberg to grant us the right to build the moat from the moors, but
our request is not answered. Therefore, we ask that the F. F. G.
graciously grant us this emergency building favor and foliage, waiting
that the F. F. G. graciously answer, we deserve against God.

I also ask that E. F. G. buy me this Leipzig fair, which is a white and
black cap. E. F. G. owes me the black cap, but I humbly request the
white one. For two or three years ago E. F. G. promised me one, which
has not yet been given to me, although Pfeffinger talked to me
willingly, and yet perhaps for business reasons, or, as one blames him,
money is slowly running out, moved, that I had to procure another one
from necessity, and thus satisfied, until here E. F. G. promise spared.
On this need I now still humbly ask, if the Psalter 5) deserves a black
cap, E. F. G. will also let the apostle earn a white cap, and also ask,
not to be left by the Pfeffinger but 2c.

E. F. G. willing subjects Capellan D. Martinus, Augustinian at
Wittenberg.

5\) \"The Psalter\" is \"Luther\'s work on the first 22 Psalms\", which
he dedicated to the Elector. The Apostle\" is \"Luther\'s shorter
interpretation of the Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians,\" vol. VIII,
1352.

**166** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 176. 177. **167**

**No. 176.**

Wittenberg. May 15, 1519.

**To the Franciscans at Jüterbock.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1362. To the locations given there
should be added: Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 36.

**No. 177.**

(Wittenberg.) May 16, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2446, appendix, no. 33. - The following
supplement is attached to this letter in all editions given there, only
separated from it by Löscher, namely vol. Ill, p. 950 and by Walch, vol.
XXl, 631,3 who, however, acknowledges its affiliation to the letter. He
has overlooked there that it is already included in the old edition,
vol. X, 1882 ff. Aurifaber reports that this writing was found in the
library of Johann Grau, pastor at Weimar. It is also found in Welker,
Altes aus allen Theilen der Geschichte 2c., Chemnitz 1765, p. 570 and in
the Erlangen edition, *opp*. *var. arg*;., vol. Ill, p. 385. Handwritten
in the Zwickau Rathsschulbibliothek. - Although this supplement is
already found in the St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1608 ff, we leave a new
translation here according to the Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 46.

**Enclosure.**

**Way of life of the priests.**

> Cap. 1. about the moderate eating and drinking of the priests.

As it may be about the breakfast, the supper must be scanty and short,
as also Horace 2) says: A short supper delights, and a nap in the grass
near a brook. Likewise Sirach 31 \[v. 24. Vulg.\]: \"A moderate man has
a sound sleep; he sleeps till morning, and his soul shall be refreshed
with 3) the same.\" Therefore it is rightly said in Proverbs, \"Merry
evening parties bring dull mornings. Yes, the telling of tales
(*fabellae*) and the frequent drinking in the evening causes a spoiled
stomach and a confused head, which in the morning is full of all the
troubles, mucus and excretion. This is an extraordinary hindrance to the
office of a

1\) *de prandio*. The *prandium* was taken at 9 o\'clock in the morning,
the evening meal (*coena*) at 5 o\'clock. See Köstlin, M. Luther, vol.
II, p. 678 *ad* p. 507. Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 380 f.

2\) *Horat. Epist., lib*. I, 14, v. 34.

3\) Only the Erl. Briefw. has the correct reading: *cum*, the other
editions: *non*.

priest, both in praying and in saying mass. Therefore, be seriously
mindful to be vigilant here against this very general evil, because you
cannot spoil the evening without also spoiling the morning and the whole
of the following day, either completely or almost. Believe the one who
has experienced it; if you do not want to believe the one who has
experienced it, you will experience and believe it yourself one day.

Cap. 2 Of the study of the priests.

In the evening, by all means take something from the holy scriptures to
bed with you in your heart, so that you, as it were ruminating like a
pure animal, may gently fall asleep; but it need not be much, but rather
a little, well thought out and understood, which you can find again, as
it were, as a remnant of the evening when you get up in the morning.
Likewise, in all study of the Scriptures you must despair entirely of
your own understanding and work, but with fear and humility you must ask
for understanding from God. Therefore, when you go to the Bible, first
lift up your eyes and heart to Christ, imploring grace in a short sigh.
Do this often while reading, saying or thinking: \"Grant, O Lord, that I
may understand this too, and even more that I may do it. But beware in
every way that you do not wish to study the Scriptures for the sake of
knowing and understanding (for I do not believe that you are so crudely
conceived as to seek honor or gain or glory), nor that you wish to teach
others. Let your thoughts be well guarded, for vain honor may be
secretly hidden here; but seek nothing at all but the honor of God, so
that you may have such a mind: \"Behold, my Lord Jesus, if this study is
not for your glory, I pray that you will not let me understand even one
syllable; but give me as much as seems good to you for your glory in me,
a poor sinner.

Cap. 3. of intimate contact.

Even a rarely occurring and at the same time short confidential contact
is good for a priest. For that saying is very true:

**168**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 177. 178. 179.

**169**

Friends steal time. 1) If friends are thieves of time, what are
strangers and unknown people or those less close to you? But in this you
will need the highest prudence, so that you do not, by avoiding living
with people too much, fall into the company of evil spirits; again, if
you get involved with them too much, you will be trampled by sows.
Therefore, if God calls you (if it should be necessary to serve, to
counsel, to talk with your neighbor, either because of his salvation or
some other need, and you have been required to do so), then no law or
rule of any kind that you have made must hold you back, for every law
must give way to love, even that of praying and saying mass; but if you
are not called, do not get involved with anyone, lest you begin to want
to win the world and suffer harm to your soul \[Matth. 16, 26\].

Cap. 4. on prayer.

Remember that you are celebrating as a priest, that is, as a common and
public servant; and therefore you must pray not so much for yourself as
for all. Therefore, you must pray fervently not so much for yourself as
for all people2) , especially and above all for the superiors of the
Church, namely the bishops and rulers, because their salvation is the
salvation of us all.

Cap. 5: On the celebration of mass.

You will not always be able to say mass, but in order to become able,
you must sometimes do it, even if you are not able. You will do this if
you remember that you have to sacrifice not for yourself, but for the
sake of others who are in sin, for countless needs of Christians.
Therefore, what you would not do for yourself, you must do for others;
and only do not begin to have the confidence at times that you have
appeared to be skilled.

Cap. 6: The whole of life.

As Tobias \[Cap. 4:20.\] taught his son that he should ask of the LORD
that he should

1\) Compare St. Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1874.

2\) Here we have assumed *omnibus* after weather instead of: *ovibus*.

Despair of yourself, and pray that he will guide your steps according to
his word, because, as Jeremiah says, \"I know,\" he says, \"that man\'s
doings are not in his power, and it is not in anyone\'s power how he
walks or how he directs his course. Above all, act with the utmost
gentleness toward sinners. For this is necessary for a priest, that he
despise no one, but consider his sins and misery as yours, as you see
that Christ did to us. Fare well in the Lord, and if you ask for more, I
will gladly be at your service if I can.

**No. 178.**

(Wittenberg.) May 16, 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2447, annex, no. 34.

**No. 179.**

Wittenberg. May 16, 1519.

**To Duke George of Saxony.**

Luther asks for admission to the disputation for the third time.

From the original in the Main State Archives at Dresden in J. K.
Seidemann\'s Thomas Münzer, p. 160; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p.
16 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, second supplement, p. III.

To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord George, Duke of
Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious lord
and patron.

JEsus.

My poor submissive prayer is always before E. F. G.. Gracious, highborn
Prince and Lord! I humbly ask, for God\'s sake, that E. F. G. not
forgive me for writing again. It causes me E. F. G.\'s next answer in
writing, which almost saddens and horrifies me; for I fear or think that
I have forfeited something against E. F. G. and have earned an
ungracious lord, which I am unaware of and completely sorry for.

**170** Letters from the year 1519. no. 179. 180. 181. **171**

For since E. F. G. has promised Doctor Ecken to hold the disputation
without 1) some request from Doctor Andreä Carlstadii or his consent,
and does not want to grant me this without 1) Doctor Ecken\'s letter, he
nevertheless summons me to the disputation in writing, testifies to it
clearly in a printed public note, and also requires me to disputate at
Leipzig, as I previously wrote to E. F. G. and I wrote to Doctor Ecken
according to E. F. G.\'s first letter. F. G., and I, according to E. F.
G.\'s first writing, wrote Doctor Ecken. I no longer know how to obtain
this from E. F. G. and can think of nothing else than that I am in
disgrace. Now, my most gracious lord, I know well that before me and
after me the world has remained and will remain without my dispute, and
that I have not forced myself to do so, but have been urged to do so by
Doctor Eck, but I ask for God\'s sake that E. F. G. will graciously
explain or forgive me for what I have been guilty of, for I am willing
to deny it. I cannot force Doctor Eck to write such a letter to E. F. G.
for my sake, but I will write another one and ask him to do so. E. F. G.
will graciously forgive me for all that God has blessedly commanded him.
At Wittenberg, on Monday after Jubilate \[May 16\] 1519.

E. F. G.

lord capellan

Doctor Martinus Luther, Aug. at Wittenberg.

**No. 180.**

Wittenberg. May 17, 1519.

**To Carl von Miltitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 727, no. 302.

**No. 181.**

(Wittenberg.) May 22, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther expresses his approval of a letter from Erasmus to the Elector,
asks for a decision on the appointment of a professor of Hebrew, and
reports the increase in the number of students in Wittenberg.

1\) In the manuscript: \"an\" == without.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 29 and in *Cod. Jen. a*, fol.56. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 178b; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 977; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
277 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 56. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 634.

To the worthy man Georg Spalatin, the priest of Christ, his superior and
patron to be highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I like the letter of Erasmus 2) quite extraordinarily, also ours,
only one thing I would like, namely that my name is not only not
mentioned in it, but also not sung about, especially by such a great
man. I know myself very well, at least in this piece.

By the way, before you leave, I ask you to let us know what the attitude
of the most noble prince is regarding the Hebrew professor. Johann
Cellarius von Kunstadt, who taught Hebrew at Heidelberg, was with us and
will return soon; he testified by the publication of a grammatical
booklet (which I believe you have seen) that he understands something in
this matter; he promised us everything: what he could, he would
faithfully teach (he is now in Leipzig and is waiting for our letters),
when he has received the news that he is to be provided with a decent
salary by our most noble prince. 3) Therefore, answer very soon, and at
the same time send back the letter of Duke George.

A large number of students 4) come here, and indeed excellent ones; yes,
the well-known Nuremberg licentiate has come, a man of advanced age,
preacher of the hospital and of Sanct Sebaldus, 5) and our city cannot
hold almost all of them for lack of housing. Other things at another
time. Farewell. On Sunday Cantate \[May 22\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

2\) An den Churfürsten Friedrich zu Sachsen, St. Louis Edition, Vol.
XVIII, 1588.

3\) Johann Cellarius did not come to Wittenberg because he was on Eck\'s
side at the Leipzig disputation. He soon turned to the Reformation,
first became a Zwinglian in Switzerland, later a strict Lutheran in
Frankfurt a. M., and died as superintendent in Dresden in 1542.

4\) The number of inscribers was in 1517: 232; 1519: 458; next year 579
(Köstlin, M. Luther \[3.j,

5\) Johann Herholt, inscribed May 26, 1519.

**172** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 182. 183. **173**

**No. 182.**

Dresden. May 23, 1519.

**Duke George of Saxony to Luther.**

Answer to No. 179: When Luther will have united with Eck about the
disputation, it should be allowed.

From the concept in the Dresden archive printed in Seidemann, \"Die
Leipziger Disputation,\" p. 129 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. II, p. 59.

Worthy, dear devotee! We have read all the contents of your letter,
which you sent to us again for the sake of the conceded disputation, and
know of no disfavor that we should have borne or apprehended toward you.
It is true that all sorts of things have happened to us, of which we
would not have been unwilling to speak to you, but we want to leave such
things until you come to us. So we are not a little surprised, since you
have previously let us hear that it is not good to discuss these
matters, and the doctors of the Faculty of Holy Scripture at Leipzig
have also taught us that they refuse to allow such discussions, which is
why you are now pressing so hard. And it is true that we have not been
requested by Doctor Carlstadt either, but Doctor Eck has announced in
his letter that he is uniting with him for the sake of the announced
disputation. If this also happens here, so that you agree with each
other and ascribe it to us, as you are now, as we understand from your
letter, in work (inheritance), we want to show ourselves, according to
our most recent letters, with an unquestionable answer against you and
have it heard. We have not wished to respond to your letter in this way.
Given at Dresden, Monday after Cantate \[May 23\] Anno 19.

**No. 183.**

Wittenberg. May 24, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks for his and Carlstadt\'s theses to be sent to Nuremberg or
to Eck himself. About Aesticampianus\' lectures and the increase of
students. Apology to Schart for delaying the promised writing. In the
postscript, news that Trutfetter has died.

The original of the letter is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv.
Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 239. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 5; by
Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 978; by De Wette, vol. I p. 278 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. II, p. 60. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 636.

The original of the postscript is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv.
Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, toi. 239. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 10; by
Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 996; by Seckendorf, *Hist Luth*., *lib.* I, p. 21
u; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 373 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 60.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 654. All editions except Erl. Briefw. have
added this postscript to the letter to Spalatin of Dec. 7, 1519, which,
as the Erl. Briefw. says, cannot take place because of the different
folding. To which letter the postscript belongs is left undecided, but
for several reasons it is to be placed in this time. Because not much is
at stake in the correct determination of the time of this postscript, we
have followed the Erl. Briefw. in this.

His Spalatin, the servant of Christ and his Lord, who is exceedingly
dear in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! As you promised me the other day, my dearest Georg, that you could
and would arrange for letters to be sent somewhere, we now ask that you
have these disputations of mine and Carlstadt\'s sent to Nuremberg or
rather to Eck himself, depending on what seems best to you. I believe
that everything else has reached you. I am surprised that D. Johann
Aesticampianus 2) would rather read about Jerome\'s Jovinian than about
Pliny. Whether you have done something in this, we also wish to know.
The number of students is increasing greatly, like an overflowing water.
Fare well in Christ. Tell Schart to bear for a little while the slowness
of Martin, who is more than three times too busy. Wittenberg, 1519, on
Tuesday after Cantate \[May 24\].

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

At this hour I have heard from the father-in-law of the painter Lucas
that Doctor Jodocus von Eisenach has departed from the living at Erfurt.
I fear that I, too, was a cause of the hastening of his death; so much
distress arose in his mind, as it is said, from my unholy and
sacrilegious conduct, through which, which was unbelievable to him,
scholastic theology was despised. The Lord have mercy on his soul, amen.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 714 and 718.

2\) On Aesticampianus, see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 396, note.

3\) The father-in-law of Lucas Cranach was Jodocus Brengbier from Gotha,
who, as Lindau, \"Cranach\", 1883, p. 23 says, was visiting Wittenberg
at that time.

**174** Letters from the year 1519. No. 184 to 187. **175**

**No. 184.**

(Wittenberg.) May 30, 1519.

**To Martin Glaser, Augustinian priory at Ramsau.**

Luther apologizes for his silence and for a borrowed horse; he wants
Glaser to visit him, talks about the Leipzig disputation, about his
lectures on the Psalms, about the printing of his interpretation of the
Epistle to the Galatians. He talks about the hatred of his enemies and
the burning of his portrait in Rome; about the condition of the
monastery and the slander of a Franciscan monk.

Handwritten in *Cod*. *Gothan*. 1048, fol. 81. Printed in Schütze, vol.
II, p. 28; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 279 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.
62.

To the venerable Father Martin Glaser, 13) Baccalaureus of sacred
theology, prior of the hermits at Ramsau, his extremely dear \[friend\]
in the Lord.

Hail! You have every right to be surprised, or even unwilling, my
venerable father, that I have not written to you yet. But although I do
not lack excuses, I rather want to acknowledge my guilt. For in regard
to your horse?, 2) I hope you will be merciful to me Aermsten through
the mediation of the venerable father Vicarius. You undoubtedly gave it
to GOtte, not to me. God would have us see you here again; I have heard
with joy from the venerable Father Vicarius that this will happen. I
believe that you know everything about my future Leipzig disputation and
about my other affairs. I am now reading anew on the Psalter, and the
teaching institution is flourishing extraordinarily. The city is full of
students. Rome is hot to my ruin, and I am cold to her ridicule. I am
told that a paper Martin was publicly burned, cursed and condemned to
death in Campo Flore. I await their fury. The epistle

1\) Glaser from Nuremberg was inscribed in Wittenberg in 1506; later
conventual in the Augustinian monastery in Nuremberg until its
dissolution in 1524; then pastor in Kraftshof near Nuremberg. - Ramsau
in the diocese of Freisingen, in the county of Haag.

2\) One will have to think of a horse borrowed for Luther\'s ride from
Augsburg to Monheim, October 20, 1518. Kolde, Augustinercongregation, p.
322, note 2.

to the Galatians is now being prepared in print, you will see it soon.

By the way, we are doing well and living in peace; indeed, we are less
poor than before. Our \[prior\] Helt governs very well and builds, but
\[only\] the kitchen, because he still takes care of the belly, after
that he will also take care of the head.

I have read what you wrote to me earlier about the chatterer, the
Minorite, 3) but I am used to such spitefulness. The whole world is
shaking and is in motion, both in body and in spirit. What will happen,
God knows. We suspect bloodshed and wars. God have mercy on us. Be at
ease in Him and pray for me, the poor. On the day after Vocem
Jucunditatis \[30 May\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 185.**

Löwm. May 30, 1519.

**Erasmus to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1586.

**No. 186.**

Wittenberg. June 6, 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2474, annex, no. 45.

**No. 187.**

Leipzig. June 26, July 4, and 14, 1519.

> **Contract between Eck, Carlstadt and Luther for the Leipzig
> Disputation.**

Regulation of the disputation and recording of the same by notaries,
prohibition of the publication of the acts before the judgement of the
universities had taken place. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 858 f.,
the introduction to No. 377.

Printed in Seidemann, Leipziger Disputation, p. 137, supplement 28,
without citation of the source, and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 71.

On Sunday after *Corporis Christi* \[26 Jun\] *Anno* 2c. 19 is by the
highly respected, strict and worthy, Mr. Johann Kochel, Doctor,

3\) De Wette has in the introduction to this letter: \"Bernhard\"
\[Dappen\]. Luther\'s dispute with the Franciscans at Jüterbock falls
into this period. See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, Ein!., p. 42 f.

**176** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 187. 188. **177**

Chancellor, Georgen von Widebach, Amtmann allhier zu Leipzig,
Rentmeister, as princely decreed councillors, and Rector, Magistri and
Doctores of this laudable university, between the worthy and highly
respected, Mr. Johann Eckio and Mr. Andrea Karolostadt, doctors of the
Holy Scriptures, the following agreement of disputation half decided and
established:

Namely, Doctor Eckius shall first oppose Doctoris Karlstadt\'s
*conclusiones,* as much as he will ascribe them to him the evening
before, and then Doctor Karlstadt shall respond; and the following day
Doctor Karlstadt shall oppose Doctoris Eck\'s *conclusiones, as* he will
also ascribe them to him the evening before, and then Doctor Eckius
shall respond; and thus proceed further, one day at a time, until the
end of the disputation. Such disputations, as *argumenta* and
*solutiones of* both parts, shall be written out by four notaries and
collated against each other at the end of the *disputation,* also a copy
of the same shall be given to each part, but in such a way that such
*disputations* and the same copy shall not be brought into print or
otherwise publicized, unless both parts of a judge are united and the
same ruling is publicized and opened thereon.

Likewise, both parts are to unite before their departure from the judge,
and the copies are to be deposited with the Rentmeister here.

The following is agreed and approved between Doctor Johann Eckio and
Doctor Martino Luther during the disputation:

Doctor Johannes Eck and Doctor Martin Luther have half compromised and
approved their disputation, as previously Doctor Eckius and Doctor
Karlstadt have approved and compromised, and to perform the special
injuries. However, Doctor Martinus reserved his appeal, which he had
previously raised, as much as he had the right to do, and did not want
to drop it, nor did he want the acts of this dispute to be sent to the
papal court, for reasons that moved him to recognize it. If in this
disputation there should be any mistake between the doctors concerned,
they shall be instructed by the lords so ordered. Actum Monday Udalrici
\[July 4\]. *Anno ut supra*.

When it was previously indicated that the doctores concerned should
unite for the sake of their disputation, they did so in the following
manner, namely: Doctor Johannes Eck and Doctor Martinus Luther were
admitted to the two universities of Paris and Erfurt, but Doctor Eckius
and Doctor Karlstadt were admitted to the University of Erfurt.

and whether more faculties than the *Doctores Theologiae* and *Canonum*
should recognize such their contribution, shall be placed in my gracious
Lord, Duke Georgen of Saxony 2c.,\'s favor, and his F. G. may send such
Acta to them; and have further extracted that for such recognition the
fathers of the two orders *Augustinensium* and *Praedicatorum* at Erfurt
shall not be used. In witness whereof we the said three Doctors have
signed ourselves with our own hands at the bottom of this writing. Done
at Leipzig (Leyptzk), Thursday after *Margarethae virginis* \[July 14\]
Anno 2c. 1519.

I, Johann von Eck, Doctor 2c., confess with this handwriting of my own
that I have consented to the above articles as they are recorded here,
that I have also accepted them, and that I will live and follow them
faithfully as is proper and right. Actum at Leipzig, July 14, 1519.

I, Endres Bodenstein, Doctor 2c., confess with this handwriting that I,
as reported above, granted and vowed to keep and live duly also in the
future. *Dat. uts*.

And I, Doctor Martinus Luther, also confess with this my handwriting
like the previous doctors. *Dat. uts*.

**No. 188.**

Leipzig. July 15, 1519.

**Notes. 1)**

The reasons why Luther insisted that all faculties of the universities
to be elected should decide on the Leipzig disputation.

From the handwritten transcript in the Dresden Main State Archives in J.
K. Seidemann\'s Thomas Münzer, p. 161; in De Wette-Seidemaun, vol. VI,
p. 18 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, second naked entry, p. V.

The reason why I have mentioned the entire universities and not only the
Faculty of Theology.

First, that by divine grace the young people are more skilled than the
old. The first is that by divine grace, through the multiplication of
many good books, the young people are more skilled than the old, having
walked in their books alone.

1\) Caesar Pflug sent this note to Duke George on July 15, together with
a counter-note from Eck, from which he gave this decision on July 16:
\"We cannot judge that those who do not understand this matter should
decide on the disputation that has taken place, but that this should be
done more wisely and more cheaply by those who have the authority and
power to do so, and who also have a thorough and good understanding.
(Seidemann, Leipz. Disp., p. 150.)

**178** Letters from the year 1519. No. 188 to 195. **17S**

Secondly, that this matter, newly thought of, is contrary to those who
have been theologians so far.

Third, that the times are such that, according to divine order,
everything that shines and appears is suspect in all classes. Third,
that the times are such that, according to the divine order, everything
that shines and appears is suspect in all classes, and almost come to
the point that those are not theologians who think they are theologians,
and the scholars are the perverse, the clergy secular, and the like.

Fourth, that Doctor Eck in his disputation has taken all pains to make
me and my matter hateful and to denigrate me, but to denigrate himself
and his matter to the greatest extent, which, as it is read, does him no
little harm and is put off to me by the old theologians in particular,
because the matter was considered to be against them. D. Martin Luther.

**No. 1 89.**

Prague. July 16, 1519.

**Johann Poduschka to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1370, no. 422.

**No. 190 .**

Prague. July 17, 1519.

**Wenceslaus Rosdalowsky to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1373, no. 423.

**No. 191 .**

(Wittenberg.) July 20, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1162, no. 381.

**No. 192 .**

Leipzig. July 22, 1519.

**Joh. Eck to the Elector Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1286, no. 413.

**No. 193 .**

Altenburg. July 24, 1519.

**Elector Friedrich of Saxony to Joh. Eck.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1289, no. 414.

**No. 19 4**

(Wittenberg.) July 26, 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Luther reports that he met Staupitzen and Link in Grimma. Von Eck\'s cry
of triumph.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 399, fol. 129b. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 184 b; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 979; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 289
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 97. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 637.

To the venerable and worthy father Johann Lang, Master of Holy Theology,
Augustinian at Erfurt, this cooperative\'s vicar, 1) his superior in
Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I met, venerable Father, in Grimma the venerable Father Vicar
General, together with Magister Wenceslaus, who wanted to visit the
monasteries, because the row hit him. And you did well to abstain from
the visitation, because he said that it was now his duty. I fear that
the prior will be deposed there.

We are daily awaiting the arrival of the venerable Father
(*P\[aternitatis\] suae*) from Dresden or Herzberg. He has ordered that
I should show his arrival to you and to whom I could, which also dll do.
Eck triumphs everywhere; he has moved from Duke George to Annaberg, 2)
perhaps to bring the indulgence back on track there. Soon from other
things; be well. On St. Anne\'s Day \[July 26\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 195 .**

Wittenberg. July 31, 1519.

**Carlstadt au den Churfürsten Friedrich zu Sachsen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1290, no. 415.

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 33, note 5.

2\) So *ductus is* to be translated here, because Eck traveled there on
July 25, while Duke George had already arrived there the day before.

**180** Letters from the year 1519. No. 196 to 201. **181**

**No. 196 .**

(Nuremberg.) (August 3, 1519.)

**Scheurl to Luther.**

He asks for new writings by Luther to be sent to him and praises Link as
the only one who preaches Christ in Nuremberg.

Handwritten in the Scheurl family archive, *Cod*. C, fol. 211 (247)b.
Printed in Scheurls Briefbuch, vol. II, p. 96 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 100.

To Doctor Martin Luther.

Hail! Only this one thing I indicate to you, venerable father, if you
have to write or send something from your workshop to our common
friends, you can safely hand it over to this messenger 1). But I want to
have asked you that you write or send. And it pleased me Erasmus 2) that
in Antwerp almost alone our prior preaches Christ. I will burst if
anyone preaches Christ here except our Wenceslaus and some who follow
him. I am glad that he is absent for a little while, because then the
listeners can appreciate him and them more. If he is staying with you,
let him return loaded with Martin\'s writings; you will also recommend
us to our vicar and father if the opportunity presents itself. Our Ebner
greets you and wishes you all the best. Farewell, venerable father. Date
2c 3)

**No. 197.**

Wittenberg. August 15, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1142, no. 380.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 284. Printed in *Buddeus,* v. 11; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p.
982; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 306 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 124.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 657.

To the worthy man, Christ\'s servant, Georg Spalatin, his \[friend\] to
be highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I will do my best, my dear Spalatin, to try what you have
requested about the contemplation of suffering, if I can, although it
does not please me very much that a man should be bound to certain hours
if there are not people to whom he may be of use. By the way, we all ask
with each other that you hand over the copy of the Leipzig Disputation
to this messenger; there is something for which we need it, as you will
see in due time. We ask this in such a way that we do not doubt that you
will do it. Be well and pray for me, a sinner overloaded with business.
May the Lord keep us our prince. Amen. 4)

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 199.**

Wittenberg. August 18, 1519.

**Luther and Carlstadt to the Elector Friedrich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1291, no. 416.

**No. 198.**

(Wittenberg.) (Before August 18, 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

On the establishment of a new endowment to commemorate the Passion of
Christ in the collegiate church at Wittenberg (see Vol. XIX,
Introduction, p. 51). Request for the return of the copy of the Leipzig
Disputation.

1\) Instead of tuo in the manuscript, we have adopted the conjecture of
the Erl. Briefw.: tuto.

2\) In his letter of May 30, 1519; No. 185. - It seems to us that here
the reading is corrupted: *mirumque placeat Erasmus*. Instead we have
assumed: *mihique placuit Erasmus*. - \"Our prior\" is Jakob Probst.

3\) The time determination of this letter results from its position in
the codex.

**No. 200.**

Wittenberg. August 18, 1519.

**Luther and Carlstadt to the Elector Friedrich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1306, no. 417.

**No. 201.**

Wittenberg. August 18, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2487, annex, no. 54.

4\) The original has no date. The time determination results from No.
200, in which the foundation is commemorated again.

**182** Letters from the year 1519. no. 202 to 205. **183**

**No. 202 .**

(Wittenberg.) August 20, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther again writes about the customs at the intended endowment in
memory of Christ\'s passion and excuses a vehement letter from Cartstadt
in the Eckian matter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav. A*, No. 31 and in *Cod*. *Jen*. a, fol. 57. printed in
Aurifaber. Vol. II, p. 2d; in De Wette, Vol. I, p. 324 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. II, p. 131. German in Müller, Staatscabinet, vol. I V, p.
193; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 29 and p. 5; also duplicated in
Walch, vol. XXI, 6 and 638.

To his extremely dear Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant and priest,
princely librarian and secretary, in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I hope, my dear Spalatin, that everything I have written to you
has reached you or will reach you, for it has been handed over to the
messenger. With regard to the arrangement of the contemplation of the
Passion of Christ, nothing is more troublesome to me than that I see
that these ceremonies tend to make people wonderfully hard, arid, and
completely unfit for all things and for all power of a spiritual
disposition. For trusting that they have murmured many words and passed
the hours, they go safely, seldom shattered, still more seldom ardent,
least of all in self-knowledge. And that I tell you my heart\'s opinion,
I like the pay of this endowment and the purpose of this pay more than
the endowment itself, because those who want to lie down on the holy
scriptures should rightly be helped by everyone, since there is only one
thing by which the church is either elevated or depressed, namely either
the knowledge or the ignorance of the holy scriptures. Therefore, if it
pleases you (as you write) that it be done weekly on a few days, and
even on these not the whole day, but at some hours by day and by night,
it pleases mix also, only that as few days and hours as possible be
taken. For nothing is so much to be feared in the setting up of
ceremonies as that (as the apostle \[1 Thess. 5:19.) reminds us) the
spirit may be subdued, and it will be better that, after hours, they
should be performed.

The people who have passed in between do little in a single hour than if
they complete everything one after the other without interruption; for
in the former case they will be discontented, in the latter they will be
lively, as much as the devil allows.

But as for the psalms, which ones they may take? perhaps those that most
concern the person of the Lord in suffering, which must be chosen and
divided up among the days and hours with the responsories, versicles and
collects, as is the custom. And I do not know whether it would not be
most beautiful that the hour of each suffering be added with the
expressed nature of the suffering of that hour, as the chant contains:
*Patris sapientia, veritas divina, Christus homo, etc.*, 1) wherewith
the psalms should be concluded. The other you have seen or will see in
other letters.

I have heard that Carlstadt has written something exceedingly harsh to
you; you see that you spare the man, for he is challenged because of the
water bladder of the Eckish boast and some others. Fare well in Christ.
On Saturday after the Assumption \[Aug. 20\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 203 .**

(Leipzig.) (Early September 1519.)

**Dungersheim to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 528.

**No. 2 04.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early September 1519.)

**To Dungersheim.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 530.

**No. 205.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early September 1519.)

**To Petrus Lupinus of Radheim and Carlstadt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1352.

1\) This is the German chant: \"Christus, der uns selig macht\" 2c.

**184** Letters from the year 1519. no. 206. 207. 208. **185**

**No. 206.**

(Wittenberg.)September 3. September 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition. Vol. XV, 2449, annex, no. 35.

**No. 207.**

Wittenberg. September 22, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends (handwritten) *Tessaradeca\'s* consolation text (St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 1816 ff.) for the sick Elector and asks Spalatin to
translate it into German; likewise the shorter interpretation of the
Epistle to the Galatians. The writing against Emser is not yet finished.
A rebuttal against Johann Rubeus in Leipzig will appear (see St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 1240, no. 398). Intercession for the bearer of the
letter. The Franciscans in Jüterbock asked Luthern to withhold his
writing against them, but too late.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 32 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 57. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 3; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 335 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II,
p. 155. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 640.

To the worthy man Georg-Spalatin, the most illustrious court preacher
and librarian, his \[friend\] in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! Finally, my dear Spalatin, my Tesfaradekas comes to you, slowly
indeed, but even so barely escaped the storms of my many affairs; you
may translate it freely and hand it over to our most noble prince, if it
seems so good to you, of course together with the preface letter. 1) For
the matter has begun to seem too small to me that it should be dedicated
to such a great prince with a pompous dedication epistle; it shall be at
your discretion.

At the same time, I am sending you my incomprehensible Galatians,
seasoned with a lot of salt, which the Leipzig Lotther has sent you as a
gift, as you can see. The Emser Bock is not yet ready.

You and the Schart will be satisfied, 2) as soon as I can catch my
breath.

1\) This passage proves that the next letter was sent to Spalatin at the
same time as Tessaradeka\'s, and is not to be dated February 1520, as De
Wette, Vol. I, p. 409 does.

2\) Through the \"Sermon on the Preparation for Dying\"; see No. 174.

Something, I don\'t know what, will also come into being in praise of
Rubeus 3).

This bearer of the letters asks that I write for him to the prince, so
that he may be allowed to practice the art of baking with the
Wittenbergers. For this (as I hear) the bakers forbid him, because he is
the son of a man who is said to have once been a baker; so conscientious
is the nobility of the craftsmen! But so that I do not fall heavily, I
ask you to do this verbally (if you want) in my name.

But listen, what I would have almost transitions, the copy of the
Tessaradekas I would like to see again, after it has done its service.
For I myself also intend to console myself with these trifles, and the
things I have gathered there are not always present to me either; also
for the reason that they become richer for me through their
contemplation. Farewell, and commend me to the prince. Wittenberg, on
the day of St. Maurice \[Sept. 22\] 1519.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

The Provincial of the Minorites has sent quite respected brothers or
fathers to me to settle my matter with the Jüterbockers, who now want to
be punished and moved from their place. 4) I have granted them this: if
they could ask the Lotther to Leipzig, or hold him harmless, then I
wanted to erase my booklet 5) for their service. And this is now being
done; I do not know what will be done.

**No. 208.**

(Wittenberg.) (September 22, 1519.) 6)

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1816.

3\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1240, no. 398, introduction.

4\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 44.

5\) \"Luthers Vertheidigung wider das böswillige Urtheil des Johann
Eck,\" St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 1370.

6\) For the time determination, see the first note to No. 207.

**186**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 209 to 220.

**187**

**No. 200.**

Altenburg. September 26, 1519.

**Miltitz to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 749, no. 316.

**No. 210.**

Lochau. September 30, 1519.

**Prince Frederick to Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 750, no. 318.

**No. 211.**

(Wittenberg.) September 30, 1519.

**To Franz Günther at Jüterbock.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1418.

**No. 212.**

(Wittenberg.) (September 1519.)

**Luther to Dungersheim.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 530. - To the locations should be
added: Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 162.

**No. 213.**

(Wittenberg.) \' (End of September 1519.)

**To Hieronymus Emser.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1212.

**No. 214.**

Wittenberg. October 1, 1519.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 751, no. 319.

**No. 215.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. October 1519.

**To Staupitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2450, anh., no.36.

**No. 216.**

(Wittenberg?) (10. \[?\] October 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 752, no. 320.

**No. 217.**

Mühlberg. October 10, 1519.

**Miltitz to the Elector Friedrich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 753, no. 321.

**No. 218.**

Lochau. 12 October 1519.

**Prince Frederick to Miltitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 754, no. 323.

**No. 210**

Lochau. 12 October 1519.

**Elector Frederick to Eck.**

The Elector sends him the copy of Luther\'s and Carlstadt\'s letter (No.
199), the dispatch of which has been delayed.

Printed in: \"Doctor Martin ludders Underricht an Kurfürsten von
Sachssen. disputation zu Leypszig belangent: vund D. Eckius briue. of
the same,\" p. A 4 b. 6-1/2 sheets, 4. no place or year. Michel von Eck,
Eck\'s cousin, is the editor. Then in the Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 191.

To the worthy and highly learned, our dear special one, Mr. Johann Ecke,
Doctor 2c.

By the Grace of God Frederick, Duke of Saxony, Elector and Vicar 2c.

Our greeting before. Worthy, highly learned, dear special one! After you
wrote to us before about the disputation in Leipzig of D. Martinus
Luther and Doctor Andreas Carlstadt, whereupon we indicated to you in
our answer that we wanted to let this reach those who had thought of it,
as we did: so we give you to know that they wrote to us again before a
good time, as you will hear from the copies enclosed. And we would have
liked to send you this for a long time, but it remained due to several
hindrances. We did not want to hold you back, because we are inclined to
be gracious to you. Date at Lochau, on the 12th day of the month
Octobris *Anno Domini* 1519 2c.

**No. 220.**

(Wittenberg.) October 13, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2454, annex, no. 37.

**188** Letters from the Year 1519. no. 221. **189**

**No. 2 21.**

Wittenberg. October 14, 1519.

**To Martin Seligmann.**

In response to the question of how a Christian, especially a pastor,
should behave in the face of the plague and other plagues, Luther
replied that a weak person may flee, but a clergyman must remain with
his congregation.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 2I3d; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 987; in
De Wette, vol. I, p. 347 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p..I95. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 642.

To the priest and servant of Christ, Martin Seligmann, vicar in the
valley of Mansfeld, his exceedingly dear \[friend\] in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I have received your letter with your questions, my dear man, and
I very much approve of what you firmly assert regarding brotherly love
and bearing the scourge of God. And yet God would have all Christians be
found to be such people as you describe them here. But what shall we do,
if not all are able to do everything? Must not the weak be carried and
taken up, as Rom. 15 \[v. 1 and 14, 1\] teaches? And what you say, \"One
bears another\'s burdens,\" seems to me to apply more to those against
whom you have used it. Those are rather the weak who flee death, 2) than
those who expect it. Moreover, famine and the sword are undoubtedly
plagues of God as well as the plague, as is abundantly clear from the
prophet. But we read in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 12,10.\] that
Abraham fled from the plague, likewise in the book of Ruth \[Cap. 1,
1\]. Furthermore, how often did not the saints flee from the sword? In
Jeremiah \[Cap. 35, 6-11\], the children of Jonadab went to the city at
the time of war, yet they had taken a vow not to live in any house.

Therefore, in my opinion, although all are to be exhorted to suffer the
hand of the Lord valiantly, yet they need not be compelled, nor told
that they sin; or if they should be told that they sin, they are to be
borne as weak. Has not also

1\) Instead of *portare in the* editions, the Vulgate will read
*portate.*

2\) Walch: \"which flee to the mountain\".

Did Christ carry the apostles when they were afraid to die and woke him
up from sleep? \[And he scolded Peter \[Matth. 14,31\] because he was
afraid to walk on the sea, but still he carried his weakness. Therefore,
if the pestilence and any scourge of God must necessarily be borne, it
also follows that it is not permitted to call upon the saints of God for
bodily healings. Then we would also like to take away all physicians
with all pharmacies, since it would not be permitted to seek an escape
from the scourge of God or a remedy through them, since weakness would
also be a scourge of God. For these things the divine goodness has
provided for those who are weak in faith.

By the way, those who are perfect and desire death of their own free
will have no need of these things. For even the church, when it prays
against the plague, against lightning and thunderstorms, does not pray
for the weak and tries to avert the scourges of wrath. She would pray
badly, because it would not be allowed to flee, to drive away, and (if
it is possible) to avoid the scourge of God. The brotherly love,
however, which perseveres in these evils with others, is found in the
perfect; it is very praiseworthy, and if it should be of use to the
neighbor, it is also commanded. But then it is necessary if no one else
could assist those dying of the plague who would like to serve the sick.
For I am firmly convinced that a priest who is commanded to care for the
sick may not flee or order a believer to take his place.

About this, read the extremely instructive letter of Augustine to
Honoratus, which is in his legend, described by Possidonius 4), in the
eleventh part, at the end. For he teaches that a shepherd must be with
the sheep of Christ, and lay down his life for them \[John 10:12\],
since he represents the state of the perfect. Therefore we, who are
strong, should carry the weak \[Rom. 15, 1.\], and give them

3\) The comma, which De Wette and the Erl. Briefw. have placed before
*proximis,* should probably be placed after it.

4\) Aurifaber and De Wette have the wrong reading *Possidamo* instead
of: *Possidanio*.

**190**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 221 to 228.

**191**

give the liberty, though not a praiseworthy one, to flee and preserve
their flesh. This I have recently \[to say\], which I pray you will take
for the best, and greet the Lord Jonas, 1) the pastor; and all of you, I
pray, will pray for me sinner. I also wish my relatives well,^2)^ the
enemy barkers I despise. Farewell in Christ. Wittenberg, Friday after
Dionysius \[Oct. 14\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 222.**

Dresden. October 14, 1519.

**Miltitz to the Elector Friedrich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 755, no. 324.

**No. 223.**

Wittenberg. October 15, 1519.

**Luther to the Elector Frederick.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 757, no. 325.

**No 224.**

Wittenberg. October 15, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2482, annex, no.50.

**No. 225.**

Wittenberg. (15 \[?\] October 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2478, annex, no. 48.

**No. 226.**

(Wittenberg.) (Mid-October 1519.)

**To Duchess Margaretha of Brunswick.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1230. - For the approximate timing,
compare vol. XV, 2480, note 3.

**No. 227.**

(Wittenberg.) October 16, 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2481, annex, no. 49.

1\) Jonas Kammerer or Kemmerer, pastor at the church of St. Georgii in
Thal Mansfeld.

2\) Walch translates the words: *carnem meam valere cupio*: \"I will
also be healthy in the flesh.\"

**No. 228.**

Bologna. 16 October 1519.

**Crotus Rubianus 3) to Luther.**

Crotus assures Luther of his old friendship from Erfurt. He had first
heard of the dispute that had broken out through Jakob Fuchs, and then
received some of Luther\'s writings against Rome from his brother
Andreas, but he had had to keep them secret. About the impression that
the Leipzig disputation had made in Italy; about the Roman conditions
and the presumed success of Luther\'s action against the Roman tyranny.
He encouraged him, whom God, like Paul, had cast down to earth by a
lightning strike and chosen, to continue the struggle, but not by way of
disputation, which was of no use.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. B 20, fol. 11 b. Printed in *Mieg, Monumenta
pietatis* 1701, vol. II, p. 12 ; in *Böcking, opp. Hutteni,* vol. I, p.
309 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 204.

To the venerable Father Martin Luther, Augustinian, the learned and holy
professor of theology, his oldest friend.

Hail! Two things, venerable Martin, who is exceedingly dear to me, keep
my love for you firm, namely that in our youthful age at Erfurt we were
in the closest acquaintance with the fine arts at the same time; this
time forges the closest bonds of friendship among like-minded people;
secondly, that we have you as such an excellent defender of right
godliness, which you protect with the shield of Scripture as much as
others, in the hope of gain, strive to overthrow it. Hence it is that I,
who am so far away from you, talk to you more often, shake your hand
more often, dream of you more often than those whom you have near you;
for this I call our Hess 4) as a witness, who administers the office of
an envoy for both of us with you; for it moves me, my dear Martin, it
moves me the quarrel which the wretched Dominicans arouse in you, who
are in contact with many at

3\) His real name was Johann Jäger and he was from the village Dornheim
near Arnstadt. He changed the name \"Jäger\" into *Crotus*, the name of
the constellation of Sagittarius. Rubianus or Rubeanus he called himself
after his birthplace, translating \"thorn\" by *rubus* (blackberry). He
was born around 1480; as we see here, he soon fell in with the
Reformation without being inwardly attached to it. Later, he took a firm
stand against it when he entered the service of Archbishop Albrecht of
Mainz in 1531. In a letter to Justus Menius of October 18, 1531, Luther
calls him \"an Epicurean who venomously persecutes us,\" and elsewhere:
\"Doctor Toad, plate licker of Mainz.\"

4\) Johann Heß from Nuremberg, later in Breslau, was the bearer of this
letter. Luther received it in December.

**192** Letters from the year 1519. No. 228. **193**

whose conspiracy is against your head. And if you had not been given by
God to this corrupt time, so that the right of God would have protected
you as a master of the Christian doctrine, we would have already given
you the funeral oration. So great is the rage of those people who would
rather have their doctrine approved than that of Christ; so great is
Roman avarice that it invents a thousand kinds of poison and treachery
if anything serves to profit. When I was still in Germany, 1) nothing
had been heard of your Punic war; in the year after, Jakob Fuchs, 2) who
is also your special patron, when he visited the thresholds of Peter out
of a vow, first brought the news that the arms had been taken. But the
first thing that came into our hands from this scholarly dispute was the
dialogue of Silvester, the astute theologian, who uses mockery^3)^ and
witticisms in a successful way, so that he wants to make your iron nose
turn away, and truth flows into him, who defends the papal party, all by
itself. 4) After this astute writing, Andreas Fuchs, 5) dean of Bamberg,
sent us your explanations of the disputed theses, then the Augsburg
treaty; 6) all of this has been eagerly read by us and, read by the
hands of many learned people, we have also sent it to Rome, so that we
suppress the false rumor spread about you by evil people. This had to be
done secretly, so that it would come into the hands of the readers
without the name of the sender, lest we bring disaster upon our heads
through the ignorance in those places where the rule of the priests is
terrible. For those are considered heretics who approve of your books in
Rome, and those who bring them there bring them there with danger to
their heads. For

1\) Crotus went to Italy in the early year of 1517.

2\) Jakob von Fuchs, from a respected Franconian noble family, was a
canon in Bamberg and Würzburg. His relatives were pupils of Crotus in
Bologna. In the year 1523, Fuchs had a document issued to Bishop Conrad
von Thüngen of Würzburg on behalf of Canonici Apel and Fischer, who were
imprisoned because of their marriage, under the title: \"Von dem
verehelichten Stand der Geistlichen\" (\"On the married status of the
clergy\") 2c. Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 258, note.

3\) Instead of *scommatis*, Wohl *scommatibus* should be read.

4\) Prierias used similar expressions in his letter to the pope. -St.
Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 312 f,

5\) The brother of Jakob Fuchs.

6\) The Explanations of the Theses on Indulgences, vol. XVIII, 100; the
*Acta Augustana*, vol. XV, no. 224 f.; no. 203 f.; no. 226; no. 176 f.

Rome is intolerant, hopeful, and always afraid that truth might take
something away from the things it holds through tyranny. After your
disputation became known, those who wanted to judge most wisely among
the theologians said that they were with you in heart, but with their
mouths they were of a different opinion, not only because they feared
the pope\'s power, but also because if his reputation were diminished,
the existence of the Christian community would be shaken. How righteous
this opinion is, they may see for themselves; I hold here that the
Christian religion needs no false pretenses, and that he who speaks
otherwise than he believes in his heart is not Christ\'s disciple, whose
teaching commanded \[Matt. 5:37\], \"Let your speech be, Yea, yea; Nay,
nay.\" If the newer theologians, as well as the disputators, had stood
as firmly in this opinion as they did on the Aristotelian decrees or
those of the brazen sea, we would not have been forced to obey the will
of the pope more than Christ\'s commandments, nor would you have been so
weighed down in your argument by his reputation, nor could Rome have so
changed the Catholic faith into another form, namely, into the form of
him who, though he is a man, permits divine honors to be bestowed upon
him by flatterers, with contempt for the form of him who, though he was
God, uttered himself and assumed the form of a servant \[Phil. 2, 6.
f.\]. It is a common speech in Rome, even of those who seem to be
intelligent: this cannot be other than exceedingly Christian, what is
good for the pope; yes, if you also oppose a hundred Pauls, yes, the
whole Scripture; since he is the governor of Christ, who has the Holy
Spirit for a leader, by whom he is governed. For there are some
misunderstood passages of Scripture in common use, with which they
immediately seek to shut the mouths of the gainsayers. What, therefore,
will your disputation accomplish? What fruit can the holy Scriptures
bring us after their reputation has been lost? Certainly none, unless
princes and bishops consider it more sacred to protect God\'s words than
to spend a great deal of gold for so many palliatives, indulgences,
bulls, antics, good-for-nothing things, so that the holy fathers may
feed their whores and scoundrels. Once, in the presence of a certain
Magister noster, a wretched Dominican, I rebuked the excessive Roman
licentiousness that oppressed the Christian people and stained their
morals.

**194** Letters from the year 1519. No. 228. **195**

Divine will must not be inquired into. I answered him: \"If one is
allowed to defend the deeds of shame with divine providence, then one
may cut them off much more sacredly by the power of the Scriptures, with
the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God \[Eph. 6:17\], since
the will of God is not known from anything else than from the testimony
of the Scriptures, which has come forth from the mouth of the Most
High. - This I say, my dear Martin, so that you may realize how little
this applies to Rome when you say \[Ps. 119, 129.\]: \"Your testimonies
are wonderful, O Lord, therefore my soul holds them.\" For one has
advanced so far in ungodliness that he who is called a good Christian or
a good theologian is regarded as showered with the utmost contempt, but
he who is greeted as a chamberlain or table companion of the pope is
regarded as a lucky child, so that the pope occupies the first place in
dignity, Christ the last. Here nothing is invented: When the king of the
*sacrificial* monkeys (*Rex sacrificulus*) goes out, so many cardinals,
so many protonotaries, so many bishops, so many legates, so many
provosts, so many advocates pile up around him, as hungry birds gather
around rotting corpses; Christ\'s supper 1) follows on some donkey in
the last crowd, which the lewd women and the ravished boys form. I have
recently been to Rome with our Hess; I have seen the old monuments, I
have seen the harmful chair \[Ps. 94, 20\]; to have seen it is useful,
to have seen it is annoying. There some (as they made themselves
believe) astute people attacked me because of the indulgence and the
power of the pope, as if I could or wanted to dispute about these
things, especially at Rome. I protected myself by silence, only that I
once jokingly answered a certain chatterer, who transferred the
forgiveness of sins from the power of God into the hands of the pope,
because Christ said to Peter \[Matth. 16,19.\]: \"Everything you will
solve on earth\", that only the Lord leads into hell and out again \[1
Sam. 2, 6\]. Therefore you are not the victor, Martin, although you,
armed with the protection of Scripture, have attacked the throat of the
enemy with the sword of the Holy Spirit: with the Roman See, not with
Scripture, stands the verdict of victory, for the latter, as your
Silvester testifies, takes its credit from the former. But against this
difficulty you are preserved unchanged.

1\) The monstrance in which the consecrated host is enclosed.

Your appeal to the judgment seat of a general council, which is so
completely fortified on every side with the protection of divine and
human law, is very impressive, that it earns praise even from the
opponents. But it is surprising how much gall it arouses in the
Florentine party, which fears that after the right over the souls of the
departed is gone, they will be deprived by a similar dispensation of the
palliæ, the reservations, the bulls, the prerogatives, the very wide
jurisdiction, and the other things to which the name of ecclesiastical
liberty has been attached, namely, the nets for taking the money of the
poor. Germany will be blind as long as it remains in its error, and as
long as the scholars do not cry out publicly, do not write against the
harmful customs which Rome sends us, and remind the uneducated poor
people of the Roman deceit, that we, who have hitherto been so often
deprived under the pretext of godliness by taxes for the Pallias, for
confirmations, for war against the Turk, have now received cardinals in
the midst of Germany to our greater burden; for what this innovation of
the Florentines would give birth to, the outcome will soon reveal. I
often call you, Martin, the father of the fatherland, who would be
worthy of a golden statue and annual festivals, since you first dared to
free the people of the Lord from harmful opinions and to assert the
right godliness. Continue as you have begun, leave the example behind
you for the descendants, for you do not do this without God\'s
intervention; divine providence has had its purpose here, since on your
return from your parents a bolt of lightning from heaven, as it were,
threw you down to earth as a second Paul before the city of Erfurt, and
drove you into the Augustinian enclosure, out of our fellowship, through
your \[for us\] exceedingly sorrowful departure. After this time,
although our intercourse was rare, my heart always remained yours, as
you could have perceived from the letter that I sent to you in Augsburg
last year, if it had been delivered. At that time, I sent you with the
utmost diligence to Thomas Fuchs 3).

2\) Leo X was a Florentine, and a large part of the ecclesiastical
income went to his relatives.

3\) Thomas von Fuchs, Imperial Governor at Regensburg, brother of Jakob
and Andreas. Compare his letter to Luther of December 12, 1519, and
Luther\'s reply to it on December 25.

**196**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 228. 229. 230.

**197**

A knight who is held in great esteem by the emperor. You have been made
tired so far and have suffered much in your body and in your good
reputation, but difficult things will not be accomplished without great
effort. When the end of the troubles will be there, the memory will be
sweet to you, and you will say

\[Ps. 66:12: \"I came in fire and water, but you carried me out and
refreshed me. Then all Germany will turn its face to you, then it will
hear the word of God from you with admiration. 1) But for the sake of
your meekness, I beg you, henceforth, not to enter the battlefield of
public disputation, especially against sacrilegious people; do you not
know that the children say: \"Against a talker, one must not fight with
words? Disputation within your monastery with the pen, in all
tranquility; the most accurate disputation is the one that is put on
paper; the one that turns here and there with words lacks the right
judgment and often distracts the disputant\'s mind from the truth, not
to say that it is disgraceful for a theologian to get into a quarrel. As
soon as the day of the dispute became known to us, we disliked the plan;
for Bologna 2) knows Eck\'s way; Vienna also knows it well. But the
matter went out for us, as Lang\'s and Melanchthon\'s letters testify.
Farewell and keep me dear; I will not cease to love you. I will protect
your honor here as far as it can be done with certainty. Forgive my
hastily thrown down letter; I preferred to make many words with you and
to write without care, rather than to carefully compose a short letter.
I have hardly been able to look through it again. At Bologna, October
16, 1519.

Crotus Rubianus.

**No. 229.**

Lochau. October 17, 1519.

**Elector Friedrich of Saxony to Miltitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 758, no. 326.

**No. 230 .**

Bologna. 31 October 1519.

**Crotus Rubianus to Luther.**

Crotus reports that Eck in Rome, on his own testimony, is regarded as
the victor in the Leipzig disputation; of a letter from Eck to Rome, in
which he asks the pope to take serious action against Luther, Hütten and
the humanistic studies; to force the universities of Paris and Erfurt to
give their verdict on the Leipzig disputation; of the reward which Eck
demands for his services, and of a new large book 3) of Prieria against
Luther.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. L 20, lol. 11. printed in Mieg\'s *Monum.
pietatis, tom*. II, p. 11; in Böcking, *opp. Hutten. tom*. I, p. 307 and
in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. II, p. 211.

Hail! Eck is celebrated in Rome as the victor in the Leipzig
disputation: so much is his own testimony valid where the people are
drawn by hope to the side on which they wanted to see the victory bend.
I have resisted an overhaste of the verdict, so that Rome would not
suffer again what it suffered shortly before, when it attributed the
imperial dignity to the Frenchman 4) for certain, while our princes
chose the Lord Carl. But let Rome have its judgment, if only that is
certain, that not everything is just which it decides by its judgment.
But it is foolishness to decide on the victory and to doubt it at the
same time. Eck 5) sent a letter to Rome, which, apart from the pope and
two theologians, only very few have seen; a certain physician, our
friend, listened in unnoticed when it was read very secretly, and what
he was able to retain in his memory during the reading, he communicated
to me in brotherly good faith; I communicate this to you, Martin, under
the same seal of secrecy, that you do not make it known, so that the
physician remains unharmed. The letter was written in many chapters,
which indicated the order of the Leipzig disputation, then also the way
in which the pope had to proceed. Bishops have been appointed for your
condemnation, with a certain number of \[people\] who are necessary for
the judgment; the way in which it has been held with them has been
indicated.

1\) Instead of *audiat* we have assumed *audiet.*

2\) Already on the day of his arrival in Bologna, July 7, 1515, Eck
participated in a disputation of Joh. Faber and was accused of a false
citation by the Dominicans. Eck did not answer for this.

3\) not \"from a letter,\" as the Erl. Briefw. states.

4\) Francis I, King of France, was a contender for the German imperial
throne. Carl V was elected on June 28, 1519.

5\) Here in Latin it says *Hechius*, afterwards *Heckius.*

**198** Letters from 1519, No. 230, 231. **199**

who have taught against the church, so that each one may serve as an
example. You have been made hateful mainly for the sake of the Bohemian
religion and because of your approval of the Hussite doctrine; the poets
and those who have a passion for the fine sciences have been accused,
but especially my Hütten, from whom some poems about the Florentine
fraud 1) have been quoted; a complaint has been added about the danger
threatening in the church through the Greek and Latin studies, which are
increasing more and more from day to day; then the pope has been
persistently admonished that he suffer no more delay in the great
danger, and by threats force the school at Paris and ours at Erfurt to
pronounce their judgment; 2) indeed, if he were to prolong the matter,
he would soon lose Thuringia, Meissen, and the Mark, and soon after
other regions whose peoples would want to enter heart and soul into your
heretical opinion, as he calls it. The doctor has not kept other things,
and I cannot tell you unknown things; you can take similar things from
this and judge the matter for yourself; since it is not small, take it
to heart, but keep quiet if you do not want to ruin me and the doctor.
When I return to Germany next spring, I will give the middle finger to
the false apostles, 3) who devour us and strike us in the face; here
\[in Italy\] one must close one\'s eyes. Eck at first desired as a
reward for his disputation the office of a heretic inquisitor in the
precinct of three bishops; now he has changed his mind and is applying
for a parish in Ingolstadt, but in the same letter he severely accuses
the pope of not condemning the right of a certain person to this parish
in his favor, since he suffers so much for the church. Greetings
Carlstadt. In haste, at Bologna on the day of Quintinus (Vtj) \[the 31st
of October\].

While I was in Rome these days, I don\'t know by what fate, your woodsy
Silvester came here with his jokes and the brazen nose, who showed the
Dominican brothers a rambling book 4) against you, not

1\) Probably the *Epigrammata Hutteni ad Crot. Rub. de statu Romano ex
urbe missa*.

2\) about the Leipzig Disputation.

3\) *digitum medium* == *digitum impudicum*, the sign of the highest
contempt.

4\) Because the book is called a \"*prolixum*\", we have no doubt that
already here not from the Epitome alone, but from the great work of
Prierias: *Errata et argumenta Martini Luteris reci.*

Thomas, but all of Christ and Paul, but I mean \[for his benefit\]
useful and bad things. 5) You have rightly prayed for him not to
miscarry; repeat the prayer and call the midwife (*Lucinam*). His belly
is swollen and protrudes to the great sign of some monstrous birth. If
it pleases you, we want to take it to the farthest islands soon after
the birth, or leave it in the midst of the people for a short time. It
is astonishing how I am happy to see new foundations about the church
according to its essence, according to its power, according to its
representation, 6) according to the accidental circumstances, according
to the name, according to the participation. For what should the
bursting belly produce but such monsters? I greet the subject; also the
noble Eberhard von der Tann 7) wishes him the best welfare.

**No. 231 .**

(Wittenberg.) (October? 8) 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

. Luther sends him a handwritten copy of his Sermon on the Preparation
for Dying.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 238. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 12; by Löscher, vol. Ill, p.
1002; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 385 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 216.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 658.

*tata, etc., is* the talk of the town. The letter of the same is dated:
\"*Rome. 1519. decima. Junii*.\" At the beginning of the 15th chapter,
fol. 212, Prierias says that at the time he received \"Luther\'s
explanation of the thirteenth thesis on the power of the pope,\" the
work had been completed (with the exception of the 15th and 16th
chapters) and had already been given to the printers to work on.
Luther\'s aforementioned writing may have been received around the end
of August or the beginning of September 1519. See our detailed report on
this work of Prierias in the St. Louis edition, Vol. XVIII,
Introduction, p. 19b f.

5\) These words are almost untranslatable: *Christos et Paulos, puto
Chrestos et Palos*. Böcking makes the remark to this passage: *Frigida
hodie videtur annominatio*: xxxxxxxx, *utilis, commodus*; xxxxxx,
*pravus,*

*[sive]{.underline} palus* == stake.

6\) The three preceding expressions: *ecclesia essentialis, virtualis*
and *repraesentativa are* used by Silvester in the dialogue; the three
following ones: *accidentalis, nominalis* and *participalis are*
mockingly hung on him by Crotus.

7\) In Latin *Erhardus von der Than*. Because this name is at the end,
the Catholic theologian Wiedemann, \"Eck\", p. 149, note 15, makes him
the writer of this letter and calls him \"thau\".

8\) Since Luther sends the first copies of the Sermon to Spalatin on
November 1, this letter is to be placed in October.

**200** Letters from the year 1519. No. 231 to 235. **201**

To his Spalatin in the castle. JEsus.

Hail! See, there you have the sermon on dying, which was written in
haste, but which grew more under the haste than I expected, even though
I did not include everything that occurred to me. For it is sober, 1)
and retains more the sense of Scripture than the words,\' this I have
done because I wanted it to be useful to the laity. By the way, send the
copy back as soon as possible, because I will publish it, and if
something should be added or changed, it will be done then. I have
written almost all this day to get rid of the rut of your bustle.
Farewell.

Brother M. Luther, Aug.

**No. 232 .**

(Wittenberg.) 1. November 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2476, annex, no. 46.

**No. 233 .**

Wittenberg. (Beginning of November 1519.)

**To corner.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1170, no. 383.

**No. 23 4.**

(Wittenberg.) November 7, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2477, annex, no. 47.

**No. 235 .**

Wittenberg. November 7, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther wants to start the Postille; again about Adrian; explanations
about the Leipzig disputation concerning the sweeping fire.

The original is in the *British Museum* in London. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen.* a. fol. 207. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 6; by De Wette, vol. I, p.
365 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 224. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
645.

1\) Walch: \"For he is a dry, miserable man who\" 2c.

To his extremely dear Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, his superior.

JEsus.

Hail! I am about to set to work interpreting the Epistles and Evangelia,
2) admittedly very swamped with business, my dear Spalatin. I will send
the other things I can.

You see what I have written about the Hebrew Matthaeus Adrianus;
therefore do your duty, but soon, and send back his letter.

I know nothing about a saying of the preacher Solomon 3) about
purgatory, and I have never heard of it. However, the \"Heller\" in
Matthew \[Cap. 5, 26\], with which Eck also attacked me in Leipzig,
applies just as much to Purgatory as to all other things. For what
should it \[the Heller\] not signify to those people who would rather
understand any arbitrary thing by it than understand it correctly? But
even Eck has been clearly refuted by the text itself, first by the
adverb \"until,\" which, according to the usage of Scripture, does not
fix the time, as those think, as Matt. 1,^4)^ 25.: \"And knew her not
until she bare her first son.\" See the Erasmus and Jerome. Secondly,
because the words of Christ speak of such a one as is not willing to his
adversary, that is, who has not obeyed the commandment of Christ, of
whom also they themselves confess that he sins unto death. Therefore,
that dungeon is hell, from which no one is released, while those alone
send to purgatory those who have done everything and have been willing
to their adversary. Therefore, this text is valid only against them,
unless at the same time they say that the souls in purgatory 5) are
separated in hatred and anger and discord with the adversary, which, I
hope, not even their iron forehead can understand.

2\) This is the Latin church postilla, which did not appear until March
1521.

3\) In Buddeus and De Wette: *Ecclesiastici,* to which the latter
correctly remarked: \"Should mean *Ecclesiastis.*\" In the Leipzig
Disputation, Eck had referred to Eccles. 4:14 for Purgatory. See St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 1014. - Walch translates: \"What the church is
able to do about purgatory, I do not know\" 2c.

4\) In the editions: Matth. II.

5\) Here it says *id est* superfluous.

**202** Letters from the year 1519. no. 235. 236. 237. **203**

would like to dare. But Christ speaks of these, as even a child can
understand. The passage of the apostle to the Corinthians \[Cap. 3,13.
ff.\] was also forcibly snatched from the corner, even though he chatted
that it was exceedingly clear for him. The words of Paul are clear, that
the day of the Lord will prove the works of each one; this day (he says
\[v. 13. Vulg.\] will be revealed in fire. Hence even a person without
understanding sees that Paul\'s words speak of the Day of Judgment, when
the world will perish by heat, and can only be drawn to Purgatory by
force or by a figure (which proves nothing). The word of Christ in John
\[Cap. 15, 2\] about the vine that is to be cleansed was drawn to
purgatory by a certain Vincentius 1) as if there really was someone who
had done violence to the Scriptures more often than this very
Vincentius. If by the word \"purify\" the purgatory is understood
everywhere, why^2)^ is it written Luc. 2, 22 \[Vulg.\]: \"When the days
of their 3) purification were fulfilled\" ? And what should those
rightly understand, to whom the words of Vincentius are articles of
faith? There is still the very clear passage in the books of the
Maccabees \[2 Macc. 12,46.\] left. But this book does not make articles
of faith, nor is it held in high esteem by the Fathers; in particular,
this second book has been rejected by St. Jerome in more than one place.
In short, although I know that there is a purgatory among us, I do not
know whether it is among all Christians. It is certain that no one is a
heretic who does not believe that there is a purgatory, nor is it an
article of faith, since the Greeks who do not believe it have never been
considered heretics for that reason, except by the recent heretics
(*apud haereticantissimos haereticantes*). And at the Basle Council they
are to give an excellent account of their faith.

1\) *Vincentius Bellovacensis* (a Dominican from Beauvais, educator of
the sons of Louis IX of France, died 1264) in his *Speculum rnorale*. -
It seems to us that there is a gap in the text before the following \"as
if\".

2\) Instead of *quia*, to give sense, we have adopted *quare.*

3\) Instead of sorum in the editions, the Vulgate reads *ejus.*

bens. 4) Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, Monday after Leonhard
\[Nov. 7\] 1519.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 236.**

Ingolstadt. November 8, 1519.

**Eck to the Elector Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1308.

**No. 237.**

(Wittenberg.) November 19, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Intercession for a widow (Walpurg Landmann) who had bequeathed her house
to the canons in Wittenberg and wanted to revoke her will. From Emsers
Wüthen.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 37; in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 63. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
I, p. 217d; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 992; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 367
and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. II, p. 261. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
650.

To his in Christ exceedingly dear Georg Spalatin, the servant of God to
be highly honored in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I beg you, may the matter of this widow reach our most noble
prince through you. I have negotiated with the Lord Dean 5) and some
others that they should give her back her house, which she gave them by
will. They answer me that it is (as it is called) a donation among the
living, which does not seem to me to be so. She complains that she is
needy, but they promise her 14 guilders a year for life to keep the
house, and they all say that she could not manage such a large sum a
year from the entire value of the house. Those, as I see, have one thing
in mind, that the priests do not have houses and land. She, on the other
hand, complains that she has recently widowed sisters elsewhere, whose
lack she intends to alleviate when she gets the house back, and to
revoke the will.

4\) Already De Wette has added *reddidisse.*

5\) Loren; Schlamau.

**204** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 237. 238. **205**

Her case is a godly one, and according to the gospel it would seem to me
that it should be restored to her. The gentlemen, however, do not
believe her, but that does not do me any good, mainly because one looks
for a property or a place in this way. I fear that there is an evil eye
looking out. You do the work of guilty love. For this also belongs to
the way of living priestly 1) in all the place where you are. Fare well
in Christ. Emser rages and finally spews out his fury 2) but nothing
that serves the cause. 1519 on the day of St. Elizabeth \[Nov 19\].

Martin Luther.

**No. 238.**

(Wittenberg.) November 20, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends him a piece of a work as a sample, which Spalatin is to
follow in continuing it. About the remarks about the Leipzig theologians
made at a dinner party; about Einser\'s rebuttal, to which Luther only
wants to respond when Eck\'s has also appeared.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 30 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 56. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 218; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 993; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
369 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. II, p. 263. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
651.

To the good and learned man Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, his
exceedingly dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I send you, my dear Spalatin, the work 3) One Sunday as a sample,
since you, after your greater experience in the fine (*humanis*)
sciences, can more appropriately and skillfully designate (*signare)
the* passages in the remaining \[pieces\] from my collection.

1\) Compare No. 177.

2\) Namely the writing: \"Emsers Behauptung seines Bocks von der
Lutherschen Jagd\" (*A venatione Luteriana Aegocerotis assertio.
Emser*), See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 39 b.

3\) This \"work\" is summarized by the Erl. Briefw. \"as a sample of the
church postilion the treatment of a Sunday\"; De Wette says: \"probably
a sermon\". Neither seems permissible to us according to what Luther
further adds. It is perhaps to be referred to the \"Tessaradekas,\"
which was intended for the Elector and was then in Spalatin\'s hands.

Of course, I will not be able to do both, since I am extremely busy, or
I will involve Philip in this task, so that he too will at least show
his zeal to the prince.

Doctor Breitenbach 4) and Mr. Heinrich Schleinitz honored me with their
table company and showed their great friendliness towards me; I did not
know the people before. We talked about nothing but the Leipzig
theologians, on whom the latter did not seem to think much. I learned a
funny saying: When someone (he said) sees such a theologian, he sees the
seven deadly sins, namely to this honor we big-bellied sophists have
brought our theological profession among the common people. And indeed,
this word seems to me to be true. For what shines out in all 5) such
people but the belly, the purse and the splendor. For what else should
one enumerate the spitefulness, the anger and the unchastity with the
most unbearable sloth? God have mercy on us.

Emser pours out his fury,^6)^ but in such a way that he confirms my
letter. I am sorry that such coarse, obtuse and tasteless boasters are
involved in this trade. If I were not restrained by consideration for my
name, indeed, by the fear of Christ, - I have not yet had one who has
presented me with a more fruitful material to write about, - in how
unworthy a manner could I make a mockery of this mole, perhaps also of
the Leipzigers. But I will remain silent and wait for Eck, 7) so that I
can also answer this liar and taunter (if the matter entails otherwise).

I am also sending the letter that I received yesterday from the
Oberland, from which you will see how things are going there; if you
have it

4\) Georg von Breitenbach, a lawyer in Leipzig, was later used by Duke
Georg against Luther. - Heinrich von Schleinitz zum Sathan, Duke
George\'s chief marshal.

5\) We think that instead of *nobis it* should be read: *ornnibus* or
*homnibus*.

6\) See the previous letter. - The \"letter\" will mean \"Luther\'s
addition to Emser\'s Bock\". St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1212.

7\) Namely, \"Eck\'s answer for Hieronymus Emser against Luther\'s mad
hunt. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 910. Compare ibid.

**206** Letters from the year 1519. no. 238. 239. 240. **207**

Send it back when you have read it. Farewell, and take care of my
intercession for Philip, as you promised, although it is against his
will. On the day before the sacrifice 1) \[Mary\] \[20 Nov.\] 1519.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 239 .**

(Wittenberg.) (Before November 29, 1519.) ^2)^

**To Spalatin.**

On the arrangement of school lessons and the writers to be read.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 11. Printed by Buddeus, p. 8; by
Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 954; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 384 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. II, p. 265. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 648.

To his Georg Spalatin, his \[friend\] to be highly honored in Christo in
love.

Hail! First, how much to give to my judgment, you may see; it will go
beyond the forces, if only one teacher of the school (*paedagogio*) is
to be presented. Secondly, if Qnintilian and Aristotle \"of the living
beings\" cannot be read at the same time, it is far better to leave
Aristotle of the living beings in place; then Pliny will easily replace
him. Quintilian, however, is the only one who can make very good young
men, even men. I ask that you above all not let this one go, whether
Fach or Heß 3) have the subject of teaching, only that he be one of the
subjects of teaching. I prefer Quintilian to almost all writers, because
he instructs as well as teaches eloquence, that is, he teaches in the
best way with words and things. The other is well ordered. Be well.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

1\) *Praesentationis \[Mariae\]* is the sacrifice of Mary, that is, the
day on which Mary is said to have vowed chastity. Walch offers: \"The
holy evening of the light mass\" \[*Puriticationis*; Feb. 2\].

2\) This undated letter will have to be placed with the Erl. Briefw. to
this time, because Melanchthon asks in a letter to Spalatin of November
29 for acceleration of the matters mentioned here. See *Corp. Ref.*,
Vol. I, 127.

3\) Eisermann, also called Montanns.

**No. 240.**

(Wittenberg.) November 29, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther is convinced that Spalatin did not take on the task set for him;
thanks him for a gift from the Elector; von Eck\'s petty printed matter.
The Sermon vom Sacrament is in print. About the visit of the Count of
Isenburg and about the title of the German Tessaradekas.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. , No. 38 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 63. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 218b; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 994; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
368 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 266. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
653.

To his \[friend\] in Christ, Georg Spalatin, the servant of God, the
priest, the good and learned man.

JEsus.

Hail! You have quite nicely shifted the task of 4) designating the
places back to me, which I had turned to you; you have won. By the way,
I thank you for the princely gift. I have long since read in print the
antics written by the Leipzigers to Eck. 5)

In print is the Sermon of the Sacrament,^6)^ which makes a lot of words.

It pleases me that Philip was commanded by the prince to wear what was
given to him.

The Count of Isenburg 7) (*Eysenberg*) of the German House, who had
brought these warriors, has been with me night and day, and has proven
himself to be very kind; he has instructed me to greet you in his name.
He had come here to see me. But listen how politely the Witten

4\) See No. 236.

5\) From a letter of Adelmann from Augsburg to Pirkheimer of August 26,
1519, we see that these are letters of the Leipzigers to Eck, which he
first carried around in all the inns and barbers\' parlors and then had
printed.

6\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 426.

7\) Count Wilhelm von Isenburg, Commander of the Teutonic Knights at
Cologne, had served the Order in Prussia for decades, and now in his old
age returned to his homeland, where he, as an old man of probably
seventy years, worked in the years 1525-1529 with writings for the
Protestant cause. - The words: \"who had brought about these men of
war\" are probably to be understood from the fact that he had brought
the Teutonic lords in Prussia to the Gospel. - Walch translates: *Domus
Theuthonicae* by: \"from the Thuringian house\".

**208**

Letters from the year 1519. No. 240 to 243.

**209**

berger gatekeeper is. Drunkenly, he had closed the gate at five
o\'clock. The count, who came late, asked in the name of the abbot of
Zinna, 1) to be let in, since he had asked in vain in his own name. But
the latter, or rather his beer, said: \"The Abbot of Zinna has never
given me a gift^2)^ .\" In short, he was forced to descend with two
noblemen in an innkeeper\'s pile in front of the upper gate. I did not
want this story to remain hidden from you, so that you too would have
something to boast about with us from this fine conduct. Fare well and
pray for me. For as far as the title of the Tessaradekas is concerned, I
do not care how you shape it, only that it has nothing of presumption
about it, since the matter itself seems to me to be very small. 1519 on
the day before St. Andrew\'s Day \[Nov. 29\].

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 241.**

Wittenberg. December 3, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2486, annex, no. 53.

**No. 242.**

(Wittenberg.) December 7, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther regrets that the Elector will not come to Wittenberg. Of the
lectures; of a spurious mystical theology of Aristotle; of the
publication of the Tessaradekas ; of Matthew Adrian. For the postscript
attached to this letter, see No. 183.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 239. Printed byBuüÜ6U8, v. 10; by Löscher, vol. Ill, p.
995; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 372 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 271.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 654.

To his \[friend\] in Christ, Georg Spalatin, the servant of God, court
preacher to the Duke of Saxony 2c.

JEsus.

Hail! That which we hoped, my dear Spalatin, I see, is changed, viz.

1\) Abbot Benedict of Zinna Monastery, near Jüterbock.

2\) Luther had first written \"Trankgeld\".

that the whole court would come here; for this had spread the rumor.
But, as I see, the princes must first do their works and then look at
them,^3)^ because they are also gods \[Ps. 82:1, 6\]. For what is spoken
and looked at before it is done tends to be thwarted in such a way. But
it was this that we would speak of many things, chiefly of the
institution of our university. For I hear that the lecture on Aristotle
is not as fruitful as we thought.

Doctor Johann Hess 4) brought from Italy a mystical theology of
Aristotle, which (as they write) was recently found in Syria, that is,
dreamed up by some deceiver, as I believe, so that they would keep this
enemy of Christ, after he had been made more glorious to us by an
apparent title, all the longer against Christ. He also brought letters
from scholars 5).

I do not know yet whether I will publish my Tessaradekas, especially in
Latin, since such a writing, which teaches Christ, is exceedingly
hateful to the Sophists.

But you will best recognize from this letter of Matthew Adrian what
should have been done; you see that he is still waiting. I will not be
unhappy to see Eck\'s boast, although I almost suspect its nature. Fare
well in Christ. The day after Nicolai \[Dec. 7\] 1519.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 243.**

(Wittenberg.) December 8, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

About Eck\'s expected rebuttal; about the occupation of the parish in
Schmiedeberg; about the case of the Wittwe Landmann and a similar case
with the Schloßpfeifer, and about the Tessaradekas.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 40 and in Cod*. Jen.* a, fol. 65. Printed Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 220; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 996; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
373 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. ll, p. 273. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
656.

3\) Allusion to I Mos. 1, 31.

4\) Johann Hetz from Nuremberg had made a humanistic journey to Italy in
1518, and at Bologna, at the same time as Crotus Rubianns, he attained
the doctorate. Now he visited Wittenberg.

5\) Among others, also No. 226.

**210** Letters from the year 1519. no. 243. 244. 245. **211**

To the learned and extremely honest man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s
servant, his dearest friend.

JEsus.

Hail! Dear God, as my corner is never anything other than a corner; so
he also, the wretched man, crept around the matter to Leipzig, yet
slippery, and was always afraid to come to the purpose. But God would
that his little book, of which he boasts, would be out; may the Lord
grant that I have lost my work for the last time on these trivial
things; I hope so.

However, I am surprised what is being done about the parish of
Schmiedeberg before the most noble prince. Magister Herzberg has the
votes of the university, and I do not like the fact that they are
invalid. I do not want you to do anything in this matter that would
deceive the one to whom the spirit has given it.

If you know anything about the matter of the widow, which I have
recently traded through you, I ask you to inform me. There is a danger
that I will fall into the hatred of the canonists or become more
involved in it. Already with four copies of wills (as they are called)
they are attacking my patience quite severely by revealing that they
prefer concern for temporal things, not to say avarice, to love, and not
without annoyance, which (as you know) is not always to be suffered by
me according to my duty.

Now they have a deal with the castle piper Nicolaus in a similar case.
There is talk and a common rumor that a certain person died of hunger,
who gave them everything they had only to keep, to whom they gave
nothing back. I do not believe it, but I am afraid that if it were
investigated, not everything would be found to be to one\'s liking. I
would rather have talked to you about this than written. I wanted to
send the Tessaradekas to Leipzig, but I will see if I can be at your
beck and call. Farewell. On the day of the conception \[of Mary\] \[Dec.
8\] 1519.

Martin Luther.

1\) The comma after *aperte* in the editions should probably precede the
same.

**No. 2 44.**

(Wittenberg.) (After December 8, 1519.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2483, annex, no. 51.

Instead of the time determination assumed by us in the 15th volume, we
have used the one given by De Wette and the Erl. Briefw., guided by the
following considerations: 1) Aurifaber places this letter after December
8. 2) Luther uses exactly the same expressions on December 18 in the
letter to Joh. Lang (No. 245) in the communications about Eck and
Staupitz, which would hardly have happened after a longer intervening
time. 3) Luther would have already given Lang the news about Staupitz in
the letter of October 15 (No. 225), if he had had it.

**No. 2 45.**

(Regensburg.) December 12, 1519.

**Imperial Governor Thomas Fuchs to Luther.**

Inquiry on behalf of the Council of Regensburg about a dispute with the
bishop there. Answered on December 25.

Printed by Carl Theod. Gemeiner, Regensburgische Chronik, vol. IV
(Regensburg 1824), p.374, note 721; in Illgen\'s Zeitschrift für hist.
Theol. 1844, Heft 2, p. 89 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 276.

To the venerable and highly learned Mr. Martin Lutter, the h. Scripture
Doctor, Augustinian Order at Wittenberg, his but dear Lord and friend.

My special kindly willing service with diligence before. Venerable,
highly learned, dear lord and friend! I am undoubtedly unforgotten by
your dignities, which I have acted with diligence for your good in your
affairs at Augsburg against the Cardinal, your Widertheil, in the past
year, for which reason I am well disposed towards your dignities. And
therefore my most diligent request comes to your dignity, that your
dignity herewith inform me in writing at this present my messenger on
the *casum* 3) of your faithful council, whether and what the law sets
and wants in this respect, the *ordinario loci* or someone else is due
to it, also how and with what measure and reason it may be rightfully
withstood and resisted. And your dignity will not take any trouble in
this respect 4). That inherits

2\) Compare No. 226 towards the end.

3\) The dispute concerned the offering money in the Chapel of the
Beautiful Mary, of which Bishop John III claimed the third part from the
city.

4\) \"bevilhen\" == to let be too much.

**212** Letters from the year 1519. no. 245. 246. **213**

I will earn your dignity, where it again comes to debt, quite kindly and
benevolently. Date on Monday after *Conceptionis Mariae* \[12 Dec.\]
1519.

**No 246.**

Wittenberg. December 18, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

About Miltitzen\'s alleged ripening by Wittenberg. Luther refuses to
write a Lenten postilla because of his busy schedule. He does not want
to write a sermon on the other so-called sacraments (except baptism, the
Lord\'s Supper and penance), because they are not founded in Scripture.
About the printing of the tessaradekas. He answers the question of how
the duties of a priest differ from those of a layman.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen.* a, fol. 66. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 222 d; in Löscher,
vol. Ill, p. 998; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 377 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 277. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 659. The postscript in Burkhardt,
p. 24 and in Erl. Briefw.

To his in Christ exceedingly dear Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ,
the righteous and learned man, his friend and patron.

JEsus.

Hail! There is a rumor that Carl M\[ilitz\] passed through here
yesterday, which I wonder about; but that may be all right. I have read
what you write about his mockery of my painting. But that you press me
so hard with the interpretation of the Lenten Gospels and Epistles, I do
not know if I can do it; there are many, and I am very burdened. Don\'t
you think? The Psalter 1) requires a whole man; likewise the sermon to
the people, which works its way through the Gospel^2)^ and the first
book of Moses, a whole man; thirdly, the prayers and services, which my
order lays out for me, also a whole man; fourthly, the work of
interpretation, to say nothing of the letters, which I have to write,
then also of the occupation with foreign matters, among which also the
meeting with good friends, which I find almost a feast, is for me a
whole man.

1\) \"Luther\'s Works on the Psalms,\" St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 198.

2\) the Gospel of Matthew. See Luther\'s letter to Spalatin of February
8, 1520.

The new system, which I would like to call a \"mess,\" steals a great
deal of time.

I am certainly a man, and only one; I am ready for work; but if I am to
carry out what you ask, then I must leave everything else. And if God
wanted me to be able to devote myself to this One in peace, I would
count that as a great happiness; there is so much missing that I would
not like to do it.

It does not take place that you or any man could hope or expect from me
a sermon about the other sacraments 3) until I am instructed from which
scripture I can prove them. For there is no sacrament left for me, since
there can be no sacrament unless an explicit divine promise is given,
which exercises faith, since we can have nothing to do with God without
the word of the one who promises and the faith of the one who accepts.
But what those have fabulated about the seven sacraments, you will hear
at another time.

The Tessaradekas is printed in both languages. The duties of a priest,
which you ask me about, I do not know, since the more I think about it,
the more I find nothing to write about but ceremonial things; then I am
very moved by the apostle Peter, who 1 Pet. 2,5. 9. says that we are all
priests; likewise John in Revelation \[Cap. 5,10.\], so that this kind
of priesthood in which we are does not seem to be at all different from
the laity, except by the office by which the sacraments and the word are
administered. Everything else is the same, if you take away the
ceremonies and human statutes, and we must wonder very much where
ordination could have received the name of a sacrament. Is not this
marvelous to you? But orally more, together with Philip, because we have
dealt with these things often and sharply.

Therefore, your duty would not differ in anything from the common duties
of the laity, except for the burdens that the Roman court has imposed on
all priests without distinction. The greatest thing, however, is that
you may well face

3\) Namely, except for the three dedicated to Duchess Margaretha of
Brunswick. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 48, col. 2480,
note 3.

**214** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 246. 247. **215**

understand to what place you are called, that is, to the court; like
Esther, you are called to serve the people \"where you can\" who are
governed by that court.

As this is the most difficult and dangerous thing, so do not doubt that
it is the highest and first, namely incomparably more glorious than all
yours, be it the *horae canonicae* or any duties that anyone could
prescribe to you. I believed that through you the letter to D. Heinrich
Stromer^1)^ could be best taken care of, so I ask you to have it brought
there. Farewell and pray for me. On the fourth Sunday of Advent \[Dec.
18\] 1519. Wittenberg. Martin Luther, Augustinian.

The prior does not come again with his request, not because he is
unwilling, but (as he says) because the right time to request this has
passed. 2) He will come at Lent in order to use your service more
abundantly. He wanted me to write this to you.

**No. 247.**

Wittenberg. December 18, 1519.

**To Joh. Lang.**

Of the friar Johann Caesar; of the friars\' attendance of Melanchthon\'s
lectures. Lutber sends writings. About Eck\'s threats; about the delay
of the arbitration ruling on the Leipzig disputation. Luther does not
want to answer Emser in particular, but at the same time also Eck. About
Miltitzen\'s effort to take Luther to Trier 2c.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 399, fol. 1271). Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 223 b; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 1000; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
379 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 280. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
661.

To the venerable father Johann Lang, the theologian, Augustinian at
Erfurt, temporary vicarius, his \[friend\] to be highly honored in
Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! With the money of the brother Caesar, 3) venerable father, what
you have written will happen. Caesar was not at home when

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1168, note 1.

2\) Burkhardt: *transierit*, for which the Erl. Briefw. (according to
the original ?) offers less well *transierat.*

3\) Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 45, § 3.

the letter came; but whether he is to be left here is up to you, for you
wrote before that he should stay until he returned to you as a Bible
commentator 4). He has lectures for theology, then also not bad books,
only that I am sorry that I cannot also send all brothers to Philip\'s
theological lecture on Matthew at the sixth hour of the morning. This
little Greek surpasses me also in theology.

I did not know that you would receive the Psalter 5) twice, one from me,
the other full of Philip. The other small things, I thought, would come
to you without my effort. I have taken the sermon on usury 6) before my
hand again, and I want to make the pure doctrine of Christ annoy many
more people; I will send everything else. See to it that we get the
printed disputations 7) as soon as possible.

Eck threatened me as well as Philippus and Carlstadt, and our whole
university, yes even your prince, I don\'t know what kind of frightening
things. For he has spat out in German a great confused heap of slobber
against the prince, one would think that the almighty God is speaking;
but quite rightly such a sophist runs against such a prince.

It pleases me that your Erfurtians have rejected the verdict. For now
there has also been futile dispute and the Parisians are judging in
vain, that is, a field is opened to speak against the Roman Antichrist,
if God gives grace. In our city, a treatise (as it is believed) by a
certain Bohemian is being circulated, which is as learned as it is
theological, against the tyranny of the Roman court.

I did not understand enough what you wanted, since you wrote in Greek
that they were not

4\) *[cursor]{.underline}* is, according to *Du Cange,* the one who

explains the Bible to those who are going through the theological
course.

5\) The *operationes in psalmos*, St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 198; the
same were issued piecemeal.

6\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 856.

7\) Namely, the Acts of the Leipzig Disputation, which most likely Lang
had printed in Erfurt. See St. Louis edition, Vol. XV, 859.

8\) In the letter to the Elector, No. 234.

**216** Letters from the year

1519\. no. 247. 248. **217**

without your great effort the disputations have been sent back to Duke
George 1) and for what cause your theologians and legal scholars were so
even dismayed (xxxxxxxxxx).

I will not answer the Emser in a special letter, because this completely
unrhymed person not only affirms and admits what I had put on him, but
also does not touch the subject of the matter in the slightest bit, in
that he only rages with invective; if the Eck Aligriff comes (as he has
promised), then I will also dismiss that one at the same time.

Carl Miltitz is soon at Torgau, 2) soon at Lochau, eager to lead me with
him to Trier, and the adversaries are extremely afraid, use all kinds of
tricks, and are completely nonsensical about the fact that my ruin is
being postponed; the bishops are writing to Rome against me. I do not
yet know what will happen; perhaps I will go to Trier when I receive
safe conduct and the call of the bishop of Trier.

The venerable Father Vicarius stays in Salzburg, healthy and honored,
and writes that Eck tries to win the great ones everywhere, but the
Cardinal, Bishop Lang, dislikes Eck\'s modesty. Lotther from Leipzig
establishes a printing press for three languages. Studies are
flourishing, especially in theology, Leipzig is Leipzigish
(*lipsiscit*), as is its way. I am very busy. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, on the fourth Sunday of Advent \[Dec. 18\] 1519.

May your new licentiates be well and I greet Father M. Usingen.

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 2 48.**

Wittenberg. December 23, 1519.

**To Thomas Fuchs, Imperial Governor at Regensburg.**

Luther advises an amicable settlement.

From Gemeiners Kirchenreformationsgeschichte von Regensburg 1792, p. 10,
in De Wette, vol. I, p. 381 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 29.

1\) The letter of rejection from the University of Erfurt to Duke Georg
is dated Dec. 29, 1519. Seidemann, Leipz. Disp., p. 152.

2\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 766, no. 331.

To the strict and honorable Lord Thomas Fuchs, Knight of Schneeberg,
Roman Imperial Majesty and Holy Roman Emperor. Majesty and of the Holy.
Reichs Hauptmann zu Regensburg 2c. 2c., my special lord and patron.

JEsus.

My poor prayer and all good beforehand. Strict, honorable, dear Lord and
friend! Your. I have diligently received and read through your letters
and questions. I have committed myself to your strictness of all
service. After I have found Your great faithfulness to Augsburg, I would
like to answer this question correctly and clearly. But the gospel is in
my way, since Christ gives a short judgment in all such matters and
says: Whoever wants to quarrel with you and rightly take your coat, let
him also take your skirt. As a theologian with a guilty conscience, it
behooves me to give no other advice in this matter. Therefore, no one
party among you will do enough for the Gospel, unless one lets the other
follow what he wants. 3) The bishop ordinarius is to take the coat from
the bishop. The bishop ordinarius shall leave it, if the council desires
it, and again; and does not help the bishop his spiritual right, nor the
council his custom or habit, for the gospel is above all. It is true
that the pope has decreed that the third part of such a sacrifice 4) is
to be given to the ordinary; but whether he has the power to do so, I
leave to him to decide. It almost looks like selfishness. But we are
guilty of suffering violence, even injustice. Therefore, my advice and
request would be that the Ordinary and the Council come to an amicable
agreement, without all rightful severity or remedy; perhaps the Ordinary
can be appealed to. If not, they may rightly not keep it before the
Roman See. As a theologian, who is not entitled to quarrel and rights,
but to peace and patience, you will accept this good opinion of mine
with goodwill and kindness. For I am always ready to serve E. Gestreng.
Given at Wittenberg, on Friday after St. Thomas \[23 Dec.\] 1519. F.
Martinus Luther,

Augustinians at Wittenberg.

3\) \"follow\" set by lins instead of: \"follow\" in our template.

4\) See No. 243.

**218Letters from the year**

1519\. no. 249. 250. **219**

**No. 2 49.**

(Wittenberg.) December 25, 1519.

**To Spalatin.**

Return of a letter from Einser. Von Eck\'s writing for Emser. Thanks for
a gift from the Elector. About the cause of the widow Landmann; about an
invitation of the princess of Anhalt; about the rage of the Meissen
clergy against Luther.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 44 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 69. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 225; in Löscher, vol. Ill, p. 1001; in De Wette, vol. I, p.
382 and in Erl. Bricht, vol. II, p. 284. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 664.

To Georg Spalatin, your servant of God, court preacher to the Elector of
Saxony, his best friend.

JEsus.

Hail! I am returning Emser\'s letter, my dear Spalatin, the man who
threatens more than he can carry out. If I let my spirit shoot the
reins, they would soon realize against whom they wrote. For Eck, too,
has begotten a new offspring worthy of his paternity, a cesspool of
invective, writing for the goat, 1) a worthy protector for such a
wretched protégé. But enough of that.

I also take care of the prince\'s welfare and diligently recommend
others to take care of it; I ask you to thank him for us that he has
sent the game.

We were expecting you to come here, so that I could talk to you, among
other things, about the cries of the widow, with which she is tormenting
me. I am afraid that the voice of the oppressed will rise to heaven, for
she complains that she is almost forced to beg.

I have been invited by the Princess 2) of Anhalt in Dessau, but I do not
know whether I may go there safely, for she herself has also excluded
the case of danger. Farewell and pray for me.

At this hour Philip reports to me,

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 910.

2\) In the Erlangen edition according to the original: Domina; in the
other editions: *Domino*. - It is Margaretha von Anhalt, née Duchess von
Münsterberg, widow. Her sons Joachim, Johann and Georg were still
minors.

that the priests of Meissen with the Emser are so nonsensical against me
that they judge that the one who killed me is without sin, because they
hear that the Bohemians boast of me as their protector. Behold, these
are the times of the murderers who serve Christ. But of this at another
time. Wittenberg, on the day of the birth of Christ 1519.

Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 250 .**

Wittenberg. December 31, 1519.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

Luther supports the request of the council of Kemberg for relief of the
levies. From the widow Landmann 2c.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, Xo. 82 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 105. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 297; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 536 (also set in the year 1520
as in Aurifaber) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 285. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 737.

To the learned and righteous man Georg Spalatin, princely preacher at
Lochau, his superior in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! Here the council of Kemberg sends a petition to the prince, my
dear Spalatin, in which he complains that he is being oppressed by quite
unreasonable interest rates. In this matter I also ask for your service,
since you can do it without danger. If now the most illustrious prince
did not want to get involved in the whole business (which is also not
necessary), that he changed the matter suddenly and by force, then help
that at least that is obtained that those people recognize that they
have the prince\'s favor and applause in this. For the people there are
being sucked dry in the most miserable way by this most fierce usury,
and its number is increasing daily by the exceedingly evil example of
sinning. For even the priesthoods and offices of worship, then also
certain brotherhoods, are maintained by these god-robbing interests and
godless robberies, which should take place least of all. You should know
that you are serving the will of God in the true service of God, with
everything that you can do and obtain in this matter, so that it is done
by the prince.

**220**

Letters from the years 1519 and 1520. No. 250. 251. 252.

**221**

This widow is coming again, whose house I myself have inspected and seen
that the lords of the abbey do not worry in vain; it is something
significant that is hoped for there.

Our Hess wanted to send the way in which heretics are to be
investigated 1) to Crotus in Italy, and would have done so if you had
sent it back. Meanwhile, you are well; I am very busy, at the same time
completely overwhelmed with challenges. Wittenberg, on the day of New
Year\'s Eve \[Dec. 31\] 1520. 2)

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 251 .**

Wittenberg. (1519?) 3)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther states his opinion about the Psalms, which have recurring verses.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, kni. 4. printed in *Buddeus*, p.9; in Löscher, vol. III, p.991;
in De Wette, vol. I, p. 383 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 287. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 649.

To his extremely dear Georg Spalatin, the sincere and highly learned
man.

JEsus.

Hail! I would very gladly satisfy your wish, best Spalatin, which is
always yours as well as mine, if you did not, behold, demand something
from me that goes completely beyond my spiritual gifts and my
meagerness. I freely confess my ignorance, and that I do not know at all
what those interposed things are, that I cannot even form a conjecture
about them. Of course, I am quite sure that the psalms you mentioned,
the 80th^4)^ and the 67th, are the prayers of the faithful.

1\) A pseudonymous satire, dedicated to the Prierias and Hoogstraten.

2\) Dec. 31, 1519, according to the way of that time to begin the new
year with Christmas. Also Walch has 1520.

3\) This letter, which has no date in the original, is placed by
*Buddeus in the* year 1519; De Wette notes: \"perhaps from an earlier
time\", which *Cod. Jen*. seems to confirm, since he already has it on
fol. 4. Also the signature: \"Luder\" speaks for it, which Luther did
not use after September 11, 1517.

4\) Here, in the original, the Psalms according to the Vulgate are one
number less than in our Bible.

Synagogue, who with the most fervent sighs ask for the coming of Christ
into the flesh. But you, who surpass me by far in sharpness of judgment
and fullness of learning, see if he 5) did not want to call them
*interjecta for* the sake of it, because such psalms are provided with
repetitive verses (*interstalares),* as in Virgil\'s Eclogue 6) (I do
not remember in how many):

*Ducito ab urbe domum, mea carmina, ducite Daphnim*

\[Bring from the city, my songs, o bring home the daphnis\], for the
67th Psalm says twice \[in the Vulg.v.2.\], \"GOtt, be gracious to us\";
twice, \"It thank thee, GOtt, the peoples\"; twice, \"It bless uys
GOtt.\" But how often the 80th say, \"O LORD GOD of hosts,\" you
yourself know well. But this is contradicted by the fact that he says:
There are in sum two. 7) For the 107th is called with greater right
(*pulchrius*) a psalm with repetition verses (*interstalaris*) than
those two. Therefore, I assume that it would be 67 with a corrupted
number instead of 107, especially since in this book he does not prefix
a psalm of a higher number to one of a lower number, nor a psalm of a
lower number to a psalm 8) of the very lowest number. And in such a way
only the 80th and the 107th \[Psalm\] would be psalms with repetition
verses. There you have all that I have. Farewell and pray for me. From
the monastery.

Brother Martin Luder, Augustinian.

**No. 252 .**

Wittenberg. January 10, 1520.

**To Spalatin in Zerbst.**

Luther sends letters to Leipzig that are full of bitter accusations
concerning his Sermon vom hochwürdigen Sacrament. Von Eck\'s writing for
Emser and Oecolampad\'s writing \"die ungelehrten Domherren\".

5\) maybe: the summist?

6\) *Virg., bucolico, ecl.* 8, where the following verse recurs nine
times.

7\) This could also be given as: \"that the summa says: two\", because
immediately follows: *in eodum libro*, which refers to the book of the
summist (perhaps the *summa angelica*\].

8\) Here *Ps.* will have to be resolved by *Psalmo*; shortly before by
*Psalmum*.

**222** Letters from the year 1520. no. 252. 253. 254. **223**

Handwritten in (*Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 69. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
226; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 388 and in Erl. Briesw., vol. II, p. 290.
German in Walch,

Vol. XXI, 664.

To his in Christ exceedingly dear Georg Spalatin, princely court
preacher, now in Zerbst.

JEsus.

Hail! I am sending you, my dear Spalatin, letters full of news, from
which you will see how unfortunate is the effort of the Leipzig
spitefulness, how maliciously they abuse the simplicity of the very good
Duke George and are not afraid to claim, it is a very great thing, an
error, a heresy, rveun someone under both forms communicire, which I,
although it has instituted the gospel of Christ, have not wanted to
command, unless it is done by the power of a council. What they are in
other matters is easily seen from this one. Read, I beg you, also the
rest of the \"secret interpretation of the monstrances\" as well as my
birth, my education, my relatives. I hope they will still tell that I
have a wife and children in Bohemia.

I did not want to send Eck\'s dirty speeches, which he published against
the articles I defended; you will be able to see them at present, if you
wish. \"The unlearned canons\", 2) I believe, you have read, which are
exceedingly learned and in sublime speech against the Sophist. Fare well
in Christ, and the HErr be favorable and graciousAmen there in the trade
of princes 3). Wittenberg, Tuesday after Epiphany \[Jan. 10\] 1520. 4)

Brother Martin Luther, August.

I\) On the title page and the title back of the \"Sermon vom
hochwürdigen Sacrament\" (St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 426, first note)
monstrances were printed, about which Duke George complained against the
Elector on Dec. 27, 1519 (the letter of Duke George and the Elector\'s
answer idick., Col. 450). Against the accusations, also against the
rumors of his origin from Bohemia 2c. Luther apologizes in his writing:
\"Erklärung etlicher Artikel in seinem Sermon vom hochwürdigen
Sacrament\" 2c., St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, 452.

2\) Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 1275, No. 408.

3\) A meeting of several princes took place at Zerbst on Jan. 8, 1520,
lasting more than two weeks, in order to settle the war between the
princes of Brunswick and Lüneburg. Spalatin was in the entourage of the
Churfürsteü.

4\) Erl. Briefw. by oversight: \"1519.\"

**No. 253 .**

(Wittenberg.) January 14, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1774, anh., no.4.

**No. 25 4.**

Wittenberg. January 18, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

About Lazarus Spengler\'s \"Schutzrede\"; about Luther\'s defense of his
Sermon von dem hochwürdigen Sacrament; about the \"Instruction on how to
confess\". Recommendation of a priest for the parish in Lochau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in the
(*Cod. Dessav*. A, No. 46 and in the (*Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 70. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 231; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 394 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. II, p. 296. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 667.

To the highly learned and extremely honest man, Georg Spalatin, canon of
Altenburg, court preacher and secretary to the Elector of Saxony, his
superior in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I believe that the German Nuremberg \"Schutzrede\" is leached to
you, my dear Spalatin, but also I issue a German Schutzschrift about
that monstrous rumor of both forms and of my birth, 5) since the friends
want it that way.

I once made \"a way how to confess\", 6) for you, the copy of which I
wish to have, because I fear that it will be printed, however it may be,
7) as our Adelmann writes, who wished that I would send it to him
improved or changed.

This *sacrificulus* has requested from me, on the advice of the Schösser
of Lochau, that I recommend him to you, so that he may obtain the
parish, which (as he writes) has just been established in

5\) D. M. Luther\'s explanation of several articles in his Sermon vom
hochwürdigen Sacrament 2c. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 452.

6\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2158.

7\) Luther had sent this writing to Spalatin on January 27, 1519, and it
had been printed several times in 1519, at Leipzig, Nuremberg, Basel,
and Augsburg, \"without Luther\'s knowledge and will\". - Bernhard
Adelmann von Adelmannsfelden, canon of Augsburg and Eichstädt.

**224** Letters from the year 1520. no. 254. 255. 256. **225**

Lochau is unoccupied. And so I do. You, because you know better the
customs of the court and the occasion of things, will see what is to be
granted on my recommendation. May the Lord keep us the prince of whom we
hear that he is ill. Dear God, what are you doing with those exceedingly
tedious things? 1) Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, January 18,
1520. 2)

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 255.**

(Wittenberg.) January 26, 1520.

**To Joh. Lang.**

From literary news. Luther sends his \"Declaration\" on the Sermon on
the Sacrament. Of another printing of his \"Works on the Psalms\"; of a
letter from Erasmus to the Archbishop of Mainz. Of a banquet at which
Luther and Melanchthon were together with the Spanish envoy.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 399, fol. 130. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I,
p. 231; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 396 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.
304. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 668.

To the venerable Father Johann Lang, Master of Holy Theology, Vicar of
the Hermits of St. Augustine at Erfurt, his superior in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! There is nothing new with us, venerable father. For you have seen
\"the unlearned canons\". We will print the German Nuremberg
\"Schutzrede\" if we can; for we lack time. 3) I am sending the
explanation of the Sermon of the Sacrament, against the unworthiness of
the Leipzigers, by which they have spread that I was born in Bohemia
with such great credibility that they have also moved courts of princes.
They captured Duke George after he had been extremely hostile to me.

1\) This will refer to the negotiations still being held at Zerbst. See
the previous number, at the end.

2\) In Erl. Briefw. by oversight: 1519.

3\) The writing of the Nuremberg council scribe Lazarus Spengler:
\"Schutzrede und christliche Antwort eines ehrbaren Liebhabers
göttlicher Wahrheit der heiligen Schrift auf Etlicher Widersprechen\"
2c. was published in 1520 by Melchior Lotther.

He even threatened the Dresdeners 4) with expulsion, as mau calls it,
for my sake.

The Psalter 5) will be printed in a new way, since the printer suffers
damage from the many sheets left to him, and at the same time the
Psalter of his time will emerge from Lotther\'s Officin in a better
arrangement.

In the hands of some people there is an excellent letter from Erasmus to
the Cardinal of Mainz, who is very concerned for me (perhaps it will be
printed one day), in which he takes my side, but in such a way that he
seems to do nothing less than protect me, as he is wont to do with his
skill.

The Spanish envoy 6) is with our prince, with whom 7) Philip and I had a
splendid dinner yesterday at his invitation. You will soon see the
speech that Philip gave yesterday in print. Fare well and pray for me.
The day after Paul\'s conversion \[Jan. 26\] 1520.

Greet Venerable Father M. Bartholomew Usingen and Nathin and all.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 256.**

(Wittenberg.) January 31, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther wants to prepare the letters to the bishops of Mainz and
Merseburg soon. He sends Jakob Gropp and recommends him for the parish
of Lochau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 47 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 70. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 232; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 397 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 306. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 669.

4\) The Augustinians in Dresden who followed Luther.

5\) Luther\'s works on the Psalms. St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 198. The
edition by Lotther was not published.

6\) Hieronymus Bronner, to whom Melanchthon dedicated his speech
delivered on Jan. 25. (*Corp. Ref. ,* Vol. I, l35.)

7\) with the Spanish envoy (not with the Elector, as De Wette and the
Erl. Briefw. assume), because Luther has seen the Elector only on the
imperial days from afar, as he reports several times. - The comma, which
stands in the editions before *splendide*, will have to be put behind
it.

**226** Letters from the year 1520. no. 256 to 259. **227**

The highly learned, extremely honest man Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s
servant, his superior in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I will hand over the letters to the bishops mentioned today or
tomorrow, my dear Spalatin. In the meantime, I am sending what you wrote
for the parish of Lochau, and I am sending you this man, who is suitable
according to my and many people\'s judgment. He is a diligent, learned
and pious man, named Jakob Gropp. The fact that he did not become a
Master of Liberal Arts was caused solely by the lack of expenses, and
nothing else; he will in any case be able to attain this degree in the
future year, when he, provided with this parish, has become somewhat
richer (*pinguior* == fatter). Therefore, the master\'s degree seemed to
me to be no obstacle, since in knowledge and good manners, then also in
administration of the priestly office, he is completely equal to the men
who have this degree. Therefore I commend him to you and through you to
the most gracious Prince in the name of the Lord, Amen. Farewell and
pray for me. January 31, 1520, Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 257**

Wittenberg. February 4, 1520.

**To Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1382, no. 429.

**No. 258.**

Wittenberg. February 4, 1520.

**To Bishop Adolph of Merseburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1388, no. 431.

**No. 259.**

(Wittenberg.) February 5, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the requested letters to the bishops and commemorates his
deal with the Bishop of Meissen. Of Eck\'s writing against Carlstadt and
his intended response. Of the printing of the Tessaradekas and the
publication of the Nuremberg \"Schutzrede\" and the \"unlearned
canons.\" Wish that Melanchthon may marry. From the widow Landmann.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 48 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 71. Printed by Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 240; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 406 (wrongly dated, because he
read 5 *Agathae* \[9 Feb.\] with Aurifaber instead of S. *Agathae*) and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 315. German in Walch,

Vol. XXI, 670.

To Georg Spalatin, court preacher and secretary to the Prince of Saxony,
his superior in Christ, who is extremely dear to the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I am finally sending the letters to the venerable bishops; you may
see if it is useful to send them, especially since the bishop of
Meissen, through the artifices of the Leipzig party, has issued a public
prohibition note 1) against my sermon on the Sacrament, with which, as
is to be expected, many others will cooperate. But I will issue a
counter-note, and, God willing, pull off these quite unrhymed larvae of
ignorance in this Shrovetide season.

Eck heckles Carlstadt and also me in the most dreadful way, in a new
booklet 2) against him, to which Carlstadt is preparing to reply, but in
such an ill-considered heat of mind that he has given the booklet the
title: \"Wider den ganz unvernünftigen Esel und angeblichen Doctor\" 2c.
Persuade him, if it concerns, that he either desist,

to revile him again, or refrain from answering altogether, for the
wretched sophist has made himself enough of a laughing stock and disgust
by this book, so that nothing else can be done to him by an Auder\'s
reviling, except perhaps a cover for his exceedingly great
disgracefulness, by which he might appear less disgraceful. For I have
begun to despise this man to such an extent that I have never despised
anyone more. Carlstadt does not allow me to remind him, but it is also
not safe if he learns that I have made this known to you, as he is a man
who is weak through suspicion.

1\) Des Bischofs zu Meißen Ausschreiben Wider Luthers Sermon vom
hochwürdigen Sacrament, St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 460. Luther\'s
rebuttal ibidaselbst, col. 462 and 468.

2\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 46.

**228** Letters from the year 1520. no. 259. 260. 261. **229**

In the Tessaradekas, the dedication letter 1) has been omitted, too
great an indelicacy for the book and to my chagrin. The first sexterne
2) has been printed in my absence. It will also be finished in German
soon. We are forced to be slow, both because of the amount of business
and the lack of types. In any case, the German \"Schutzrede\" will go
out, and at the same time \"the unlearned canons\".

I remember that I wished Philip a wife who would be suitable for his
way, and I still do not regret this wish. I fear an accident for the man
who is used to meet great spirits (*ingenia*) in general, both because
he is a man who does not care about the household at all, and also does
not take care of his body at all; but I do not yet see that the man is
inclined to this way of life.

I again send a petition from the well-known widow. She sighs and weeps
bitterly and calls God to witness that she will be a beggar if she does
not get the house back. I try in vain with the canons and see that no
help will be left unless the most noble prince does something in this
matter. I certainly do not want her to become a beggar for this reason,
lest she be one of the widows of whom the Scriptures say that God is
their judge.

I send - but send it back again - the Meissner prohibition note, namely
the fruit of a great spitefulness and an even greater ignorance. Be well
and pray for me. On the day of St. Agatha \[5 Feb.\] 1520. Martin
Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 260.**

(Wittenberg.) Feb. 8, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2490, appendix, no. 55.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1816.

2\) Sexterne == Sheet of six leaves.

**No. 261.**

(Wittenberg.) Feb. 11, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the printed Tessaradekas. Of his answer to the prohibition
note of the bishop of Meissen) that it turned out somewhat violently and
proudly. He works on the Latin edition of the same.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, manuscript in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 50 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 73. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 2446; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 408 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p: 321. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 672.

To the learned and pious man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, the
priest, his friend in the Lord 2c.

JEsus.

Hail! See, there you have your, 4) rather our Tessaradekas, my dear
Spalatin. You may not be surprised that my answer against the stumbling,
foolish and foolish (*tolpensem et talpensem*) note 5) is somewhat
vehement and proud. Here it is a matter of those who triumph against me
by striking the notes everywhere, therefore it was necessary that their
triumph should not lack such a hymn of praise, so that there would be a
proper lid for the vessel. Now I am writing a Latin reply against it,
which is a little more detailed, to which the note itself must be added
at the end. But you hesitate too much to send it back. For tomorrow, or
the day after tomorrow at the latest, it will be needed. Farewell and
pray for me. February 11, 1520 Martin Luther, Aug.

3\) A transmission of the writing, which Aurifaber assumes (also Kolde,
M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 241), is not to be thought of, because the writing
was in print (see the following letter), as well as the transmission of
the manuscript (Erl. Briefw.), which was needed for the printing. That
the manuscript was not sent to Spalatin before it was published is clear
from Luther\'s letter to Spalatin of February 18. This has already been
correctly noted by De Wette. See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 482, note.

4\) The German Tessaradekas translated by Spalatin.

5\) Walch translates the preceding thus: \"Behold your, indeed my Four
Tenths, namely the answer to the stumbling, doltish, and talpic d. i.
blind mole ceddle.\"

**230**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 262. 263. 264.

**231**

**No. 262 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 12, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1778, annex, no. 5.

**No. 263 .**

Wittenberg. Between February 12 and 18, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 482.

**No. 26 4.**

(Wittenberg.) February 18, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther testifies to his great courage in the Stolpian affair; he wants
to reduce the Latin script and send it to Spalatin before it is printed.
Spalatin is also to advise the opponents to be careful against Luther.
From the widow Landmann.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 51 and in *Cod. Jen.* a, fol. 74. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 246; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 413 and in Erl. Briefwechsel,
vol. II, p. 324. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 673.

To the learned and godly man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, court preacher and
secretary to the Prince of Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I have, dearest George, by the grace of God, great courage against
the Meissen conflagration, and you will see that I obey your advice,
that I answer as kindly as I can. Yes, you and yours shall get to see
the \[Latin\] copy before it is published, which would also have
happened with this 1) if the printing had not preceded your letter.
However, out of reverence for the bishop, I have not touched the ulcer
of the note in this writing either, which is indeed blasphemous and more
against the Gospel of Christ than any raging heresy ever was; I will
show this to the descendants and at the same time convict them of their
ignorance; if they do not take care, I will pull them through.

1\) namely the German copy.

I will not suffer an error condemned in the Gospel of God to be
proclaimed even full of all the angels of heaven, how much less by the
idols of an earthly little church.

If it seems good to you, let us show this favor to the enemies, and
write to them, if there are people who want to hear you, and admonish
and ask them that they may act against Luther as wisely and cautiously
as they can, let it be spared them in this writing with great diligence,
so that when they begin to want to escape the frost, they will not be
overwhelmed by the snow. For if God does not deprive me of reason (which
He may do according to His gracious will (nothing)), it will happen, if
they stir the muck (as they say) more, that it will stink further and
worse: not that I wish to threaten so great and many men, but that I am
sorry and pity their disgrace, which they have irrevocably contracted by
this unfortunate note, and that I offer them in this way what I would
wish to be done against me in this matter. I would not take the
treasures of the whole world that I should be found to be the author of
this note.

And yet God wanted them to keep right counsel among themselves and
either keep completely silent or purify themselves in the way of love.
But if they should begin to pursue the matter by force, threats,
science, shrewdness, art or cunning, the Lord will have an understanding
and grant me that they can hardly fool my observing nose 3). If they
should pretend in an unholy way, as they have done in this note, they
will spoil the matter. If they had published the note according to my
advice, they would have written in this way: Behold, dear brethren, a
certain sermon has gone forth which many misunderstand, therefore do not
think that it pleases the author of it to be so understood. In this way,
they would not have harmed me, and they would not have harmed themselves
and everyone else.

2\) Here *non* seems to be omitted.

3\) Walch: \"that they may not mock my thin noses\".

**232** Letters from the year

1520\. no. 204. 265. **233**

But now they fall in with full fury and condemn what I have never
written. Yes, I have written the opposite, and that under my name. Or at
least they would have written to me privately and admonished me to issue
a statement. But they have left the path of this justice and that love
and have begun with violence and injustice: what wonder is it if such an
evil beginning is followed by an evil continuation?

I am surprised and cannot be surprised enough that there are such coarse
and unlearned people in Meissen and Leipzig, or that their spitefulness
is so great that they have even lost their common sense. Up to now, I
have not had any adversaries whom I would have despised just as much: so
great is either their narrow-mindedness or their imprudence. However it
may be, if you can, help them so that they do not provoke me. I hold
them captive, and so captive that they will expose themselves to the
highest reproach if they do not act with gentleness. If it should seem
good to you, I too will write to the bishop about this matter\.... I
would write to Duke George if I did not know that what comes from me is
either not read or, if it is read, is not heard.

You should know that Walpurga Landmann never had a curator or a
guardian, but gave the house to the church solely out of her will. I
have dealt a lot with the provost 1), but he is up to his ears in his
rights sunk, and chattering, that what is once given to God cannot be
given back, although the giver would have to beg eternally or die of
hunger, and he has referred me to God and to the sacrament of the mass,
that I would like to deal with Christ, whether He Himself wants to talk
to me and give back what I desired. The law-abiding (*juridicus*) even
considers these antics to be serious. When I told him why they could
accept things given in Christ\'s place and not also give them back in
the same place, he insisted.

that a man cannot return what has been given to him. The Gospel does not
penetrate into these minds, which are completely taken in by these
positions, as if he \[Christ\] did not reveal abundantly in the Gospels
what one should do to one\'s neighbor in these matters, where necessity
and love require it. Fare well and pray for me. 1520, February 18.
Martin Luther.

**No. 265.**

(Wittenberg.) February 24, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther will continue to respond in the Stolpian affair if the opponents
do not remain silent. Sending of the letters to the bishops of Mainz and
Merseburg. About the publication of the Sermon of Good Works, the
Nuremberg \"Schutzrede\" and the \"unlearned canons\". About the
employment of Matthäus Adrian. On the publication by Hutten of
Laurentius Valla\'s *de donatione Constantini*. About the student riots
in Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 52 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 76. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 2476; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 419 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 331. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 676.

To the learned and godly man, Georg Spalatin, court preacher, his
sincere friend in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I also believe that the people of Stolpen will not remain silent.
Perhaps the Lord will accomplish through them what they and I do not
think of. Therefore, they may come, so that they may finally find the
interpreter of their note. The letters to the bishops have been sent in
the most delicate handwriting, written by the hand of Johann
Schwertfeger; I am waiting for an answer.

I have not mentioned anything about the sermon of good works 2), but I
have already published so many \[sermons\] that there is a danger that I
would finally tire the buyers.

I don\'t understand what you mean by the German Schutzschrift, which, as
you write, should be attached to the Nuremberg. Send it when you have it
so that we may watch; for that one was finished today. \"The Unlearned

1\) D.Henning Göde.

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1298.

**234**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 265 to 268.

**235**

ten canons\" will follow. Nothing has been written to Doctor Calvus 1)
yet; today we will meet to negotiate and answer. Yesterday, Matthew
Adrian let me know through D. Conrad König, the son-in-law of D.
Wolfgang \[Stehelin\], that I should answer him; but I think that I have
answered him and that the letter has been caught. The same negotiated
with me, with how large a salary one believed that he would be satisfied
that he taught Hebrew here. He said that if he received a hundred or
ninety gold florins, he would turn to us from there; this I will now
find out from him through another letter. In the meantime, you answer as
you see fit and as you hope.

Through the courtesy of Dominicus Schleupner 2) I have in my hands the
donation of Constantius refuted by Laurentius Bulla, which Hutten
published. Dear God, what a great darkness or unworthiness of the
Romans! and what you can wonder about in God\'s judgment, that they have
not only lasted for so many centuries, but also ruled, and that under
the decrees such impure, such coarse, such impudent lies have been put
and (so that nothing of the most atrocious Grenel would be missing) have
taken the place of articles of faith. I am so cornered that I almost do
not doubt that the pope is actually the Antichrist whom the world
expects according to the generally accepted opinion; everything he
lives, does, speaks and orders is so much in accordance with it. But
more about this orally. If you have not seen it, I will see to it that
you read it.

I do not know what to say about the students and the painters; 3) I
doubt that the matter is as great as some effervescent heads (*venti*)
make it, which they blow out. I have dealt with this in a sermon, but

1\) He signs himself: Gregorius Coppus, *Calvus medicus*. In a letter
from Magdeburg dated February 6, 1520, he warmly recommended Werner von
Bacharach to Spalatin as a teacher of Hebrew.

2\) Canon in Breslau, later pastor at St. Sebald in Nuremberg.

3\) This refers to a prelude to the riots between the students and Lucas
Cranach\'s pupils, journeymen and workers, which reached their climax in
July.

I did not do enough for everyone. There were some who said that I was
too favorable to the student part, others the opposite. The work of the
devil is so utterly ungovernable, and it would have been better to let
it fizzle out in itself than to have begun to dampen it with so much
noise. There are few who perform this tragedy, and they are not worthy
that the whole city and the university suffer so for their sake. And it
is impossible that in a large and sick body (as Antiochus said to Herod)
an ulcer or pus or the like should not arise from time to time, which,
if it is allowed to go its way, will cease of its own accord, but if it
is hindered and obstructed, will infect and corrupt the whole body. But
I will do as much as I can. Farewell and pray for me. Our prior Helt had
gone to Magdeburg when your letter arrived. The day before Matthias
\[24.^4)^ Feb.\] 1520.

Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 266.**

Merseburg. February 25, 1520.

**Bishop Adolph of Merseburg to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1391, no. 432.

**No. 267.**

Calbe. February 26, 1520.

**Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1385, no. 430.

**No. 268.**

(Wittenberg.) February 26, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a certain Mocha. Of Eck\'s journey to Rome, and that
he had published the correspondence with the Elector. About the sermon
on good works.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 53 and in *Cod. Jen*.

a, fol. 78. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 249; in De Wette, vol. I,
p. 421 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 339. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
679.

4\) Although Matthias is February 24, this day falls on the 25th in a
leap year, because the leap day (Febr. 24) is without a name. Compare
the letter to Link of Feb. 25, 1528.

**236**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 268. 269. 270.

**237**

To Georg Spalatin, princely court preacher and secretary, the righteous
and learned man, who is extremely dear to the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! This Mocha 1) comes to ask for the right of his fief. You, as you
do, take care of his children and his very good wife, for the sake of
their poverty; I will cooperate, if it is necessary, if anything has to
be given.

Eck has gone to Rome in order to lighten the very deepest abysses
(*abyssos abyssorum* == the deepest hell) for me; that is how we are
written. I will immediately send the letters of Wenceslaus and Adelmann.
It has issued Eck the letters of our prince and our answers and his
German letters to the prince, which are written exceedingly spitefully.
I will send them as soon as possible through the bearer. I believe that
the man is completely transformed into a fury. Meanwhile, be well and
pray for me. It occurred to me again that I should write about good
works, namely in a tract; I have promised this and will do my best to
make it happen. On the Sunday of Invocavit \[26 Feb.\] 1520.

Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 269 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 27, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2485, annex, no. 52.

**No. 270.**

Wittenberg. February 29, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

From the answer of the bishop of Merseburg; that the archbishop of Mainz
had forbidden the begging of the monks. Luther wishes that the mendicant
orders be completely abolished.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 56 and in *Cod. Jen.* a, fol. 79. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 250; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 423 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 342. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 680.

1\) Probably the miller Christoph Mocha in Segren near Wittenberg,

Your learned and righteous man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant,
princely Saxon court preacher, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! Finally, the Bishop of Merseburg has sent my messenger back to me
with his letter, which he held up there for three days; I am still
awaiting the Cardinal\'s reply in Mainz. I have now read the letter. I
do not dislike it, except that he confesses that he was moved by
writings and reports of others against my sermon, which he perhaps never
read, but condemns by believing it. Then he condemns, not without rhyme,
the strife in the cause of the Roman pope, as if I really took pleasure
in being tossed to and fro in these storms, and did not rather wish to
live in peace, which he desires, as he writes. But when we are quite
healthy, we give advice to sick people, like Terence 2) If you were
here, you would judge differently.

That the Cardinal at Mainz has forbidden the mendicant monks \[to beg\],
I do not believe that it was done out of spite against me; 3) Magdeburg
is also full of many other complaints against him, as our prior says,
who has returned. For he is beginning to tyrannize and to dare
everything by offending even his spiritual great ones. Who knows what he
is called to do in the administration of such great matters? The Lord
will use him (do not doubt it) for some future monstrosity. As much as
there is in me, I wish very much that this mendicancy would be abolished
from the ground up. This is one of the articles that Eck makes a
heretical one for me and praises highly. For I hate this quite shameful
livelihood, and even today would rather learn a trade with which I could
support myself than live in such a way, and I will die in this heresy,
even against Eck\'s will.

2\) *Terent. Andria*, II, 1, v. 10.

3\) Kolde, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 386 *ad* p. 242 says: \"The
intervention against the mendicant monks can hardly be regarded as the
beginning of a reformation; it was based on the old opposition of the
secular priests against the mendicant monks.\"

**238**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 270. 271. 272.

**239**

I am surprised that my letters written earlier have not reached you yet.
We enjoyed reading Schott\'s fight with Emser. We will soon write to
Doctor Calvus, for we have not yet had a suitable messenger. Farewell
and pray for me. At Wittenberg, on Wednesday after Invocavit \[29 Feb.\]
1520.

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 271.**

Wittenberg. February 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a sample of his postilla; he refuses to offer peace in a
letter to the Elector. He and Staupitz had been unconscious Hussites
until now.

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 15; by De Wette, vol. I,
p. 424 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. II, p. 344. German by Walch, vol.
XXI, 741.

To his most dear in Christ highly beloved Georg Spalatin.

JEsus.

Hail! I am sending you a sample of the Gospels and Epistles, but it
shows that my soul is very busy, and is not doing enough for me
according to my wishes. This thing (as I see) requires a man, and all
alone, so I am almost sorry that I started it.

After I have asked my friends for advice about the letter to our prince,
I find that it can by no means be done without danger to godliness that
I offer peace in my name or according to my wishes. I have so far
offered it sufficiently and alone; I have always been drawn into the
bargain by force, and it is not advisable to withdraw my hand as long as
Eck cries out, for I am forced to command the matter to God and to let
myself be led, since the ship is exposed to the winds and floods. One
thing I can do is to call upon GOD\'s mercy; word has been given me of
some mighty storm if GOD does not resist Satan. I have seen his
thousand-fold thoughts to my and many people\'s destruction.

What do you want? Never has the word of godliness been acted upon
without commotion, noise and danger. The word has infinite majesty, it
directs great things, and is wonderful in high and low, as the prophet
\[Ps. 78, 31. Vulg.\] says: \"It killeth the fat in Israel, and
preventeth the elect thereof.\" Therefore, in this matter, one must
either despair of peace and tranquility, or deny the Word. It is a war
of the LORD, who has not come to send peace. Beware, therefore, that you
do not hope that Christ will be promoted on earth with peace and
comfort, seeing that he fought with his own blood, and after him all the
martyrs. I have hitherto unconsciously taught and held all the things of
John Hus; John Staupitz also taught them in the same ignorance; in
short, we are all unconsciously Hussites, yea, Paul and Augustine are
quite proper Hussites. Behold, I beseech you, the monstrosities into
which we fall without the Bohemian leader and teacher. I am amazed and
do not know what to think, seeing such terrible judgments of God on
mankind, that the quite obvious evangelical truth, now already publicly
burned more than a hundred years ago, is considered condemned, and one
is not allowed to confess this. Woe to the earth! Farewell. Martin
Luther.

**No. 272.**

(Wittenberg.)March 2. March 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends writings that had appeared against Eck.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 57 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 79. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 251; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 426 and in Erl. Briefw.,\' vol.
II, p. 346. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 681.

His in the Lord exceedingly dear Gdorg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant at
the court of Saxony.

JEsus.

Hail! I am sending other news against Eck, my dear Spalatin; when you
have read them, send them back. You see that the Leipzigers and Eck
other Cologneers and Hochstrateners

**240**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 272. 273. 274.

**241**

will be. In my opinion, the conversation has the nature of Wilibald. For
he is angry with O. Scheurl, and I also conclude this from other signs.
But I do not like this way of raging against Eck, because it is a
vituperative writing; and an open accusation is better than this
stabbing behind your fence. Fare well and pray for me in the Lord.
Friday after Invocavit \[March 2\] 1520, Martin Luther.

**No. 273.**

(Wittenberg.) March 12 (1520.) 1530.

**To Joseph Levin Metzsch in Mila.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1814. - This letter does not belong to
the year 1520, where the editions place it, but to the year 1530. See
No. 1519.

**No. 274.**

Basel. March 15, 1520.

**Conrad Pellicanus to Luther.**

About the printings of Luther\'s writings that appeared in Basel; about
the reading of them in the Minorite monastery there and the enumeration
of Luther\'s patrons. Of the absence of the Cardinal of Sion; of the
departure of Capito to Mainz and that of Rhenanus to Schlettstadt. On
the death of Bruno Amerbach. About Luther\'s opponents among the
Minorites; rebuke of the Erasmians. Encouragement of Luther to continue
his literary work. About the rumor that Luther had escaped to Bohemia,
that he and the Elector had been banished, and that his picture had been
burned in Rome. Miscellaneous news.

1\) *Dialogus*, meaning the farce *Eckius dedolutus.* Compare St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII, introduction, p. 29b. The passage referring to
Scheurl (Riederer, Beitrag zu den Reformations - Urkunden, p. 162)
reads: \"Friends: Now we want to summon physicians from Nuremberg, for
there you also possess innumerable friends, namely Wilibald, and half of
your soul, the twister (*dolorem*) \*) of both rights. Corner: *Dolorem*
you say? [Friends]{.underline}: *Doctorem* we wanted to say. Eck. Who
then? because I do not understand this sufficiently. *Friends*: That
braggart, the rude, haughty, presumptuous man, whose father, whose
mother, - don\'t you know him? How should I not know him, since I was
recently at his wedding? I also used him as a spy to find out about
Luther\'s affairs, because he acted as if he were his friend.\" -
Wilibald is Pirkheimer. - In a letter to Otto Beckmann of March 27, 1520
(Scheurls Briefbuch, p. 100), Scheurl writes that although he hears that
such a writing, in which he is mocked, is being circulated, he does not
seem to have read it yet

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

\*) *Dolorem* here is mockingly law instead of *doctorem*. *Dolor* is
here

due to *dolus*, fraud, rank.

Handwritten in the archive at Bern in *Epp. variae mss.* in quarto, p.
39 and in *Thes. Baum.*, I, fol. 70 in Strasbourg. Printed in Kolde\'s
*Analecta*, p. II and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 354.

To the famous and most Christian theologian Doctor Martin Luther,
Augustinian, at Wittenberg.

I, Conrad Pellican, Minorite, am so devoted to you, the chosen confessor
of Christ, Martin Luther, and wish you all the best that, among my most
noble intentions, I continue to pray to the divine mercy with pious
sighs, praising you completely. With a sincere heart I implore, for the
sanctification of his glorious name and for the prosperity of the
church, that the merciful Lord, whose cause you have recently bravely
begun and are happily carrying on, may long grant you to us unharmed, of
great courage and victorious in the word of Christ, and may he preserve
you; I hope that you will by no means be put to shame. He gives a great
many for the sake of prayer, for he will condescend to hear those who
are sincerely concerned for the welfare of his church.

By writing you a few things about many things, I will run through them
briefly; I ask you not to be displeased with them. What has been done so
far in studies at Basel, you can take from the \[here printed\]
writings. 2) Last fall, while Frobenius was absent, his people printed
the explanation of the power of the pope 3). Soon another, Andreas,^4)^
has spread all your small works in two or three parts equally, as you
can see, which I have long since read, except for the defense against
Eck, 5) which I have begun to write.

since it did not appear until July. Pirkheimer is the author of it. In
the letter just mentioned, Scheurl still sends his regards to Luthern.

2\) In the manuscripts and the *Analecta: accipe dee litteris* (?). The
Erl. Briefw. has taken up Knaake\'s Conjectur offered in the Stud. und
Krit. 1884, p. 593: *accipe brevibus* (?). The former reading seems to
us not only not \"incomprehensible\", but quite appropriate. Pellican
sent all these writings at the same time as his letter to Luther, as is
evident from what follows. In reference to the printing of Cratander, he
says: tu *videbis*, and after enumerating the various printings: *Omnia
haec forsan simul cum his meis literis ex Franckfordensi emporio
recipies et gaudebis*.

3\) Luther\'s explanation of his thirteenth thesis on the power of the
pope, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 720.

4\) Cratander.

5\) This refers to \"Luther\'s defense against the malicious judgment of
Johann Eck on some articles imposed on him by some brothers. (St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII, 1370.)

**242** Letters from the year 1520. No. 274. **243**

read, but not yet finished. Another, Adam, 1) has edited many of your
German things, and the interpretation on the Epistle to the Galatians,
and at the same time all the paraphrases of Erasmus on Paul, except the
one addressed to the Hebrews; also the augmented Compendium, 2) by
attacking indulgences, the nonsense of the Curtisans, the Pope\'s
flatterers, the diminishers of faith and grace in quite an open manner,
so that he seems to act expressly (*ex professo*) your cause, rather
that of the Church, in a manner unusual to him. You will perhaps receive
all this at the same time as this letter of mine from the Frankfurt fair
and rejoice. Besides, I have a preacher, Brother Johann Luthard; he. has
a good head and is an eloquent and good man. In front of a very large
audience he has recited your \"ten commandments\" 3), not without fruit,
and privately he does not suffer that someone speaks badly of you and
belittles you; he holds your writings as valuable as gold and reads
them. Another brother, Lector of Theology, Sebastian Münster, who is not
unknown to your, indeed to our Melanchthon^4)^ , knows three languages
and is an excellent professor of general mathematics, has been an
interpreter of scholastic theology among the brothers for some years, is
extraordinarily gifted and so far the most eager of my listeners. He has
preferred to all his studies the work of translating your \"ten
commandments\" into German, and has had them printed. This has brought
immense benefit to the printer 5) but will be of far more use to the
souls of the readers. Another very learned professor of theology, who
was formerly at Tübingen and now teaches the brethren at Freiburg, is
Johann von Ulm,^6)^ small in body but very great in gifts, an
exceedingly good, God-fearing man (*religiosus*), and also very well
known to Melanchthon. He is extraordinarily zealous for your writings,
and is burdensome to me every day, so that he does not lack any of your
work, and always wants to have more. I favor, promote and praise the
studies of all. And that you may see to it that yours is always sent to
us without delay,

1\) Petri.

2\) This is the writing of Erasmus: *Ratio seu methodus compendio
perveniendi ad veram theologiam*. See No. 167.

3\) *Praeceptorium*, that is, \"the ten commandments preached to the
people at Wittenberg. St. Louis edition, Vol. Ill, 1132. See the second
note there.

4\) Erl. Briefw.: *incognito* instead of *incognitus*.

5\) Adam Petri.

6\) That is, Johann Eberlin of Günzburg.

I ask for this above all things and implore it most urgently.

Recently, the Cardinal of Sion 7) was here; he took this up with our
Bishop of Basel, who is already very fond of you and your writings, so
that someone would not undertake to print the notes 8) of a certain
Augustinian against you, although I do not know whether anyone could
have been induced to do so by the printers.

W\[olfgang\] Fabricius Capito brings, as a preacher to the people, your
teachings, but to our detriment he will exchange Basel with Mainz after
Easter. 9) To the sorrow of the fine sciences, Bruno Amerbach has died;
Beatus Rhenanus has left for Schlettstadt; there are few left for us and
for the promotion 10) of the sciences. I am waiting from day to day
whether the papal courtiers (*Curtisani*) will do something against you,
because I am completely convinced that the pope, if he is not irritated
by them, is not ill-disposed against you, because he judges far more
modestly of the state and person of the pope than those Curtisani, the
disgraceful flatterers, from whom he suffers all sorts of troubles, in
that they impose upon him slander, frauds throughout the world, 11) most
of all upon the ears of Rome, as I recently heard, when the General
Chapter was held, where they preached lies, intermingled with frightful
diatribes.

I ask you not to conceal from me who those brothers were whom you
indicate, besides the corner, as opponents of your writings. 12) I fear
that it might be our Minorites, who are zealous, but with a lack of
understanding, who have so far detested their confreres, whom we have
long been accustomed to call Martinians, with whom they refuse to have
intercourse, as the Jews did with the Samaritans, who have been
admonished by you everywhere in the most modest manner. Of the
Wittenberg Minorites, I know Doctor Peter, 13) who, since he went to the
general chapter at Lyons, was accompanied by my

7\) Matthäus Schinner. Compare No. 90 - The bishop of Basel is Christoph
von Uttenheim.

8\) *frascas* == *folia, feuillees. Du Cange s. v.*

9\) Kolde I. c. p. 11 erroneously says: \"Capito wants to go to
[Basel.]{.underline}\"

10\) Instead of *profectus* we have assumed *profectui.*

11\) Instead of *infideles* have adopted *infigentes.*

12\) Namely in the title of the already mentioned \"defense of Luther
against the malicious judgment of Eck\". These are the Minorites at
Jüterbock.

13\) Peter Fontinus. About him, see St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, Annex,
No. 36, § 11.

**244**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 274.

**245**

Rufach, 1) he has been my guest for the second time, he seemed to me to
be a good man; I would like to know whether he left you or not. Perhaps
he fears (as many of ours do) the superiors of our order, the General
Officer, a very astute Scotist. In time they will become tame. I have
recently received the writings of a certain very good father, who speaks
of the great stain of your vehemence in writing against Eck, and is
sorry about it, so that Eck seems to him to be more modest, whose
writings against you I have not yet read. In your other writings I do
not miss a great modesty. In writing of such content, it seems to be
necessary that such sophists are annoyed, otherwise they would not care
about it at all. The sacrilegiousness of certain followers of Erasmus,
who arouse an inhuman hatred against all monks without distinction,
declaring them superstitious, Pharisees and impostors, is evident
everywhere. All in all, they are enemies of the ceremonies, revile
confession, the divine service, the ecclesiastical customs. It is true
that in these things many things should be reformed; I do not deny that.
I abhor many abuses, but they go too far: They write against the gospel,
against Paul, against the fathers, quite rashly, not that they want or
do anything better, but that they break the bruised reed, introduce
worse things for it, confess nothing, pray nothing, ridicule everything,
resist the good, judge most severely everything that displeases them,
push those who are already inclined to vices, unbelief and wisdom of the
flesh even more to the abyss. I wish that you, when writing, restrain
the immoderate undertakings, set a measure for them, how far the monks
are to be improved, but not exterminated. Certainly it is a good thing
(*praestat*) to take our senses captive in Christ, to avoid the dangers
of the world, to stand by one another through fraternal communion, to
implore Christ\'s grace without ceasing, and the ceremonies do not make
this unjust. I wish you would rebuke 2) such efforts; they may be
charmed by lies. 3) Out of all power, the followers of Erasmus crush
monasticism with words, writings and deeds; as once the Origenists, so
the Erasmians deceive Erasmus.

1\) Rufach in Alsace. Instead of: *per me Rubeacum* we have assumed:
*per meum Rubeacum*.

2\) Instead of *improborum* we have assumed *improbares.*

3\) Kolde reads *fastinentur* instead of *fascinentur*.

Continue, we all implore, with the remaining epistles. Do not pass over
Isaiah and immediately \[continue\] with the Psalter. We will pray that
the Holy Spirit will assist you. You may write what you want to present,
not with high and grand words, but in the word of truth, according to
the testimony of the Scriptures, in Christian fervor, fearing nothing,
for the sake of the church and to save the holy liberty of consciences,
whatever adversities may occur.

There is a rumor, but a vague and dark one, that you fled to Bohemia
last summer. Now they say about the ban against your prince and against
you, yes, they gossip that your image was burned in Rome. So you are a
fairy tale to the world. It would do you good to hear from you often, so
that we do not believe that you have died. Would God that the trade
would go out to a fruitful general concilium! I would hope that many
things would become better; the shepherds would wake up and yield to the
worldly, and act godly. Must not the Roman ordinaries or use concede
what is intelligible? Now we have prayers throughout Lent, we don\'t
know from which saints, all other churches to laugh at, what our fathers
have thought up so far only some 4) that no one has been able to do it.
I am silent about so many fictitious old and new fables, which are
generally inserted without special choice, which we are forced to hear
and believe even against our will. There is no one with us who is not
very favorable to you. There are a few old clowns, remnants of the old
breed, who perish with spite, want to bite, but do not dare; they are
held down by the crowd and the erudition of yours. Two Augustinian
doctors do not openly confess yours either, because they were once
instructed far differently than you teach, but they like to hear that
such a glorious ornament of their order is praised. The prior of the
regular canons of St. Leonhard, an extraordinary friend of the studies
and of the students, loves you from the bottom of his heart to such an
extent that he has decided to go to Wittenberg to see you and to
converse with you, since the time for the Westphalian chapter has
approached. I have read the interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians for the third time, and have read the more detailed and very
frequent annexes.

4\) Instead of utrinque we have assumed *utcunque.*

**246** Letters from the year 1520. No. 274 to 277. **247**

I have left aside some remarks that do not reflect your way of speaking
and have put short and sparse ones in their place. I ask you to
interpret this for the best. If you send something, we will decorate it
splendidly by printing Frobenius or others. You will have me entirely
\[at your service\] if it is permitted by the fathers that I remain at
Basel. But I ask you again and again to send more of your own. I ask you
to send my warmest regards to Philipp Melanchthon. I wish you both
happiness that your hearts have agreed for the glory of God. All my
brothers wish you constant prosperity in the Lord, that you may be
mindful of us, that they may deserve to receive the streams of your
scholarship over and over again. If you send something to Johann
Oecolampad in Augsburg, I will receive it occasionally; he is an old
friend of mine, honest and very learned. When our Capito has left, I
will gladly take his place for you, if it seems good to you. Fare well,
my dear Martin, and count this little tale of mine to my simplicity, and
take it as a pledge of the friendship we have begun. I do not demand
letters from you again, but books, *commentaries*, volumes. Take care
that nothing of yours is hidden from us for long. From Basel, March 15,
1520.

Yours, Conrad P\[ellican\] from Rufach, servant of the Minorite Brothers
at Basel, with my own hand.

**No. 275.**

Wittenberg. March 19, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

From the Hebrew professorship. Luther sends the verdicts of condemnation
from Louvain and Cologne and responds to them. About a writing of Hus;
about signs in the sky that were seen in Vienna.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 59 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 80. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 251 b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 427 and in Erlanger Briefw.,
vol. II, p. 3tz2. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 682.

To the highly esteemed Mr. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, ducal
court preacher 2c., his most beloved in Christ. JEsus.

Hail! I thought you had written to D. Calvus, my dear Spalatin, what you
had said about Werner to the most noble prince.

would be closed. Therefore, I exhorted him by letter to hasten the
arrival of man to us; you see what he replies.

I send the Louvain and Cologne Asses, 1) to whom I now answer in print;
also the Johann Hus,;^2)^ if you will, read it, and send it back after
you have read it; not only does everyone like it, but both its spirit
and scholarship are wonderful. Two thousand copies of Thomas Anshelm 3)
have been published. The news, namely the flames and fire signs, they
say, are with you, the phenomena which have been seen in the sky at
Vienna, 4) which I also wish to see. Perhaps my tragedy is also in it,
as it was in the previous \[writings\]. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Monday after Lätare \[March 19\] 1520.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 276.**

Wittenberg. March 21, 1520.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2492, annex, no. 56.

**No. 277.**

Wittenberg . 21. 5) March 1520.

**To Alexius Chrosner, canon in Altenburg.**

Luther wishes to be allowed to appropriate the *Ratio confitendi to*
him.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 254; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 433; in
Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 370 and in the Weim. German in -Walch, vol.
XXI, 685.

2\) This is, \"Die lehrmäßige Verdammung der Bücher Luthers durch einige
Magistri nostri zu Löwen und Köln\", St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1337
ff, no. 421. See also the introduction to the 18th volume, p. 29 b f.

2\) The book of Hus *de ecclesia*.

3\) Anshelm, first a printer in Strasbourg in 1488, then in Pforzheim
and Tübingen, then in Hagenau.

4\) Luther means the \"Interpretation and meaning of the miraculous
signs, which \[on Jan. 3-7, 1520\] have been seen in the skies at Vienna
in Austria\" published by the astronomer Johann Virdung von Hassfurt 2c.

5\) The Latin editions date this letter: 7. *Calend. Aprilis*, that is,
March 26, Walch (probably by false redaction): \"den 24. Martii\". The
former date is undoubtedly wrong, the latter hardly.

**248** Letters from the year 1520. no. 277. 278. 279. **249**

To the exceedingly righteous Lord Alexius Chrosner of Colditz, canon of
Altenburg, his \[friend\] in Christo.

JEsus.

Hail! Georg Spalatin, your colleague and our mutual friend, once
demanded and forced a letter from me 1) in which I briefly drafted a way
in which one should confess, because the complaint reached me everywhere
and among others that the way of confession was extremely burdensome and
completely confused. Since I realized that I was being asked to do
something spiteful and unbearable to the ecclesiastical tyrants, I
postponed it for a while until I was forced to calm my friend down to
some extent by means of a confidential and private letter. Since he had
now communicated this booklet or letter to one and the other, which he
could also do with full right, and had not offended me, it finally began
to be in danger and also to be desired in print. 3)

Mindful here of how my friends also take care of my syllables, I have
been forced to reclaim the rambling writing^4^ ) again, and, although in
a hurry and very busy with other things, to overlook it again myself,
and, after a few things have been changed and added, to anticipate an
edition on the part of others. I know that this matter should have been
left to far more learned people, then (as they say) held back for nine
years and considered again and again;

correct. It cannot be assumed, as we have already stated in the 19th
volume of our edition, Introduction, p. 37, note 2, that Luther sent
\"the way how to confess\" to Spalatin \"without preface\" (which has
been omitted in print, see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 29) on
March 25, and on the day after, March 26, asked Chrosnern to allow that
this writing be dedicated to him. We still hold to the assumption that
\"VII. *Calend. Aprilis*\" from XII. *Cal. Aprilis* \[March 21\] will be
read.

1\) Instead of *exigit, the* Weim. *Ausg*. *exegit is* to be read.

2\) *non* is first inserted here by Walch and recorded by the later
editions.

3\) *desidarari* in Aurifaber and in the Weimar edition; in the other
editions, after Walch\'s process: *desiderare*.

4\) Weimar edition: *vagabundum*; in the other editions: *vagabundos*. -
On January 18, 1520 (No. 254), Luther reclaimed this writing from
Spalatin.

But the die was cast, and we could no longer do anything else as we
pleased. I have begun to presume on the spirit that knows nothing of
slow undertakings. I therefore ask you to allow this, whatever it may be
in trifles or things, to go out under your name, because since you are
equal to Spalatin in almost every respect, you should not appear unequal
to him in this either. Fare well, and leave me in the hands of the Lord
and excuse me. Wittenberg, March 21, 1520.

Martin Luther. ^6)^

**No. 278.**

Wittenberg. March 25, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2439, annex, no. 29.

**No. 279.**

Wittenberg. March 25, 1520.

**To Martin Seligmann, preacher at Mansfeld.**

Luther thanks for the transmission of the verdicts of condemnation,
which he has already received elsewhere; his answer will be ready for
printing tomorrow. Many consider this writing to be similar to that of
the dark ones, but it is really genuine. Greetings. Luther reports the
death of his sister Barbara. -

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 253; in De Wette, vol. I, p.431 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.367. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 683.

To his Martin Seligmann, the godly and righteous priest, who is highly
esteemed in Christ, and his extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I thank you for the gift sent to me, my dear Martin, but it was
the same monster 7) already sent to me before

5\) Our Conjecture for *sextirno Calen. April*. The Weimar edition
notes: \"in the first edition \[which one?\], in which the letter is
found, it bears a later date \[which one?\], which must have been added
later.

6\) In the Weimar edition, the signature is missing.

7\) The verdict of condemnation of the theologians of Louvain and
Cologne on the books of Luther. See No. 275.

**250**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 279 to 283.

**251**

I have also replied to it, and tomorrow it will be completed in print.
There are many among us, and even the princely court, who think that
this creation is a larva of the dark ones, which the envious have
instigated to attack me and to seek an opportunity; by the way, you will
see from the letter of Dorpius 1) that it is true. From Philip you will
receive everything. Greet in my name Pastor Jonas,^2)^ Johann Reineck
and Wilhelm, then also my flesh and blood. The people of Leipzig and
Meissen are making a clamor like crows, but there is nothing to it. I
hear that my sister Barbara 3) has died; may she rest in peace, amen.
All of us will also follow. Farewell and pray to the Lord for me.
Wittenberg, on the day of the Annunciation \[March 25\] 1520. Martin
Luther.

**No. 280.**

(Wittenberg.) March 26, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends him the letter of Dorpius. He is glad that he did not reply
to Cardinal Adrian\'s letter out of oversight.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 58 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 79. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 253k; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 432 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 369. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 684.

His Lord in the Lord, George Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, the priest.

JEsus.

Hail! The other day, my dear Spalatin, I forgot to send you Dorpius\'
letter, which I had received from Antwerp along with others. Read it now
and see if you have to believe that it is a fictitious thing that comes
out of it. It is

1\) He was the only theologian in Louvain who did not agree with the
verdict of condemnation. He died young in 1525.

2\) Chamberlain. - Johann Reineck, metallurgist in Mansfeld, Luther\'s
schoolmate in Magdeburg. - Wilhelm\" is Reifenstein, treasurer of the
Count of Mansfeld.

3\) She is said to have been much younger than Luther and unmarried.

but, as I believe you know, the most learned of all the Leuven, not only
according to the testimony of Erasmus, but also according to this letter
of his and another, which Erasmus added to his collection. 4)

I thank the Lord, who directed my mind elsewhere, that I did not
carefully read the Cardinal of Tortosa 5), who writes most ungodly that
the divine and the natural right is in the hands of man, who uses the
divine power. I would not have passed by this horrible abomination if I
had been present. Farewell and pray to the Lord for me. The day after
the Annunciation \[March 26\] 1520.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 281.**

Wittenberg. March 29, 1\^20.

**To Duke John of Saxony.**

Write-up of the Sermon of Good Works.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1298.

**No. 282.**

Wittenberg. End of March 1520.

**To Christoph Blank.**

Zueignung der Antwort auf das Verdammungsurtheil der Magistri nostri zu
Löwen und Köln. In the 15th volume we have dated the writing from March
26, because Luther says in the letter to Seligmann from March 25 (No.
279) that the writing will be finished in print tomorrow.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1346, no. 421 d.

**No. 283.**

(Leipzig.) (Early April 1520.)

**Augustin Alveld to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1002.

4s A letter from Dorpius to Erasmus dated July 14, 1518 in *Farrago nova
epp. Des. Erasmi, Basil. apud Froben.* , Oct. 1519, p. 171.

5\) That is, the letter of Adrian, Cardinal of Tortosa, to the
theological faculty of Louvain. St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1345.

**252** Letters from the year 1520. no. 284. **253**

**No. 284.**

(Wittenberg.) April 13, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Explanation about Joh. 15, 5.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen. a*, fol. 81. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 4; in De Wette, vol.
I, p. 438 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 379. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 686.

To the Magister Georg Spalatin. JEsus.

Hail! I have received the question, my dear Spalatin, which you asked,
what the word of Christ Joh. 15, 5. means: \"Without me you can do
nothing.\" First of all, I believe that you are familiar with the two
*discerptiones* (*distinctiones) of* the Magistri nostri taught in this
passage, the first of which is: the *influence* (*influentiam) of* God
is either a general one or a special one, which they understand in this
way: by the general influence we are able to do what is proper to nature
without grace, which those think is neither merit nor sin, but a kind of
neutral thing, or morally good works, as walking, standing, working,
praying, eating, and what we see men do outwardly that is not manifestly
evil; By the special influence we are able to do that which is proper to
grace and above nature, namely, to do meritorious things only and to
avoid sins, so that the general influence is a being and working of
nature, the special one a being and working of grace. Then follows the
other distinction: doing something else in a beginning way, and doing
something else in a perfect way; that in a beginning way belongs to the
general influence, that in a perfect way to the special. Then \"Without
me you can do nothing\" will mean: that is, in a perfect way, or through
the special influence; but certainly in a beginning way, that is,
through the general influence we can do something; this is as much as to
say: through our powers (by the general influence standing still) we can
prepare ourselves to receive the grace or the special influence, that we
can do something meritorious, but we cannot, since the same influence
stands still, also do something out of our own power.

do something meritorious with our strength. This is how this saying has
been interpreted and understood up to now.

Incidentally, Christ, who condemns this general influence or being of
nature altogether, therefore, because nature cannot but seek what is
hers, and abuse the gifts of God, speaks unreservedly and without
distinction, that without the special influence (as they call it) or
grace of God nothing can be done that is not worthy of fire in the sight
of God, as he continues by saying \[v. 6.\] \"He that abideth not in me
is cast away as a branch, and is withered; and they gather them, and
cast them into the fire, and they must burn.\" Behold, the branch apart
from Christ not only does not green up and bear fruit, but also withers
(that is, goes bad and perishes), and not only goes bad and withers, but
is also gathered and separated from the vine and thrown into the fire
2c. In such a way, then, he who is driven only by the general influence
and forces of nature, becomes worse and worse, and comes further from
Christ, and is prepared for the fire, however much he may outwardly
appear to be moral and well-doing, so that we see from this, that
without Christ we can do nothing either by a general or a special
influence, and everything that is done by the general influence alone,
however great it may be, is more against Christ than for Christ, which
is sufficiently evident in the hypocrites, who do great and many things,
but from an exceedingly evil disposition. That is why Christ exhorts
with such great zeal that in him, as the vine, the branches should
abide, because it is impossible that they should not continually grow
worse if they do not abide in him, just as it is impossible that those
who do not abide in the way should not continually go more and more
astray if they do not return to the way. Therefore, no distinction is
necessary here, as if the general influence is not the way of error,
since this \[influence\] is a gift of God by grace, free of charge,
given to such people who are not worthy of the gift and always misuse
it, just as wine and gold are given to the godless people in

**254**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 284. 285. 286.

**255**

The word \"influence\" is turned into a daily abuse, where it could be
said that the thing flowing from God (*influxam*) is good, but its use
cannot be good if those who use the thing are not first made healthy by
grace. Thus no one uses the general influence (that is, the dangerous
word), which is the being and working of nature, other than in an evil
way and to nothingness, unless he remains as a vine in Christ. For as to
the pure all things are pure, so to the impure nothing is pure, Titus
1:15, and as with the saints all things work together for good, so with
the wicked all things work together for evil. For who can deny that a
fornicator, an adulterer, a murderer, a blasphemer does his work by the
help of the general influence? For how could he do these things if he
had not the being and the working of nature? But who would dare to say
that this means to do good in a beginning way and to prepare it for
grace? Thus a work apart from grace, however good it may seem, because
there is no good disposition in the heart apart from grace, cannot be
other than evil against grace, and can in no way begin to be able to do
something for grace. But all this concerns the matter (*materiam*) of
grace and free will, which is exceedingly great and extensive, rather
very brief, therefore it cannot all be stated in so few words. Fare well
and pray for me. At the hour you left. \[1520. On Friday in Easter week
(April 13).\] 1)

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 285.**

(Wittenberg.) April 16, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2403, annex, no. 12.

**No. 286.**

Wittenberg. April 27, 1520.

**To Joh. Heß in Breslau.**

Luther gives thanks for a gift. He expresses the wish that the Bishop of
Breslau may remain with them longer, and answers questions about the
priesthood.

1\) The brackets are added by Spalatin.

Handwritten in the royal library in Berlin, *Ms. lat. theol.* (Octav)
91, p. 101. Printed in J. W. Fischer\'s Reformation History of the Main
and Parish Church of St. Mary Magdalene in Breslau, 1817, p. 48; in E.
Krafft, 14 Letters of Luther (in the Theol. Arbeiten aus dem rhein.
wissensch. Prediger-Verein, edited by Evertsbusch, vol. 2, 1874), p. 92,
no. 1 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. II, p.384.

Martin to his Heß.

Hail! I will write more at another time, my dear Hess; now I do this
with very few words, since I am very busy, just so that you do not
believe that your letter has not been handed over to me. The other will
be reported by Moiban 2) himself. I thank you for the Emperor Honorius,
but I thank you even more for your prayers, which you promise me and on
which I rely not a little, as I am also in great need of them. May the
Lord have mercy on your bishop 3) and preserve him for us longer. Your
colleagues will teach you about the ordination to the priesthood 4) as
far as the ceremonies are concerned; but as far as the spirit of faith
is concerned, the German sermon 5) gives some information about this, to
which another will be added soon, which is given by me about the use of
the mass. 6) For as far as the use of the Mass is concerned, you must
make no distinction between a priest and a layman, \[it is\] One Bread,
One Faith, One Communion, only that the office belongs to the latter,
but not to the former. Of this elsewhere. Now be well and pray for me,
as you do. Wittenberg, 1520, Friday after Misericordias Domini \[April
27\].

Your Martin Luther.

2\) Ambrosius Moiban, later the college of Heß in Breslau, teacher at
the cathedral school and soon after at the Maria-Magdalenaschule there.
He first taught Greek there. - The \"Emperor Honorius\" will be a coin,
because Hess was a coin collector.

3\) John VI of Thurzo from Hungary, bishop from Jan. 21, 1506 to Aug. 2,
1520. Heß was held in great esteem by him and through him had become
Canonicus at Neisse and Breslau.

4\) Hess was awaiting ordination to the priesthood, which he received on
June 2.

5\) Sermon on the Reverend Sacrament of the Holy True Body 2c. St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XIX, 426 ff.

6\) Luther\'s Sermon on the New Testament, that is, on the Holy Mass.
St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1036.

**256** Letters from the year

1520\. no. 287. 288. **257**

**No. 287.**

Wittenberg. May 1, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Of Hebrew books; of the difficulty for the new professor of Hebrew,
Adrian, to obtain an apartment; of the widow Landmann; of letters from
Nuremberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. B 20, No. 9 and in *Cod. Jen. a*, fol.
318. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 263; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 442
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 395. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 691.

His venerable, honorable Georg Spalatin, court preacher to the Elector
of Saxony, Christ\'s servant

JEsus.

Hail! I am returning your dean\'s letter, enclosing the one I received
from Nuremberg. Matthew Adrian thinks that you should write to Doctor
Paschas at Magdeburg about the Hebrew books. If you have done it first,
I will do it too, and soon; see that it is done. As far as my matter is
concerned, I will see to it.

Every day, a number of students stream in, but the narrow city cannot
hold them all and many are forced to leave again. For Adrian, too, we
are unable to procure a dwelling sufficient for man, and it does not
please us to expel others for his sake, which is what he has begun to
work towards. If he should write or act in regard to this matter (for he
himself wanted to act there personally), you know my and Philip\'s
opinion: we will not cooperate, nor will we consent to anyone being
expelled from the house of the treasurer or anyone else against his
will; but if they want to leave out of good will, then we will gladly be
grateful.

If you can obtain an answer for our widow Landmann, whether it contains
a discount or a grant, then I ask you to do it soon. For I have noticed
a certain trifle in the matter, but it almost makes me regret having
taken the trouble: that is how everything gets confused and tangled
nowadays. After all

1\) D.Buffo von Alvensleben (Burkhardt, p. 28).

I worked towards it, if not everything can go out according to her
liking, then she should let go what can go, let fall what falls, peace
be better than war. I do not know if I have done anything. Fare well in
the Lord.

From Nuremberg I have received letters from Staupitzen, which at last
indicate more praise and firmer hope in my cause than I was accustomed
to hearing before. Wenceslaus writes thus: We have received the
doctrinal asses 2); and he has good hope. Thus my ship rocks to and fro;
soon hope, soon fear has the upper hand; but I care nothing for it.
Wittenberg, May 1, 1520.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 288.**

Wittenberg. May 5, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Of letters; of Alveld\'s writing, to which Luther wants to have his
famulus answer. A thanksgiving to the Elector.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 62 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 84. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 264; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 445 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 397. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 692.

Mr. Georg Spalatin, priest of Christ, his extremely dear \[friend\] in
the Lord.

**JEsus.**

Hail! I am sending the letter to Veit Bild, my dear Spalatin, together
with the letter of Peter Aquensis,^3)^ as he ordered. Hutten, Fabricius,
Pellican and Erasmus have been written by both of us and by many others.

Finally, the brother Augustin von Alveld came out with his hunk, 4) but
it is too inconsistent that I should lose hours with the answer to him.
The whole

2\) The doctrinal condemnation 2c. St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 1337.

3\) *Petrus Aquensis, Canonicus* at St. Martin in

Münster.

4\) *offa*, that is Alveld\'s writing: *Super apostolica sede* 2c., the
title of which is given in full in the 18th volume of the St. Louis
edition, Introduction, p. 31 b.. There, p. 32, is also the title of
Loniker\'s answer.

**258** Letters from the year 1520. no. 288. 289. 290. **259**

The way of thinking (*ingenium*), the brain, the nose, the mouth, the
hair, yes, everything that this booklet contains indicates that Leipzig
ox 1): everywhere he uses the same images and inventions that he used in
his exceedingly dirty book against the Picards. He will be answered by
others, and I will employ my brother Famulus to exercise his poetry and
oratory against this stupid ox.

I ask you rather to thank the most noble prince in my name. For you know
that I am not easily at hand to bother those busy ears with my letters.
Dear God, how much is pouring in, and how much more is promised to us
through letters, that many people will flock to us. Farewell and pray
also for me. Wittenberg, May 5, 1520, Martin Luther.

The letter of Aquensis send back, as I will answer.

**No. 2 89.**

(Wittenberg.) May 5, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2458, anh., no.38.

**No. 290 .**

Wittenberg. 7.^2)^ May 1520.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

About a parish or field in dispute between Günther von Staupitz and the
convent of the Augustinian monastery in Wittenberg.

In the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 16; in the Altenburger, vol. I, p.
390; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 545; in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p.
38;-in De Wette, vol. I, p. 444 and in Walch, vol. XXI, 8.

1\) That is Dungersheim von Ochsenfart. He had published two writings
against the Picards in 1514. It was assumed that Alveld had not written
them, but had only given his name to them, as Luther also indicates in
the preface to his writing, \"Vom Pabstthum zu Rom\" 2c.

2\) This date is Conjectur Burkhardt, p. 28: \"Probably Monday
[after]{.underline} *Inventionis Crucis,* which is the 7th time; wrong
in any case the 2nd of May.\" The latter date has De Wette and according
to him the Erl. Edition. \"Cross Invention\" is May 3, in 1520 a
Thursday.

To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Friederich, Duke
of Saxony, Elector and Vicar of the Holy Roman Empire 2c., Landgrave of
Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen, my most gracious lord and patron.

JEsus.

Most Serene, Highborn, Most Gracious Prince and Lord, My Sublime Service
Be E. C. F. G. always ready beforehand. Most gracious Lord, E. C. F.
G.\'s letter to me, I have received submissively, and understood, as E.
C. F. G. pleases, that I was entitled to the parish lands for the same
perpetual interest, in order to avoid future quarrels. However, I am
surprised, most gracious Lord, that Günther von S\[taupitz\] always
pretends to your churfl. Your Grace always claims such a cause of
quarrel, which has now been acted upon for almost the third time, and
has always become worse. There must remain quarrels where one acts in
this way. I can\'t understand how this some hoof has become so
quarrelsome in Günther\'s time, so he has mixed more hoofs among other
hoofs much more, about which no complaint of quarrel comes. If I had not
seen it myself, my lord, I would also think that the quarrel was the
cause, and not the great advantage, and the parish disadvantage. But, my
lord, I am not powerful in this matter alone, and now I know so much
about what happiness arises where it happens without the will of the
convent, that I am glad, and E. C. F. G. that it has come to this, that
the letters are returned to the Convention, and that I am out of the
matter. I find, however, that the parish priest and the convent are in
no way willing to let Günther have his hoofs, so that I report their
cause here to the elector\'s grace and, as much as I am aware of it, do
something about the matter. The dog is so often beaten over the nose
that it once becomes shy. For this reason, I request, in addition to the
Convention, that Your Electoral Grace will take our opinion into
consideration. Your Grace will graciously accept our opinion for the
best, or forgive us for a while. We want to owe this to your honor and
humbly diligence before God. Given at Wittenberg, on Monday \[after\]
Inventionis Crucis \[May 7\] Anno 1520.

E. C. F. G. submissive Capellan D. Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**260** Letters from the year 1520. no. 291. 292. 293. **261**

**No. 291 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 13, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2503, annex, no. 63.

**No. 292 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 17, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

About a matter of Adrian. Luther is surprised that some scholars like
Alveld\'s writing.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 64 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 85. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 266 d; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 449 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 403. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 694.

To His Most Worshipful in the Lord, M. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s
servant, his most esteemed \[friend\].

JEsus.

Hail! Our Adrian asks you to see to it that this letter is handed over
to the Prince. In addition, he asks if you would not allow him to go to
Zerbst himself and pay his respects to the Prince of Brunswick in his
own cause. For someone from Brunswick has written to him that he should
do this. Then he also asks this, that you write again to D. Busso von
Alvensleben about the Hebrew books of which we have written before. What
kind of person this may be, I do not know, you may watch.

Dear, listen, what I am very surprised about in regard to my cause:
Alveld\'s book has begun to please D. Heynitz 1) at Meissen, as D.
Wolfgang Stehlin reports, who also likes it. I ask you, is it not
surprising that such great people have no nose? I will take care that
every thing is called by its right name. 2) Farewell. 1520 on Thursday
after Sophia \[May 17\].

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

1\) Nicolaus von Heynitz, Doctor of Laws, Councillor to Duke George of
Saxony, Provost of Bautzen, member of the Meissen and Altenburg
Cathedral Chapters. He died in 1526.

2\) *ut scapha scapha, serra serra appelletur* == that a punt is called
a punt, a saw a saw.

**No. 293 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 30, 1520.

> **To Heinrich von Bünau, archdeacon in Osterwiek.**

Luther wants to provide him with caplains; he exhorts him to
steadfastness; the fact that many are opposed to the doctrine is a sign
that it is right and God\'s word.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. (Quart), No. 185. Printed in Schütze, Vol.
II, p. 31; in De Wette Vol. I, p. 450 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.
404.

To the excellent man, Mr. Heinrich von Bünau, archdeacon and pastor at
Osterwiek,^3)^ his in Christ highly venerable and honorable \[friend\].

Hail! I too knew that Thomas 4) could not postpone his matter, my dear
sir; but I am glad that everyone is eager for the word of God. I will
indeed use the advice and help of my friends and make an effort to see
if we can provide you, worthy sir, with caplains. In the meantime, let
your constancy be like yourself, that is, constancy in the Lord. It is
nothing new nowadays, when the world is agitated because of the word of
God. Herod, and with him all Jerusalem, is frightened by the mere
preaching that Christ has been born; why should not the earth tremble
and the sun be darkened when one hears of the death of Christ? But it is
a sign to me that the doctrine is sound, when many, and great and wise
men, are offended at it. For so it is said in Ps. 78:31 \[Vulg.\], \"And
he slew their fat ones, and hindered the elect in Israel,\" and \[Luc.
2:34\], \"He is set for a sign to be contradicted, and for the fall and
rising of many,\" not among the Gentiles, but \"in Israel\" and \"the
elect.\" The foolish, the weak before the world, and that which is
nothing, God always chooses \[1 Cor. 1, 27. f.\], and it is written
\[Prov. 3, 32. Vulg.\], that the speech of wisdom

3\) In Latin: *Elsterwicensi*. But Heinrich von Bünau was at Osterwiek
an der Ilse, in the district of Halberstadt. De Wetie-Seidemann, vol.
VI, 485, note 2.

4\) In a letter of April 21, 1520, Bünau tried to win Thomas Münzer as a
chaplain for himself, but he was already in negotiation with the council
of Zwickau. (Seidemann, Münzer, p. 6. Bünau\'s letter there, p. 107.)

**262**

Letters from 1520. no, 293 to 296.

**263**

is with those who walk in simplicity. May the Lord Jesus preserve your
reverence, Amen. Wittenberg, on the Wednesday of Pentecost \[May 30\]
1520. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 29 4.**

Wittenberg. May 31, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends letters which he asks to be forwarded. Loniker\'s writing
will be ready for printing tomorrow. Leipzig\'s envy against Wittenberg.
Dungersheim is to write against Feldkirch. Luther\'s German writing
against Alveld is in print. Inquiry as to whether Luther should write to
the Elector on account of the grievances in Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 66 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 86. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 267; in De Wette, vol. 1, p. 451 and in Erl. Briefwechsel,
vol. II, p. 405. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 695.

To his in the Lord exceedingly dear Magister Georg Spalatin, ducal court
preacher and secretary, his very honest friend.

JEsus.

Hail! I am sending letters to Hütten, Sickingen and our Taubenheim, my
dear Spalatin; I beg you, let it be your command to take care of them in
due time, especially that Taubenheim receives his as soon as possible,
for I myself have been delayed longer than he might have expected.
Loniker\'s paper 1) will be ready tomorrow. The Leipzigers are anxious
to keep their students; 2) they boast that Erasmus will come to them.
How busy and yet how unhappy is the envy. A year ago, when they mocked
at us as if we were defeated, they did not foresee that this cross was
in store for them. The Lord reigns so that we can grasp it with our
hands. Ochsenfart should arm himself against Feldkirchen\'s booklet 3)
in which he is being hounded. I have a German book against the donkey
from

1\) Walch translates, \"Lonicer will be let away tomorrow.\"

2\) After the Leipzig Disputation, many students went from Leipzig to
Wittenberg.

3\) *Confutatio inepti et impii libelli F. Augustini Alved, Franciscani
Lipsici, p\[ro\] D. Martino Luth.* Reprinted in the Latin Wittenberg
edition, tom. II, fol. 203b. Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII,
inset, p. 32a.

Alveld completed, which is now under press.

Give advice whether I should write to the prince for help for our
community. Everything is becoming very expensive, and the supply is
insufficient; also, nothing is administered in a proper manner, with
this completely confused and neglected government. Something could be
done in Wittenberg if there were some order in the administration. Here,
the council and the prince\'s reputation would be in need. Answer and be
well. Wittenberg, Thursday after Pentecost \[May 31\] 1520. Martin
Luther, August.

**No. 295 .**

(Wittenberg.) (May? 1520.) 4)

**To Spalatin.**

Ueber das betrügerische Handeln des Günther von Staupitz.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen. a, fol.* 319. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
293; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 540 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 407.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 789.

Günther Staupitz has, according to all of us and also according to his
own judgment, been invented in such a way that he has deceived us by an
enormous overstatement. This little soup is getting sour to me, so that
it makes me disgusted to act in such matters. For who would believe that
anyone would be so audacious, especially such a man who is so close to
us, that he should deceive our trust in such a gross and impudent
manner? But we have accepted his excuse that he did not know the value
of the two pieces. Therefore, we expect the declaration of invalidity
(*cassationowem*) of the most illustrious prince, since we, too, have
already invalidated everything out of twofold right and name.

**No. 296 .**

Mainz. June 4, 1520.

**Ulrich von Hutten to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1633, no. 490.

4\) That this undated letter belongs to this time is evident from the
same content with No. 290.

**264Letters from the year**

1520\. no. 297. 298. **265**

**No. 297.**

(Wittenberg.) June 7, 1520.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

Luther expresses his regret that the letter of Crotus, which he had sent
to Hess, had not arrived. About Eck\'s triumphs in Rome and a new
writing of Silvester Prierias.

Handwritten at the royal library in Berlin, *Ms. theol. Iat.* (Octav)
91, Bl. 98. Printed by Fischer, Ref.-Gesch. der Mar. - Magdal. - Kirche
in Breslau, 1817, p. 48; in C. Krafft, 14 Briefe Luthers in den Theol.
Arbeiten des rheinischen wissenschaftlichen Predigervereins, II, 92 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 411.

Martin Luther to his Hess.

Hail! Although you only send me your greetings, my dear Heß, I want to
repay you more abundantly, and also write, but briefly, as my occupation
permits. Crotus has also written to you from Bamberg, as he did to me. I
am surprised that his letter has not reached you, for I have, if I am
not mistaken, arranged it very beautifully and faithfully, although he
has written that I should tear it up if you were not present. My letter
had gone to Italy when he left, and he did not know that it came to meet
him. Eck seizes the coveted fame in Rome. He was led by the Cardinal of
the Four Crowned 1) to the holy pope and kissed the holy feet, again the
pope kissed him, to the astonishment of all, and that since he was
sitting publicly before all eyes on the chair of his majesty. Would God
that they would also lick, lick, spit and bite each other in such a way,
writes the one who writes: Luther has gracious gods in Rome, but no men.
What do you think will become of it? Perhaps the sky will fall, and many
pots will be smashed. Silvester Prierias has spewed another, so
blasphemous slobber, 3) that reading these things alone almost kills me.
We will publish this booklet, which has escaped from hell (*tartareum*),
with Luther\'s annotations. In the meantime, you do what you do, and

1\) *Quatuor Coronatorum*, the Cardinal Lorenzo Pucci.

2\) It seems to us that the reading here is corrupted.

3\) The Epitome, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 422. See also the
introduction there, p. 19d f.

Greetings to the friends, Michael 4) and Krautwald, together with all.
To the most reverend bishop 5) I wish the grace of Christ. In Him you
are also well. On the seventh of June 1520. Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 298.**

Wittenberg. (Before June 8, 1520.) 6)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the epitome of Prierias. Of the writing against Alveld; of
the plan of the writing to the nobility of the German nation; of the
postilla being prepared for printing; of his letter to the Churfürst
because of the theurung.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav. A*, No.84 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 107. Printed in Aurifaber;
vol. I, p. 289b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 452 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 413\... German in Walch, vol. XXI, 723.

To his extremely honorable Georg Spalatin, the pious and learned man,
Christ\'s servant.

JEsus.

Hail! I send the Nuremberg letter, my dear Spalatin, with Silvester\'s
epitome, which he himself calls *epithoma,* the man who does not
understand Greek and is a cook 7) in Latin. Send it back immediately,
for it shall soon be printed to the praise and honor of all enemies of
truth, with my annotations. \"I think they are all mad, foolish, raging,
nonsensical at Rome. Fools, sticks, stones, hell and devils.\" Now see
what is to be hoped from Rome, which allows this infernal poison (*hunc
tartarum*) to go out into the church. Indeed, these monsters overcome me
by the greatness of their foolishness.

Against the ass of Alveld I will arrange my attack in such a way that I
am not unaware of the Roman pope, and I will not give anything to either
of them. For this is what the material necessitates. End

4\) Michael Williger, canon in Breslau, and Valentin Krautwald, the
later Schwenkfeldianer.

5\) Johann Thurzo.

6\) This time determination results from comparison with Melanchthon\'s
letter to Hess, *Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I, 201. (Kolde, M. Luther, p. 387 p.
256.)

7\) This refers to the intentional misprint in the Basel edition *Magiri
Palatii* instead of *Magistri*. See St. Louis edition, vol. X VIII,
introduction, p. 20, note.

**266** Letters from the year 1520. no. 298 to 301. **267**

Once the secrets of the Antichrist have to be revealed. Because this is
how they push themselves out and do not want to be hidden any further.

I intend to issue a public note to the emperor and the nobility
throughout Germany, against the tyranny and unworthiness of the Roman
court.

The interpretations of the Epistles and Gospels are prepared for
printing.

I am writing to the most illustrious prince for support of our
commonwealth; I beg you, let this matter be of equal concern to you. For
if this is not done, it will come about that we will soon starve, or be
fed too sumptuously 1). Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, 1520,
Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 29 9.**

Münnerstadt. June 11, 1520,

**Silvester von Schaumburg to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1631, no. 489.

**No. 300 .**

Wittenberg. June 13, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Of slanders against Lotther. The epitome of Prierias is in print.
Melanchthon should rather read about Paul than Pliny 2c.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 67 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 87. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 267d; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 454 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.\'
II, p. 417. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 696.

To his extremely dear Lord Georg Spalatin, the most illustrious
prince\'s secretary and court preacher, the pious and learned man.

JEsus.

Hail! There is nothing of Lotther that you may believe the pretenders,
my dear Spalatin; the speeches that have reached you are words of men;
we know otherwise. Primarily those complain who have nothing to do with
the matter; I judge the same about the teachers of the boys\' school
(*Paedagogii*);

1\) That is, at too great a cost.

that I just say it: you seem to have received what you write from D.
Wolfgang 2) and his followers (*genitivis). Let that* bishop Zacharias
come,^3)^ in the name of the Lord. Silvester\'s nonsense is under the
press. We are also surprised about the sudden marriage of our Adrian and
wish him all the best.

About our Philip I also do not determine anything, as far as Pliny is
concerned. He reads Paul to the Romans with far greater benefit than
many can bring Pliny; and what this is, that a head is burdened daily
with three public lectures, you consider, so that we do not kill the
man.

That Fach resigns his priesthood does not move me very much; rather, I
am moved by the fact that the priesthoods of this church have to be
bought for so much money that no poor person can get them, and that by
the statutes of men. I ask you, do you not think that this extortion is
robbery? Many others dislike this condition under which one must obtain
the priesthoods.

To Emperor Carl, may the Lord give His Spirit for growth in truth
against the enemy of truth, Rome, amen. Farewell. Wittenberg, 1520,
Wednesday after the Feast of Corpus Christi \[June 13\].

M. Luther, Aug.

**No. 301**

Wittenberg. June 15, 1520.

**To Georg Kunzelt, pastor in Eilenburg.**

When asked, Luther states how he begins and closes his sermons.

Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 12 (from the original in the town hall at Burg
near Magdeburg, which, however, could no longer be found there upon
request); by Löscher, Vol. Ill, p. 955 (who places the letter among
those of 1519, but notes: \"scheinet schon 1518 datirt zu sein\"); by De
Wette, Vol. I, p. 455 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 418. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 697.

2\) Stehelin.

3\) Both Seidemann and the Erl. Briefwechsel refer this passage to D.
Joh. Zacharias, who at the Concil of Costnitz overcame Joh. Hus with a
forged Bible (Tischreden, Cap. 58, § 5) and brought him to death by
fire. If this is correct, then by Zacharias here Eck is to be
understood, and by *Episcopus* that, just as the former was given a rose
as a reward, the latter might have been granted a bishopric.

**268**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 301 to 304. **269**

To the venerable Mr. Georg Kunzelt in Eilenburg, his brother in the
Lord.

Hail! What you have asked, my venerable father, about the way in which
one should begin and conclude a sermon, does not agree with the usage of
others. For I omit lengthy prefaces, and use briefly these words: \"That
the word of God may be fruitful to us and pleasing to God, let us first
invoke His divine grace, and say a heartfelt Hail Mary, or Pater
noster.\" Then I immediately recite the text without any subject, and
either explain David or present the teachings from it. At the end I say:
\"That\'s enough of that\", or: \"Another time more\". Or, \"Let this be
said of it, let us call upon God and His grace, that we may do this,\"
or thus, \"God help us.\" After that, in very short words: \"Let us be
commanded spiritually and worldly, especially 2c., for those and all who
are only guilty, let us pray one Our Father in common\". After that, as
all stand up: The blessing of God the Father 2c. Amen. This is my way of
preaching. Fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, on St. Vitus\' Day \[June
15\] 1520.

Brother Mart. Luther, August.

**No. 302.**

Wittenberg. June 21, 1520.

**To Justus Jonas in Erfurt.**

Luther expresses his joy that Jonas has turned from legal scholarship to
theology. Von Eck\'s bustle in Rome. Apology due to infrequent writing.

Handwritten in the old royal library in Copenhagen, Manuscr. 1393
(quarto), p. 37. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 268b; in De Wette,
vol. I, p.456 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.419. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 698.

To the highly famous man, Doctor Justus Jonas, his very good friend.

JEsus.

Salvation and peace in Christ! I do not deny my guilt, my dear Jonas,
for I confess that I owe you letters long ago; not as if they meant
anything, but because I should have been at your service.

even if you desire my trifling things. I am glad that you have taken
refuge in the safe harbor of the holy scriptures from the stormy sea of
the legal scholars. ^1)^ May the Lord who seized you keep you.

The wretched men rage against me and seek my soul, but Christ lives and
reigns. My cause is being pursued in Rome (as friends from Rome write)
with great power on Eck\'s incentives, 2) who is the one spirit \[1
Kings 22, 21. f.\] of the papal men. What they may accomplish, Christ
will see. Everything else you will learn from our Lang.

In the meantime, you will forgive me for writing less frequently. By the
way, so that I henceforth write more often, see to it that you
frequently prod me when I am lazy, or encourage me when I am busy. If I
do not reply to everything (which I will, however, try to do with all
diligence), I will read everything very gladly, yes, with great
pleasure. Repay not 3) silence with silence, or sloth with sloth, but
overcome evil with good. Farewell, my dear Jonas, and take my heart, and
pray for me. Wittenberg, June 21, 1520.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 303.**

Wittenberg. June 23, 1520.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf, canon in Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 266 (erroneously dated June 20 there).

**No. 304.**

Basel. June 23, 1520.

**Caspar Hedio to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1377, no. 427.

1\) Especially on the advice of Erasmus, Jonas had turned from
jurisprudence to theology, and had begun to lecture on the Corinthian
Epistles. On August 28, 1520, they appeared in print.

2\) On Eck\'s negotiations in Rome on the matter of Luther, compare
Wiedemann, \"Eck,\" p. 151 f.

3\) Here we have adopted De Wette\'s Conjectur, namely *redde* and
*vince* instead of *reddo* and *vinco*.

**270** Letters from the year

1520\. no. 305. 306. **271**

**No. 305.**

(Wittenberg.) June 25, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Melanchthon should not be taken away from Paul by the lecture on Pliny;
Vl. Joh. Heß could provide the same. Melanchthon\'s marriage was to be
desired; he must be kept for Wittenberg through a better salary.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 68 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 87. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 269; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 458 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 423. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 699.

To the learned and pious man Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant and
priest, his friend in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! It has seemed good to me as well as to many others, my dear
Spalatin, that Philip should not be burdened with the lecture on Pliny,
because of the apostle Paul, whom he reads with such great fruit. The
listeners must not be deprived of this, since the fruit of Pliny can in
no way be compared to it, and it is to be feared that he might have been
driven to it by the spirit, which must not be sacrilegiously resisted,
and that it might be an attempt by Satan to prevent such great fruit
under this pretense. If Pliny is to be read by all means, one thinks
that this should be laid on the Magister Johann Heß 1). With regard to
taking a wife, especially the one you mention, I do not know what will
happen. I wish a man a wife, but which one he should take, I will
neither be the author nor the counselor, nor do I see that the man
hurries to take a wife.

Although I hope that Philip does not aim at the Bavarians, 2) this is
something I have always wished, that he, honored by a more respectable
salary, would deprive them of the hope they cherish, because they know
that he is held worse here than it would be the case with them. If an
opportunity presents itself

1\) This is not the Breslau, but the Wittenberg Heß, Eisermann, also
called Montanus.

2\) Reuchlin sought to draw Melanchthon to Ingolstadt.

you should take care of it. For each one must also not neglect the care
for himself when the occasion, that is, God calls. I will be
sufficiently mindful of the tragedy at Strasbourg 3) in its place.
Tomorrow, Silvester and the German novelist 4) will be ready. Farewell.
On the day after John the Baptist\'s day \[June 25\] 1520.

Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 306.**

(Wittenberg.) June 29, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a Sigismund for a scholarship. He wants to write to
Sickingen.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 69 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 88. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 269 b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 460 (incorrect: \"28.
Junius\") and in Erl. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 701.

To the learned and godly man, Magister Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s
servant, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! This Mr. Sigismund, 5) who was recommended to me by you, my dear
George, I again commend his cause to you. For although I know that the
regiment at court is of such a nature that, since it has to do with many
things, it often needs a reminder, yes, an impetuous knocker, it is not
at all patient against an impetuous being. But you yourself know the man
and his cause. For what he does,

3\) Perhaps the process is meant here, which Luther tells in the writing
to the nobility 2c. St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 289 f., § 47.

4\) namely the Epitome with Luther\'s annotations and the writing
against Alveld: Vom Pabstthum zu Rom wider den Romanisten zu Leipzig,
St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 422 and Col. 1002.

5\) According to Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 654 8. v. Chlumma,
this D. *Sigismundus* is the same, which is mentioned in St. Louiser
Ausg. In contrast, the Erl. Briefw. asserts that he was not inscribed,
but a *Sigismundus Mintanus de Grimma*, on April 24, 1520. (*AIb.* p.
90.) The latter assumption receives great probability from the fact that
the scholarship money was located in Grimma.

**272**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 306 to 309.

**273**

He does this for his own sake, so that while theology is flourishing in
Wittenberg, he may learn what he can later teach in a very beneficial
way; although those who have the gift of teaching, as this one seems to
have, are rare. You see that in this matter a delay can only do harm.
For if he is delayed, he will be forced to go away, and who knows when
there will be an opportunity to return, or if he returns, whether he
will find what he is now leaving? Therefore, you will, I presume, do
what you can, that he may know undoubtedly (*absolutus*) what he has to
do. The scholarship money, 1) which is involved, is in Grimma, as you
will hear from him more completely.

I will write the letter to Sickingen 2) tomorrow, today I have not been
able to do it, because I am too overwhelmed with business. Farewell, in
the evening 3) of the day of Peter and Paul \[June 29\] 1520.

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 307.**

(Wittenberg.) (June or July? 1520.) 4)

**To Spalatin.**

About an imperial privilege to be granted to Lotther for the printing of
the Postille. Postscript: from Purgatory.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 13. Printed by Buddeus, p. 17; by De
Wette, vol. I, p. 463 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 426. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 767 (also from 1522).

JEsus.

Hail! Lotther has negotiated with me, my dear Spalatin, about the
printing of the so-called Postillen. But, if it could happen, he wishes
an imperial privilege

1\) *census beneficiales*, the income for the benefit s)of the
scholarship).

2\) This letter does not exist.

3\) Because De Wette has confused *vigilio* and *vesperi*, he gives this
letter the date: \"28. Junius\". But *vesperi* is the evening of the
mentioned day, not the day before.

4\) Buddeus erroneously places this letter in the year 1522. De Wette,
guided by a second postscript, which does not belong to this letter, but
to No. 309, has given it its place between July 9 and 10. The Erl.
Briefw. has the above time determination, because of the mention of the
printing of the Postille, which was already mentioned in No. 298.

for several years, during which no one should be allowed to be his rival
in the whole of Germany, which, as he thinks, can best be achieved by
our prince. 5) He believes that in this way the Wittenberg prints would
be spread further and faster, to the greater glory of our academy. And
would God that we, according to this advice, had so far brought our
writings into the hands of very many people, and had forestalled the
violence and treachery of the godless enemies of truth in the hearts of
the common people; such a swift spreading of the truth and the preceding
instruction of the hearts might have frightened the tyrants of
godlessness. But in this I expect what the Lord may also counsel through
you. Fare well.

Martin Luther.

About purgatory I have nothing more certain than several psalms, such as
the 6th \[v. 6\], the 13th \[v. 4\] and the 88th \[v. 4\] and several
others that speak of this torment. Apart from these, Tauler evidently
has the same in many places. Whoever does not grasp this will not grasp
it by anyone\'s words, for it is beyond all reason, as is everything
else concerning the world to come. Therefore, if someone has not
experienced it in some way, he cannot add anything to these words, nor
treat these things, nor understand them. ^6)^

**No. 308.**

(Wittenberg.) July 9, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 1408, no. 440.

**No. 309.**

Wittenberg. July 10, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2500, annex, no. 62.

5\) Lotther\'s efforts seem to have been in vain, for it was Grünenberg,
not he, who printed the Latin Postille in March 1521. See St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XI, Preface, Col. VII.

6\) Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 604, note 5, notes: \"Probably it
was this letter, if not No. CLXXII \[No. 235 of our edition\], which was
auctioned as an original letter of Luther to Spalatin on the doctrine of
Purgatory for 400 francs in Paris in 1852.\" *Bulletin du bibliophile
Belge. Ser. II, tom*. I, p. 146.

**274** Letters from the year 1520. no. 310. **275**

**No. 310 .**

(Zwickau.) July 13, 1520.

**Thomas Münzer to Luther.**

On behalf of the council of Zwickau, Münzer turns to Luther for advice
and assistance. He reported what he had preached and what teachings his
opponents, the local Minorites, had presented, and offered to hand over
his sermons to the deputies of the bishop of Naumburg for evaluation and
to be instructed.

The original is in the Hauptstaatsarchiv in Dresden. Printed in
Seidemann, Thomas Münzer, 1842, p. 112, supplement 6, and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. II, p. 434.

JEsus be with you.

The council has instructed me, dearest father, to use your council 1) in
the matter against my innocents, who, raging all the time, are driven by
the spirit of fraud, so that they drag me here and there, splashed with
the rain of the great sea. They have cited me before the guardian of
their prerogatives, so that they force me to recant what I have said not
against the mendicant monks, but against all hypocrites, who all for the
sake of a morsel of bread condemn souls to life, who nevertheless should
not live \[Ezek. 13, 19.\], and with their long prayers devour the
houses of widows \[Matth. 23, 14.\], seeking not faith but their
insatiable avarice in the dying. Of these I have said that they have
hitherto deceived the Church of God, whether they be monks or priests;
also the laity, I have said, are equally guilty, who have entirely left
prayer and groaning for the shepherds of souls, therefore the Lord has
justly given blind watchmen to the blind sheep. Thus, I always connect
that the monks and priests as well as the laity are guilty; I exclude
none, I spare none; I admonish all of them from time to time, whether at
the right time or at the wrong time \[2 Tim. 4, 2.\], that they should
go into themselves. I freely confess that I said on Ascension Day 2) to
beware of the monsters who wear helmets and shields of faith \[Eph. 6,
16. f.\], indicating the ceremonies with which they, as they are

1\) Although the letter has no address, it cannot be doubted that it was
addressed to Luther. Münzer had been a preacher at the parish church of
St. Mary in Zwickau since May 13, 1520, when he preached his inaugural
sermon.

2\) In this sermon on the Ascension, Münzer said among other things: the
monks had mouths that one could cut off a pound of them, and yet they
kept enough mouths. See Seidemann, Münzer, p. 6.

They have fought for the church, which otherwise would have been
destroyed long ago. With such clamor they rage before the people, and
with a plaintive voice they weep for me as a blasphemer against the holy
orders, saying that I do not build up right 3) love, but destroy it 2c.
All the false nonsense of my adversaries I take up to an exceedingly
sweet exercise of faith, because the gospel comforts \[Joh. 15, 20.\]:
If they have received my word, they will also receive yours 2c. If they
have perverted Christ\'s word, they will also pervert mine. I know that
the word of the Lord does not return empty \[Isa. 55:11\], I know that
the eyes of the Lord see in all places both the wicked and the pious
\[Prov. 15:3\], who judge and handle nothing but what is implanted in
their hearts. May you be my protector in the Lord Jesus. I beg you not
to lend your ears to those who speak against me, not to believe those
who have called me a fickle, biting man and have defamed me with a
thousand other names. I do not give a fig for it, everything is
exceedingly pleasant to me for the sake of my Christ; more difficult
battles are ahead of me; I firmly trust that God will lead everything
out through your and all Christians\' counsel. My cross is not yet
complete, for the whole council 4) stands by me and almost the whole
city, which knows the exceedingly burdensome avarice of the hypocrites
as it were from the cradle, and has admonished me that I, on your
advice, should appeal to a future concilium 5) against the birds of prey
that tear everything apart. The council has written to Prince John so
that they do not bother those who preach the divine word. The council
itself has heard almost all the words I have preached. I have also
pleaded with the deputies of the bishop at Naumburg 6) that I am quite
willing to give an account of my faith, and have offered them all my
sermons: if they found anything in them contrary to Christian modesty, I
would make it up to them. The Minorites are not satisfied by either one
or the other, fill the ears of all the people, run around everywhere
from house to house, and howl 7) against the

3\) Instead of *geminam* we have assumed *genuinam.*

4\) especially the mayor D. Stuler. Seidemann 1. o. p. 8.

5\) Instead of *consilium* we have adopted *concilium.* The confusion of
both words is very frequent.

6\) Nicolaus Tilemann, canon of Zeitz.

7\) In the original: *eulantes*. We have assumed *ejulantes*, the Erl.
Briefw.: *evolantes*.

**276**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 310.

If you wish, I will answer all the superiors; if an appeal is to be
made, I will write; if a disputation is to be offered, I will tell them.
If you request it, I will answer all the superiors; if an appeal is to
be made, write; if a disputation is to be offered to them, indicate it:
whatever you advise, that I will do in the Lord. Both your ears will be
ringing at such euphonious sentences:

Christ died once, so that he would not die in us, nor would his
sacrament be a comfort to us, nor would his example be changed into a
discipleship 1). In the office of the Mass we obtain that we do not
suffer in this world.

The new preachers preach nothing but the gospel, but in the very worst
way, contradicting by it the commandments of men, which are most to be
observed. Many things must be added to the gospel.

There is no need to live according to the gospel over and over again.

If poverty were evangelical, it would not allow kings 2c. to seize the
riches of the world.

If an example of faith must be given by the shepherds of souls and the
monks in renouncing riches, so that they may preside over their sheep
with word and example, then consequently such poverty must be observed
by princes and kings that they have nothing and are beggars.

It is not a commandment of the Gospel \[Matth. 5, 39\]: If someone hits
you on one cheek, you should offer him the other one as well. It is a
citation of the heretics, so that they may freely persecute the church,
and we should not call upon the secular arm.

The failure is an imaginary thing; it must not be placed in the belief
that we know ourselves safe by the same, but in the works from which the
people must not be turned away, that the people of Zwickau, who have
always been dear to me for twenty-four years, burn lights and do
exceedingly virtuous works.

Eternal blessedness cannot be called the kingdom of faith that is in us,
since it is in the future Fatherland alone; here we are completely
uncertain of our blessedness.

He poured out these articles before the people all at once in one
sermon.

1\) Instead of in *imitatione* we have assumed in *imitationern.*

With all my soul I admonished this father of the Order of Minorites,
Tiburtius von Weißenfels, not to spread such great errors among the
people against the salvation of souls, or to give me and the council an
account of his faith through reliable scriptural passages and their
right understanding. He, more cruel than any wild animal, said he would
do neither the one nor the other, but confidently asserted that I should
be destroyed by the whole order, and the furious fighter boarded the
chariot, full of invective. I mocked his fury, fearing nothing, even if
the entire band of mendicants should summon, mangle or slaughter me. I
do not do my work, but the work of the Lord. I will not, as long as a
single breath revives me, suffer these antics, these larvae of the
hypocrites; I will oppose them with ceaseless groaning and with the
trumpet of the Word of God, so that the name of the Lord may not be
blasphemed by those who want to be considered Christians, since their
feet are very hasty \[Rom. 3:15\], so that they themselves make a
commotion among the people of God, mixing heaven and earth. If you
advise it, with my very sincere friends, the Doctor *Great* and his
deputy, and the teacher of the Greek language 2) and the rest of the
magisters, my assistants, I will write against these sentences, so that
the opponents of the cross of Christ may learn to sanctify the name of
God and to keep their blasphemous mouths in check, that the light of our
consolation may shine to all who are in the house of the Lord. Indicate
what seems to you to be Christian in all these things. After my previous
danger, I certainly believe that I am set apart for other struggles of
the world. He who snatched me out of the most perishable mire will
deliver me from the hand of the beast and the lion and the dragon, so
that I shall not fear, though I walk in the midst of the shadow of
death, for the Lord is with me, so strong a warrior. He will give mouth
and wisdom, which all our adversaries will not be able to resist \[Luc.
21, 15\]. What more could I desire? Fare well in Christ, you model and
lamp of God\'s friends. Given on the day of Margaret \[July 13, in the
year of the Lord 1520.

Tomas Munezer, g.. . u\... p Gospel.

2\) This is Melanchthon. - Große\" is perhaps the Naumburg canon Donatus
Große, who was highly regarded by the Elector.

**278Letters from the year**

1520\. no. 311. 312. **279**

**No. 311 .**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther complains that the rector of the university has taken the wrong
measures against the student revolt and advocates that the revolt be
controlled with severity. He asks for the return of Schaumburg\'s
letters (No. 299).

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 71 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 92. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 273 b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 466 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 439. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 702.

To the learned and pious man, Georg Spalatin, princely court preacher,
his superior in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I beg you, if you are able to do anything with the most noble
prince, my dear Spalatin, then see to it that the prince writes a very
hard and sharp letter to our Rector 1). For he almost involved us in
murder and bloodshed yesterday, with his exceedingly great nonsense, the
nonsensical man, by fomenting the uproar of the student mob 2) against
the council and the innocent people, which he should have dampened. I
was present at the meeting where they were completely resting; nothing
was said but what only inflamed the wildness of the young people even
more. I am sorry for this disorder of our university, which will finally
be its disgrace. D. Petrus Lupinus 3) spoke very validly against the
rebellion, but was so received by D. Thomas Eschaeus that I immediately
got up and left when I saw that Satan was presiding over this assembly.
Yes, it is said that the young people were allowed to bear arms, against
the commandment of the prince.

It is better that a smaller number here

1\) Rector Peter Burkhard. After the expiration of his rectorate, he
returned to Ingolstadt, and in 1523 signed with others the 17 articles,
against which Luther in 1524 directed his writing: \"Wider das blinde
und tolle Verdammniß der siebenzehn Artikel, von der mabenden,
schändlichen Universität zu Ingolstadt ausgegangen\". See Walch, old
edition, vol. XXI, 131.

2\) In the Weimar archives there is an Actenfascikel with the
inscription: \"Der Studentenaufflauf wider Lucas Cranach den Mahler anno
1520.\" See also Köstlin, M. Luther (3.), vol.

3\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 411, note 3.

studire than that mau be exposed to this turmoil. All who are good
condemn this nonsense. Tomorrow I will also make an effort in the
sermon, if, God willing, I can dampen something. Nothing of what the
Prince has recently decreed has been observed; the old men have been
more nonsensical than the young men. I know that this is a pretense of
Satan, who, since he can nowhere harm the word of God that is
reappearing among us, seeks to bring him ill-repute by this trick. But
one must oppose it with all possible diligence, so that he does not keep
the upper hand with these bloodthirsty people.

By the way, I believe that you have received all the letters I sent,
including the one from Silvester Schaumburg; send it back so that the
friends can read it. Be well and pray for me. Saturday after Margaret
\[July 14\] 1520.

Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 312 .**

(Wittenberg.) July 17, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther preached against sedition and, although he spoke impartially,
made many enemies as a result. About news from Rome.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 92. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
274; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 468 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 441.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 704.

To the learned and godly man, Magister Georg Spalatin, princely Saxon
court preacher, his in Christ exceedingly theureu \[friend\].

JEsus.

Hail! That Liranian vision, my dear Spalatin, we think, is nothing else
than this very uproar. Namely, a great man almost in all prophecies and
visions praises the rude rabble. Yesterday, I delivered a speech from
the pulpit against the riot, which was so moderate that I did not fall
for any party, and quite simply described the fog of the riot, whether
it be aroused by the citizens or by the students, and extolled the

4\) more precisely: the day before yesterday, July 15, which was a
Sunday. See also the previous letter.

**280**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 312. 313. 314.

**281**

The power of the authorities, which would be appointed by God, so that
everything would not be devastated by rebellion. Dear God, how much
spite I have incurred! They cry out that I have favored the party of the
council, and at last reveal the thoughts of their hearts, 1) from which
one can tell which in truth and which in pretense have heard our
theology. For through this sieve the wheat and the chaff must be
separated from one another. I can well see Satan, who, seeing that he is
of no avail in Rome and among the foreigners, has invented this evil, so
that he may do harm from within, and that in the worst possible way. Do
harm.

The matter was small at first, but behold, the more it is acted upon,
the more sharply it seizes and emboldens the hearts, which is quite
diabolical in nature, that by the very thing by which one thinks to
heal, he increases the disease. I do not fear him, but I worry that we
have offended the Lord through ingratitude or vain honor, that in his
anger he has allowed Satan to creep in among the children of God. And
this does not move me so much as that which I fear will happen, namely,
that we, hardened and possessed by Satan, will be incorrigible, so that
only our iniquities will become full, and the wrath of God will come and
visit us with some mighty plague and put us to shame, because we have
not received the word offered to us, or have not received it
sufficiently.

Here, indeed, I fear a lot and am seriously worried. In these last three
years I have suffered some particularly great danger every year: first
at Augsburg, second at Leipzig, now at Wittenberg. Therefore, it will
not be prudence nor weapons, but humble prayer and strong faith that
will be necessary to obtain Christ for us; otherwise, if we rely on our
strength, it will indeed be the end of us.

1\) A student who had come from Leipzig said after the sermon: \"If the
monk does more of this kind of sermon, he will take a stone and hit the
monk on the head or on the plates in the church\"; and another: \"If he
would not leave this sermon, they would soon put an end to it with him.
This is the testimony of Thomas Feuerlein, Raths- und Bauherr zu
Wittenberg. Neue Mittheilungen, VIII, 2, p. 62.

let. Therefore, take refuge with me in prayer, lest the evil spirit of
the Lord blow a conflagration from this spark. Mau must not despise
small things, especially those that take their beginning from Satan\'s
operation.

I am sending back your news from Rome. I myself have heard more from him
orally 2) than can be read on this note. Yes, this is what Magister
Eisleben has written out of his mouth and given it to Melchior Lotther;
from there it comes back to us through you. Farewell and remember that
we must suffer for the word. For since Silvester Schaumburg and Franz
Sickingen have made me safe against the fear of men, the raging of the
devil must also follow. This will be the last, since I will be
burdensome to myself. Such is the will of God. On the day of St. Alexii
\[July 17\] 1520.

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 313.**

Wittenberg. July 20, 1520.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2504, annex, no. 64.

**No. 314.**

(Wittenberg.) July 22, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther complains about the accusations that have been leveled against
him because of the sermon on sedition, even before Spalatin; he
therefore also wants to write to Dolzig and the Elector. Bon of a new
writing of Alveld. About Agricola\'s and Melanchthon\'s marriage.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 276; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 470 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 445. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 706.

To his Georg Spalatin, the good and learned man, his exceedingly dear
\[friend\] in Christ.

Hail! I am surprised that you are so angry against me and believe others
who write about me so much, my dear Spalatin. My sermon has been of such
a nature that it is not about the present, but about the future.

2\) Perhaps Doctor Johann von Wick is meant, with whom, as we can
conclude from No. 309, Luther had a meeting. See St. Louis edition, vol.
XV, 2501, note 4.

**282**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 314. 315,

**283**

I have said in clear words that the present unrest was a kind of
childish unrest, which I thought had already been quenched at that time.
For of the present one I have said in clear words that it was a kind of
childish unrest, which I thought had already been dealt with and quieted
at that time. All those who want to tell the truth must be witnesses to
this. Neither party, neither thing have I touched upon nor indicated,
not even with one syllable, indeed, I have said that I will not speak of
the matter, but in general of the dangers of any sedition. Now you see
whether I have lied, that this matter is being carried on by the
deceitfulness of the devils: what shall I do now?

I write, as you wished, to Dolzig\^ and the prince. I am very displeased
with the letters written to you by some people, whatever their fault may
be. I cannot defend our part in one thing, that they have incited the
rabble; but I believe it is to be forgiven the carelessness, especially
if they acknowledge their error. I have to this day despised the matter
as a childish one, and would despise it if you did not thunder so. But
see that you do not move me in vain to write to the prince in such a
matter. Farewell.

The Leipzig ass 3) has let a new roar be heard against me, which is full
of blasphemies about the communion under both forms, and will also write
against my German writing about the papacy. The Wittenberg Magister
Eisleben will take a wife (*ducturit*), as the rumor goes; as for
Philip, I do not know what the rumor says he will do. I would like the
man\'s salary to be increased, so that it would not be necessary for him
to go to something else for the sake of his household. In the year 1520,
on the day of Mary Magdalene \[July 22\].

Brother Martin Luther, August.

1\) Dolzig had come to Wittenberg on July 16 with a number of foot
soldiers to quell the riot. He also led the investigation into this
matter, as a result of which several students were expelled.

2\) the university.

3\) Alveld. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV111, Introduction, p. 325.

**No. 315 .**

Wittenberg. July 30, 1520.

**To Johann Thurzo, Bishop of Breslau.**

Luther consoled him in his illness; but since he died already on August
2, he did not receive this letter anymore.

Handwritten in *Cod*. *Goth*. B 20, fol. 25. printed by Scultetus,
*annal. eccles.* in dev edition by der Hardts, P. V, p. 33; by Gerdes,
*Hist. ref.,* P. II. Docum., No.2, p.6; Innocent News, 1784, p.713;
Rosenberg, Schles. Ref. - Gesch., 1767, p. 461; *Strobel- Ranner*, *epp.
Luth.*, 1814, p. 56; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 472 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. II, p. 447. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 707.

To the most reverend and highly respected Father and Lord in Christ, Mr.
John, 4) Bishop of the Church at Wroclaw, his gracious and especially
venerable patron.

JEsus.

5\) Although I, most reverend bishop, seeing my lowliness, write with
shyness, as I do to all other great ones, especially to your highness,
the venerable man Dominicus Schleupner, who is extremely devoted to you,
most reverend father, and who, out of childlike love with which he is
attached to his bishop, has broken out of here to see what the Lord is
doing in the mortal body of the most reverend father, 6) has given me
courage. But he did not want to leave without a letter from me, and
persuaded me that I would thereby do something that would not be
unpleasant to you, most reverend father. I confess, in fact, that I,
too, become somewhat, yes, much ill with you, Most Reverend Father,
because I suffer with the Church of God, which, unfortunately, is rarely
given such bishops as you, Most Reverend Father, have given a bishop,
while it has never needed such people more. By the way, I am confident
that his hand will strike and heal \[Job 5:18\], and he who has given
you, Most Reverend Father, such glorious gifts, is the one who will do
it.

4\) Thurzo. Compare No. 286.

5\) Here in the manuscript and in the editions, except for De Wette:
*Sese commendat*, which we have omitted with De Wette. If one wants to
keep it, then it is to be added to the inscription: \"recommends itself
\[brother Martin Luther\]\", and the signature, which is also missing in
the manuscript, is to be deleted.

6\) Compare No. 265.

**284**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 315. 316. 317.

**285**

He will not fail to give you strength and fortitude to suffer everything
with steadfast, Christian and episcopal courage, and to surrender to his
holy will in all things. If your life will be denied to the church, your
death shall benefit it. But he is powerful to help his Church both
through your life and through your death, most reverend Father,
according to the riches of his good will.

I do not write this because I consider it necessary to strengthen your
courage in the Lord (but who is so strong that he should not need even
the least brother\'s comfort), but because he who willed and made all
things common to us, after having done all things for us, commanded that
one should bear another\'s burdens \[Gal. 6:2\], so that no one who
believes in him should live alone or die alone, but that in the
fellowship of the saints he should act and suffer securely in all
things. Therefore, as much as we are grieved, most reverend Father, by
your sickness, which is common to us all, or, if the Lord should will
it, also by your future death: so much again do we rejoice that your
soul neither suffers alone, nor lives alone, but we suffer and live with
it, and with all Christ Jesus, the center of our heart, in whom you,
most reverend Father, may be holily well pleased and forgive my
boldness. For your former letters, most reverend Father, have made me
stout-hearted, since they are exceedingly full of great humility and
love, to the point that I am indifferent to scholarship; they shall be
preserved for lasting remembrance among my saints. Again, I pray thee in
Christ, most reverend Father, and let me be commended to thee.
Wittenberg, July 30, 1520.

Your Reverend Son Brother Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 3 16.**

Wittenberg. July 30, 1520.

**To Michael Williger, canon in Breslau.**

Luther writes to him, prompted by Schleupner. Much is written against
him, but by unrighteous people. The Dominicans were silent now, but the
Franciscans were active, but only with crudeness and great foolishness.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. B 20, fol. 24 d. Printed in Schütze, vol.
II, p. 32; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 473 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.
449.

Brother M. Luther, Augustinian, to Mr. Wittiger, Canon in Breslau, his
superior in the Lord.

Hail! I did not want to write anything to you, dearest man, since Mr.
Dominic Schleupner, our mutual friend, himself seems to be able to tell
everything better orally. He knows everything there is with us, but he
wanted me to write to you, even if only one line. Therefore I do what he
wanted. Many a booklet is written against me in Germany and Italy, but
there is no need for that. Only the most ass-like donkeys write, who
pull themselves through with their inconsistencies. I, however, am quite
well in body and soul, except that I wish I sinned less. And every day I
sin more, which I lament to you and your prayers. By the way, the sect
of the preaching monks) has become quiet after an edict was issued
against them, 1) that no one should write against me. In their place the
people of Samaria have followed, the priests of Bethaven,^2)^ the
brothers of the observance of St. Francis. If these will be victorious,
they will be victorious through crudeness and excessive stupidity. I
don\'t remember reading more stupid pieces (*capita*), since they don\'t
even realize if they will be victorious or defeated. Alas, the poor
people who are exposed to these wolves! But may the Lord have a
comprehension in which you may be at ease. Wittenberg, July 30, 1520.

**No. 31 7.**

Wittenberg. July 30, 1520.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

Luther complains about his silence.

Handwritten in the royal library in Berlin, *Ms. theoI. lat.* (Octav),
Lol. 102. printed in Fischer, Ref.-Gesch. der Mar.-Magd.-Kirche in
Breslau, p. 49 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 450.

1\) De Wette: \"I don\'t know anything about that. Perhaps it was only a
threatening satire by Hütten or someone else.

2\) In the older editions: *Episcopus Bavariae* instead of: *sacerdotes
Bethaven*.

**286**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 317. 318. 319.

**287**

Martin to his Heß.

Hail! If silence makes a monk and a religious man in a hurry, then you,
my dear Hess, are the most monastic and religious. But I, too, will
refrain from many words until you, too, break your silence and inform us
who you have become and free us from the suspicion that we suspect you
have forgotten us and despise our letters. Farewell. You can ask
Dominicus what you wish to know more about. Wittenberg, July 30, 1520.

Your brother Martin Luther.

**No. 318.**

(Wittenberg.) (July or August?) 1520.

**To Peter Mosellanus, Rector of the University of Leipzig.**

Luther assures the Leipzigers that he will not repay them in kind for
their hostility toward him and the University of Wittenberg, but he
complains about their behavior.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 37; in De Wette, Vol. I, p. 538 (without
date) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 451 with the date we have set.
Seidemann, Reformationzeit, p. 37, note, assumes July.

The highly respected Rector of the Academy in Leipzig, Peter Mosellanus,
his superior in the Lord.

You need not fear anything, my dearest Peter. For even though your
Leipzig deserves to be pulled through, because it suffers that our
school is so reviled everywhere with writings, and even that does not
excuse you, as if you had no power over the monks, who do everything to
please you, we will still not repay the evil. It had to be called
Leipzig, because the monk himself boasts of it on the quite vain and
hopeful title, 1) then also dedicated this very book in German to the
council and the people of Leipzig. In addition, it is printed again by
you, since in it, nevertheless, our school remains disgraceful and
blasphemous, but especially the stain of extraordinary invective against

1\) In the writing *Super apostolica sede etc.* Alveld calls himself:
*Sacrique Bibliarum canonis publicum lectorem in conventu Lipsico.* See
St. Louis Aus

gabe, vol. XVIII, Einl., p. 31b.

our very good prince. I ask you, how long do you think it is permissible
for yours to abuse our patience? Nothing of the sort has been done by
us. For Leipzig, I have always feared that these two academies, out of
old hatred, would finally come to war (*in arma ruerent*), which, if I
had not resisted, would already have been brought about by Arnold\'s
letter,^2)^ your predecessor in the Rectorate, which is the most
impudent and unyielding of all \[letters\] that I have seen. I confess
it is more blessed to be hurt than to hurt, but also more difficult. You
hurt and do not notice it, and also tell us who are hurt not to notice
it. This is what I am saying to you, my dear Peter, not as if any spark
of my love for you had gone out, but rather you have kindled it more
just by showing at least yourself alone as one who notices and hates
these things, but so that you might have something to say about us
before your own. My good name, my cause, my life, my soul is sought
after by yours, and it is considered a miracle if I even murmur
something \[against it\]. You are doing well, and remain our Peter.
1520.

Your Mart. Luther.

**No. 319.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. August 1520.

**To Joh. Voigt, Augustinian in Magdeburg.**

Luther sends him the Sermon of the Mass and Melanchthon\'s Theses. About
the writings of his opponents; about the protection of Sickingen and the
Franconian nobility promised to him. Of the publication of his writing
to the Christian nobility of the German nation.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 5b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 475 and in
Erl. German in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 26 d. and in Walch, vol.
XXI, 709.

To Johann Voigt, Master of Sacred Theology, Augustinian Hermit at
Magdeburg, his senior.

JEsus.

Hail! Because I do not yet hear that you are in the register of the
dead, I believe that you are

2\) Arnold Wüstenfelder from Lindau. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 50.

**288** Letters from the year

1520\. no. 319. 320. **289**

you are still alive and have not yet written the last letter to me. The
sermon full of the mass 1) I send through you to the venerable Father
Provincial and the theses of Melanchthon, 2) which are quite strange,
but true. The Leipzig donkey 3) writes many books against me, and a
certain completely unlearned man at Cremona in Italy, without giving his
name, who, as I believe, belongs to the order of the preacher monks, has
written against me,^4)^ Eck, they say, has not yet done anything in
Rome. Franz Sickingen promises me protection against all enemies through
huts 5). Silvester von Schaumburg does the same with the Frankish
nobles, whose beautiful letter to me I have. We no longer fear anything,
but now I am publishing the German book against the pope about the state
of the church that needs to be improved; 6) here I treat the pope very
sharply, and as it were as the antichrist. Pray to the Lord for me that
my word may benefit his church. Be well. On the day of the invention of
St. Stephen \[Aug. 3\] 1520.

Brother Martin Luther.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1036.

2\) The \"Provincial\" is Staupitz. - Melanchthon\'s theses are printed
in *Corp. Ref.*, Vol. I, 126, but with the wrong date: September 1519.
On August 1, 1520, Melanchthon sent them to Hess in Breslau. *Corp.
Ref.*, Vol. I, 209.

3\) Alveld.

4\) This is the same scribe who is mentioned in Luther\'s writing \"Of
the Babylonian Captivity\" (issued in October 1520), St. Louis edition,
vol. XIX, 13. The title of the work is: *Reuocatio Martini Lutherij ad
sanctam Sedem.* At the end: *Cremonae in solennitate gloriosae virginis
et martyris Divae Caeciliae Romanae MDXX*. This timing is according to
the so-called *calculus Pisanus*, according to which the year 1520 runs
from March 25, 1519 to March 24, 1520, therefore the writing is to be
placed on November 22, 1519, not November 20, 1520, as the Erl. Briefw.,
vol. II, p. 527 does. To avoid the contradiction that Luther already
mentions the writing here in our letter, then also in the \"Babylonian
Captivity\", Enders assumes two different writings by the same author.
See Weimar edition, vol. VI, p. 486 f.

5\) See Hutten\'s two letters to Melanchthon, St. Louis edition, vol.
XV, 1635, no. 491. - Des Silvester Schaumburg letter to Luther, ibid.
there, Col. 1631, no. 489.

6\) \"An den christlichen Adel deutscher Nation von des christlichen
Standes Besserung,\" St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 266.

**No. 320.**

(Wittenberg.) August 5, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther did not write for a long time in order to wait for the success of
his letter of July 22 concerning the student unrest. About the
impression that his writing \"To the Christian Nobility\" would make.
About Melanchthon\'s salary increase.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 83 and ini *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 106. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 281; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 484 and in Erl. Briefwechsel,
vol. II, p. 456. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 715 f.

To the learned and godly man Georg Spalatin, Magister, court preacher of
the Prince of Saxony, his friend in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I have not written for a long time, waiting until the turmoil that
the friends have aroused has subsided in you. And I am not at all
pleased with Amsdorf\'s excessive favor towards one part. The students
have never suffered what the citizens have suffered; they care little
about that, feeling only their adversity. But enough of that. Everyone
talks about my invectives, but no one pays attention to theirs. I am
truly moved little by the loss of the prestige of my name. If all
reviling is reviling, then no one is a greater reviler than the
prophets. But we are so accustomed in our time to hear the truth that is
against us.

Envy plagues the Leipzigers, and under the larva of Alveld they play
their tragedy; the Lord will give them their reward one day. Although my
war trombone 7) will perhaps not be approved by anyone, it must be
approved by me in order to attack the tyranny of the Roman Antichrist,
which is corrupting the souls of the whole world. It is very sharp and
vehement, so that at the same time, I hope, I will astonish those dull
taunters. The Alveld will not be answered, but, prompted by him,

7\) *Classicum*; this is what Lang had called the writing \"To the
Christian Nobility\" in a letter, and Luther takes it up.

**290**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 320. 321. 322.

**291**

will be given something made of light, 1) which will irritate the vipers
even more.

Of Philip\'s salary I write nothing to the prince, if you should not be
sufficient. What I have written before about this matter, I have done so
that the man would have no reason to ever leave us; if it cannot happen,
then let the will of the Lord be done. Yes, that he should take a wife
and live longer, this I have done for the sake of the growth of the
gospel; even if this cannot happen, let it be done. I fear that with
this way of living he will not stay alive long. I do everything I can
for the Word; perhaps I am not worthy to accomplish anything. I, too,
would like to be set free from teaching and preaching, if it pleases
God; I have almost grown tired of it, since I see that little fruit and
gratitude to God is growing; perhaps the whole fault is mine. Fare well
and pray for me. On the day of Mary to the Snows \[Aug. 5\] 2) 1520.
Martin Luther, August.

**No. 321 .**

Wittenberg. August 10, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends two petitions to Spalatin, one from an expellee, the other
from the widow Landmann.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 72 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 94. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 277; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 476 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 458. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 710.

His in the Lord exceedingly dear Magister Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s
servant.

JEsus.

Hail! I am sending you something here, my dear George, which you can do
for the salvation of your soul.

1\) This is Luther\'s reference to his work \"On the Babylonian
Captivity of the Church,\" which appeared not long after. See St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XIX, Introduction, p. I d.

2\) Aurifaber and De Wette offer: *nativitatis Marianae*, that is,
September 8, but the original says: *Niüis*, that is, August 5. From
this improved date it is clear that Lang with the *classicum* not, as
Köstlin, Mart. Luther (3.), p. 365, he meant the writing of the
Babylonian captivity, but the \"An den christlichen Adel\". Cf. Köstlin
I. c., p. 795 ad p. 365.

can. It is a poor man who has obtained from me through many intercessors
that I took it upon myself to bring this petition of his before the
prince through you. I did not want to change anything in his way of
speaking, so that if I changed the simplicity of it, I would not take
away the forcefulness at the same time. Take care, therefore, that you
render a Christian service, that the man with wife and children may not
suffer in such a high degree, deprived and forcibly expelled from all
that is his. It is quite an unseemly thing when it is thus invented. For
the time being, he is in poverty as a refugee in Wittenberg.

I am also sending a petition of the countrymen, by which, I hope, the
matter will come to an end, if the prince should accept it. Fare well in
the Lord. Wittenberg, on the day of St. Lawrence \[Aug. 10\] 1520.
Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 32 2.**

Wittenberg. August 14, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther doubts that Eck is already in Meissen. About the recall of the
court preacher in Lochau, in whose place Luther recommends M. Franz
Günther.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 73 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 94. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 277 d; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 476 f. and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. II, p. 459. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 711.

To Georg Spalatin, Magister, Christ\'s servant, and his patron, who is
extremely dear to the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! We cannot believe at all that Eck is in Meissen, but either those
people again tempt us with their fairy tales, or the words which are
sent to you are written in Rome. This can be inferred from the fact that
he writes: he hopes that the bull should be moderated, which could not
be moderated in Meissen.

3\) Erl. Briefw. after the original: *tanto*; Aurifaber and De Wette:
*tanta*.

4\) According to Miltitzen\'s letter to the Elector of Oct. 3, 1520, Eck
was in Meissen only on Sept. 21. See St. Louis edition, Vol. XV, 778.

**292** Letters from 1520. no, 322 to 326. **293**

You wrote several times before that I should call back the priest of
Lochau 1) and recommend him to the prince for another priestly position;
now Magister Franz von Nordhausen 2) comes to our attention, who is
quite skilled, although he may have seemed a bit rough to you once,
which you must easily forget. If the matter is still pending, you can
report it to me. He is eloquent and capable of speaking before the
court, and in general such a one as I would like to have in Lochau, and
close to us. For it is being discussed that a preacher\'s position will
be procured for him with foreigners. Answer as soon as you can, and be
well. Wittenberg, on the day before the Assumption \[of Mary\] \[14
Aug.\] 1520. Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 32 3.**

Wittenberg. August 18, 1520.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1638, no. 498.

**No. 324 .**

(Wittenberg.) August 19, 1520.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther justifies himself because of his violent writing. Staupitz
advised him by letter not to publish the book to the Christian nobility,
but he was too late.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 6; in De Wette, vol. I, p.479 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p.462. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 712.

JEsus.

Hail! I do not assume, my dear father, that I seek praise and honor with
my writings and books. Almost everyone condemns the biting nature of me,
but I have the same opinion as you, namely that God may reveal the
fiction of men in this way. For I see that what is treated quietly in
our time soon falls into oblivion, and no one cares about it. But also
the body of Rebecca has to bear children who are unborn.

1\) Probably Jakob Gropp. Compare No. 256.

2\) Franz Günther, who debated scholastic theology on September 4, 1517.
St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 18.

are united and push each other. The present age judges badly, the
judgment of posterity will be better. Paul also calls his opponents
\"dogs\" \[Phil. 3, 2\], \"the circumcision\" \[Tit. 1, 10\], \"useless
talkers\" \[1 Tim. 1, 6\], \"deceitful workers\" \[2 Cor. 11, 13\],
Satan\'s servants \[2 Tim. 2, 26\] and the like, and scolds the
\"whitewashed wall\" to its face \[Apost. 23, 3\]. Who does not see that
the prophets are grasping at the very worst? But these things are
common, so they have ceased to make an impression. The venerable father
Vicarius 3) wrote to me yesterday from Erfurt and asked me not to
publish the booklet von des christlichen Standes Besserung, because I do
not know in what respect it may be accused with him, but he came too
late, since the booklet was already published. Take it upon yourself to
pardon him verbally. Who knows whether I am not moved by the spirit with
its impetuosity, since it is certain that I am neither driven by the
search for honor nor the desire for money, but also not by pleasure. I
say nothing of revenge, let the Lord pardon; nor is this done by me to
excite a riot, but that I may assert liberty to a general concilio. Fare
well in the Lord. Sunday after the Assumption \[of Mary\] \[August 19,
1520.

Your brother Martin Luther.

**No. 325 .**

Wittenberg. August 23, 1620.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2493, annex, no. 57.

**No. 326 .**

(Wittenberg.) August 24, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the Franz Günther. Of the manuscripts sent with the
previous letter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 75 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 95. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 279 b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 481 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 465. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 714.

3\) Staupitz, Köstlin, M. Luther (3.), vol. I, p.357, not Lang,
Seidemann bei De Wette, vol. VI, p. 537, note 7.

**294**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 326 to 332.

**295**

To his in Christ exceedingly dear Lord Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant
at Lochau.

JEsus.

Hail! I send to you the Magister Franz Günther, my dear Spalatin, who is
ready to do what you write; but you remind and instruct the man more
extensively, since he is unfamiliar with the nature of the court, but
docile, as much as I know his ways. I believe that my letters with the
\"Erbieten\" and the other things have come to you. You take care, I beg
you, that you smooth everything with a careful file. For I was
depressed, I don\'t know what kind of burden of mind, when I wrote those
things. I will also show it to other friends before it is published.
Farewell. 1520 on Bartholomew\'s Day \[24 Aug\].

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 3 27.**

Eisleben. August 29, 1520.

**Carl von Miltitz to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 776, no. 339.

**No. 3 28.**

Wittenberg. August 30, 1520.

**To Kaisir Carl V.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1378, no. 428.

**No. 3 29.**

(Wittenberg.) August 31, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Ueber Aenderungen in den Vorlesungen. By Franz Günther. Luther sends the
printed \"Erbieten\" and letters. About the printing of the \"Babylonian
Captivity\". Postscript: of Eisleben\'s upcoming wedding.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 76 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 96. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 280; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 482 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 471. German in Walch, \"Bd. XXI, 714 f.

To the good and godly man, Magister Georg Spalatin, court preacher to
the Prince of Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! We will write about the change of the lectures at another time,
when the bridegroom 2) will have gotten used to having the bride. With
regard to the Lochau priest Franz, I hope that everything will go well,
if you will only be a gentle and willing teacher of man in what concerns
the customs of the court. We did not know about the extremely bad
suspicion about his sister, but it will be removed.

I am sending the \"Erbieten\" printed, also the letters to Franz
Sickingen and to Emperor Carl. There is still little printed about the
\[Babylonian\] captivity of the church, but we shall see. Fare well in
the Lord. On the day before Aegidii \[Aug. 31\] 1520.

Martin Luther, August.

The day of Eisleben\'s wedding is on the first Monday after the Nativity
of Mary \[Sept. 10; therefore, you faithfully take care of what has been
promised.

**No. 330 .**

(Wittenberg.) 1. September 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2459, annex, no. 39.

**No. 331 .**

Wittenberg. II September 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2405, annex, no. 13.

**No. 33 2**

Wittenberg. September 28, 1520.

**To Günther von Bünan, canon in Merseburg.**

Luther corrects the false news spread about a Wittenberg disputation.
Von Eck\'s arrival with the papal bull and Luther\'s good courage.

1\) to the emperor, St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1378, no. 428. -The
\"Erbieten\" ibid. there, Col. 1392, no. 433.

2\) Melanchthon. Compare the latter\'s letter to Lang, *Corp. ref*.

**296** Letters from the year 1520. no. 332. 333. **297**

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. Printed in Unsch. Nachr. 1708, p. 465; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 61; in De Wette, vol. 1, p. 487 and in Erl.
Briefwechsel, vol. II,

S. 481.

To the godly and learned man, Mr. Günther von Bunan, canon of the church
at Merseburg, his patron and superior in the Lord.

Hail! I read your letter, my dear husband, which testifies to your
immense confidence in me, with joy and amazement. For what lies not that
old poisonous snake? The disputation was like this: Carlstadt had the
chair, I with others, as is our way, made objections (*arguebam*). At
that time the question was: whether Christ in suffering would also have
resisted the Father, because he asked that the cup be taken from him,
which in any case is a non-willing and resisting. Then the reason is put
forward, 1) that a non-willing person could also be called a hating and
rebellious person. As this was denied, so it was not approved. For
nothing has been asserted, but only spoken in confidence for and
against. Dear, how great things we are in the habit of saying, even when
we dispute about Catholic opinions! Don\'t we also disputing the
articles of faith? Why then are those people nonsensical with their
lies, saying that I have asserted, while I only opposed according to the
custom of disputing, but did not assert anything, but rather publicly
confessed that I do not understand all the mysteries of the passion of
Christ? I do not know whether we have at the same time treated that word
of the apostle \[2 Cor. 5:21\], \"He made him who knew no sin to be sin
for us,\" and several other things which attribute sin, curse, and
despair to Christ, as Paul and the prophets are wont to do; since we
cannot yet grasp these, it is fair that we should assert nothing. I have
never publicly disputed anything about this subject of Christ\'s
sufferings, so I know nothing about it except the reason I have given
for it.

1\) Instead of *profert,* we have assumed *profertur.* - After the
following it is to be assumed that Luther had brought this forward.

I have stated above. If someone has said something different about me,
you can brazenly accuse him of lying, since our entire audience is also
a witness. Therefore, let those poisonous people desist from accusing a
disputant, or let them first condemn their Thomas, who sees everything
Christian by proving for and against. Or do they want to imprison us,
that it should not be allowed, after the custom of disputing and
learning, to dispute articles of faith? I am ashamed that even you alone
are so moved by these trifles. But there you have what I have done and
how I am minded.

Full of corner I still know nothing but that he came, provided with a
beard, a bull and money 2) God grant that this is one of the damned
articles: it is to be wished that the sack of the mendicants is off.
Also I will laugh at the water bladder or bottle (*bullum sive
ampuIIam*). I send the marforiils. 3) The Lord keep you for eternity,
Amen. My dearest Günther, farewell. Wittenberg, on the day of Wenceslaus
\[Sept. 28\] 1520.

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 333.**

Wittenberg. October 1, 1520.

**To Conrad Saum in Brackenheim.**

Luther is pleased that Saum adheres to the pure doctrine; he exhorts him
to stand firm in the face of the terror of Eck\'s bull; he should not
leave his position, but persevere.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 285; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 489 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 483. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 717.

2\) Peter Gebweiler wrote from Rome to Capito that Eck had received five
hundred gold florins as a gift.

3\) Instead of *Marferium, Marforium* will probably be read, as already
conjicirt in the addenda of De Wette, Vol. Ill to this place. Marforius
is the name of the large mutilated marble statue of a river god in Rome,
to which all kinds of satires used to be attached. It will be to be
thought here therefore of a satire. Thus Burkhardt, p. 32. The Erl.
Briefw. gives here the title of a writing published without year and
place, in which among other things an *Epistola Pasquilli Romani ad
Marforium Romanum is* found.

**298**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 333. 334.

**299**

Brother Martin Luther, Augustinian, to Conrad Saum, 1) preacher in
Brackenheim.

Hail! With very special praise, my dear Conrad, this Magister Heilingen,
2) a man of acknowledged godliness and scholarship, 3) has recommended
you to me, and it has created me not a little, that he testified that
the pure and clean doctrine of Christ dwells constantly in your heart,
which the sophists resist with all zeal with weapons and intrigues, and
as they only can, from the effect of Satan; for who does not see that he
is in them the leader to these troubles?

For we have not to fight against flesh and blood, but against the evil
spirits under heaven, which reign in this darkness \[Eph. 6:12\]. Let us
therefore be constant, and again also hear our leader\'s trumpet of war,
with which he lets himself be heard: Be valiant in the war, and fight
with the old serpent, and ye shall receive the everlasting kingdom. For
this Satan does not fight with us, but with Christ, who fights in us,
who is greater than he who is in the world \[1 John 4:4\]. The Lord
chooses new wars, says Deborah, Judges 5:8, and we also fight not our
wars, but the Lord\'s. Therefore be confident and be strong; if God is
for us, who can be against us? \[Rom. 8:31.\]

You will say: What is this? \[I say this because it will undoubtedly
happen that you hear that the Roman pope, through his legate Eck, has
raged with a very harsh bull 4) against Luther and his books, and
against all who adhere to and follow him. This wretched tool of Satan is
now in Leipzig, and trumpets his bull with

1\) Conrad Sam (dialect: Som, Saum) was one of the first confessors of
the new doctrine in Würtemberg. He was so challenged by this that he
thought of leaving, but he stayed until 1524, when he went to Ulm, where
he helped to implement the Zwinglian Reformation. He died in 1533.

2\) According to the Erl. This is M. Joh. Geyling from Ilsfeld. In the
*Syngramma Suevicum (Acta et scripta*

*publica ecclesiae Wirtembergicae*, p. 153) he is called *Joannes
Geilingius Ulsfeldensis.* Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 522.

3\) The old translator has referred these words to hem, which is
possible, but not probable for us.

4\) This bull is printed in the St. Louis edition, Vol. XV, 1425, No.
444.

with tremendous splendor and glory. I do not yet know what will happen,
nor am I anxious to know, since I am certain that he who dwells in
heaven cares for all things and has foreseen from eternity the beginning
of this matter, the progress and the end that I expect. And wherever the
lot will fall, it will not move me, because it will not fall other than
according to his will, which is the best, wherever it may fall. As he
cannot err, so must he please each one. Therefore, do not be concerned
that \"your Father knows what you need before you ask him\" \[Matt.
6:8\]. No leaf of a tree falls to the earth without his will, how much
less will we fall anywhere else than where he wants us to fall.

It has seemed good to me to admonish you herewith together with me, so
that when the Spirit, who has power over you, comes, you may not leave
your place, 5) but hold on to what you have, lest another receive your
crown. It is a small thing that we die or perish for the word, since it,
being made flesh, died for us before; we shall rise with you, with whom
we perish, and we who have passed through with it, whither it \[the
word\] has passed through, shall also abide with it for ever. Therefore,
see to it that you do not disregard your holy calling, but gratefully
persevere in it through all adversity. He will come and not forgive, who
will save us from all evil. Fare well in the Lord Jesus Christ, who
strengthens and sustains our spirit and our knowledge, amen. Wittenberg,
October 1, 1520.

Martin Luther.

**No. 334.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. October 1520.

To Spalatin.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2460, annex, no. 40.

5\) These words: *ut locum tuum non dimittas*, Walch translates: \"that
he \[the spirit\] find no quiet place with you\".

**300**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 335 to 339.

**301**

**No. 335 .**

(Wittenberg.) (October 6, 1520.)

**To Hermann Tulich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 4.

**No. 336 .**

Wittenberg. (11.) October 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2463, annex, no. 41.

**No. 33 7.**

Wittenberg. (12 October) 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 782, no. 345.

**No. 33 8.**

Wittenberg. After October 13, 1520.

**To Pope Leo X.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 783, no. 346.

**No. 339 .**

Wittenberg. 20 October 1520.

**To Michael Mäurer (*Muris*), Cistercian in Old Celle.**

Luther is unconcerned that now even more opponents appear against him
than before; the word of God must be contested by the powerful, and is
protected by God, not by men. That the Scripture of the Babylonian
captivity was forbidden did not concern him. The book of Thomas Rhadinus
is Einser\'s work. He reassures his friend about the publication of his
letters to him. He does not want to write to Duke George, because he
will not achieve anything with it.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. B 20, fol. 32. Printed in Schütze, vol. II,
p. 33; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 502 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 497.

To the godly and pious man Michael Maurer, 1) Professor of the
Cistercians at Celle, his in Christ exceedingly dear \[friend\].

JEsus.

Hail in the Lord! You can hardly believe, my dearest Michael, how it has
pleased me.

1\) Schütze and after him De Wette give the name of the addressee as
\"Marx\". In the also otherwise very un

that more opponents stand up against me than before. For I am never more
hopeful and bold than when I hear that I am displeasing these people.
People dislike me. They may be doctors, they may be bishops, they may be
princes: what does it matter? If the word of God were not challenged by
them, it would not be God\'s word, since it is written \[Ps. 2:1 f.\]:
\"The heathen rage, and the people speak in vain. The kings of the land
rebel, and the lords counsel with one another against the LORD and his
anointed.\" Behold, there you have the service and endeavor of princes,
kings and bishops against the word of Christ; what more do you want? It
would grieve me greatly if they praised me (for what is a greater pity
than to please them?). Let everything go, my dear Michael. God\'s cause
is hidden and spiritual; now it is 2) public in the day what kind of
people these are. See to it that you save your soul in this Babylon. The
judgment of GOD drives them, and works in a frightening way, because the
blind do not see. \"Let them go (saith he \[Matt. 15:14.\]), they are
blind leaders of the blind.\" If the word of God should have been
protected with the powers or the hand of men, or with eloquence, or with
high gifts, Christ would not have called fishermen to do it, nor even
himself defended it with his blood. I do what I must. I give in vain
what I have received in vain, even at the risk of my life, my good name
and all things, yes, even my soul. I have written what is the Lord\'s
3); I have done it in sincerity, desiring to instruct all as well as
myself. I am pure from the blood of all; I rejoice in this. You will

clearly written manuscript is found: *Muro*. \-- Michael Mäurer,
*Muris*, also *Galliculus,* as he called himself after his birthplace
Hainichen or Hänichen, was a much learned man. He taught for a long time
as a professor in the monastery of Alt-Celle. In 1525 Luther sent him as
a preacher to Danzig (No. 850).

2\) Schütze and De Wette read: *non esse*; the Erlanger Briefw.:
*num(?)esse* and notes: \"the whole passage seems already corrupted in
the manuscript\". We have assumed *nunc est.*

3\) Instead of *domi* in the editions we have assumed *Domini.*

**302** Letters from the year 1520. no. 339. 340. 341. **303**

see in his own time whom they have repelled and persecuted.

That the book of the Babylonian captivity was forbidden, I don\'t care
about that. Yes, 1) what would I care if all of them were banned? I will
write nothing against those who act violently against us; against those
unlearned parasites it is enough for me that I have taught the truth,
that I have defended it against the scholars, who alone can do harm. But
that the French book of Thomas Rhadinus 2) is Emser\'s, the style and
the slobber is right. May the will of the Lord be done. I despise these
devils so much that if I were not bound here, I would go to Rome of my
own free will to show my contempt for Satan and all the Furies. What
would it be if they killed me? I am not worthy to suffer anything in
such a blessed cause.

It does not matter if any of my letters that I have addressed to you
should be transferred anywhere. I do not fear that they will become
public knowledge to you and to all, because I write before the face of
God. If He approves of them, what is the matter with those who
disapprove of them? If He disapproves of them, what is the matter if
they approve of them? I beg you, learn to despise men bravely, since
Christ says, Beware of men. It is a great thing to have God gracious and
to trust in Him. Fare well in Christ, dearest Michael.

I will not write to Prince George. You know as well as I do what I did
to him with the three letters 3) before the disputation in Leipzig. If
he is worthy, he will hear the truth; if he is not worthy, one labors in
vain. Wittenberg, 1520, the day before the 11,000 virgins \[20 Oct\].

Your brother Martin Luther.

1\) In the manuscript: *Quin*, which the editions have omitted.

2\) This assumption of Luther was incorrect. See St. Louis edition, vol.
XVIII, 1252, note 4.

3\) No. 148. 169 and No. 173.

**No. 3 40.**

Szczecin. 20 October 1520.

**Duke Barnim of Pomerania to Luther.**

Encouragement to continue on the path taken. 4)

The original can be found in the von Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 33 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 500.

Our greetings before, venerable father, dear particular! We have
received your letter, addressed to us, its contents, and have received
and accepted your booklets with great pleasure. We would have hoped that
this game, which has been played with you for some time, would have been
quenched at some point, but the longer it goes on, the deeper it gets.
We believe that your opponents must have doubts about the Paris and
Erfurt verdict, and fear that it will not be in their favor, since they
have abandoned it and now intend to attack you with the ban. Whether it
is Christian or tyrannical, we do not want to judge, because it is the
old custom, by which the church of God is divided and split. We know
nothing to advise you in this opposition of yours, but only that we hear
nothing more eagerly or rather than that you so heartily and boldly
pursue this 5) thing as you have raised and attacked it, so that divine
truth may come to light. If we knew how to help you as much as we are
very much inclined to help you, you would not remain without our great
support. We would like to command this game and you to our dear Lord GOD
and have asked you to provide all good things to us, and whatever mirror
fights happen to you in these matters, do not save us in idle time. Date
Szczecin, Saturday after Lucä Evangelistä \[Oct. 20\] Anno XX°, by our
own hand.

Bernym by the Grace of God Duke of Stettyn and Pomerania.

**No. 3 41.**

Wittenberg. October 30, 1520.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Luther thanked the duke for a letter 6) in which he had spoken to him of
his courage in the face of the bull. He wants to continue preaching,
teaching and writing, although the Leipzigers will try to destroy the
University of Wittenberg.

4\) On Dec. 3, 1520, Spalatin wrote to the Elector that Luther had
received thirty such letters in that year.

5\) Original: \"dyß dhont\". Erl. Letter word: \"deß Thont\".

6\) Compare Veit Warbeck\'s letter to Duke Johann Friedrich, St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XV, 1573 f., No. 458.

**304** Letters from the year

1520\. no. 341. 342. **305**

From the original in Unsch. Nachr. 1735, p. 524; in Walch, vol. XXI,
719; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 518 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53,
p. 52. We have used the variants given by Seidemann in De Wette, vol.
VI, p. 568, Kote 2.

To the noble and highborn Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of
Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious Lord.

Sublime, highborn prince and lord, E. F. G. are my most submissive
prayer and fortune always before.

Gracious Lord, I have received F. G.\'s letter and read it with great
pleasure, in which I have heard F. G.\'s special favor and grace to me,
the unworthy, as well as his great will and desire for the holy divine
truth. And although I am too small to humbly owe such diligence to E. F.
G., I will nevertheless always be diligent with my subservient fortune
to give thanks and praise to God - who may strengthen and maintain E. F.
G.\'s heart and courage for such a Christian opinion. That E. F. G. also
takes up the cause so firmly and writes so diligently to my most
gracious Lord, Duke Friedrich, Elector, gives me special hope that God
will help his Gospel through E. F. G., even though I am not afraid of
the bulls in any way, I have nevertheless undertaken to preach, read and
write. However, I may have had a delusion that the Leipzigers would
drive me from Wittenberg through the help of Duke George and the Bishop
of Merseburg, who has created unspeakable bitterness against me, which I
have nevertheless attributed to divine will. For I am well aware how
they seek to disturb not me, but E. F. G. University of Wittenberg, so
that they have been around for a long time, and now consider with joy
that they have come upon a just cause; what God has decreed for them,
let them do. I will wait for the game, where it falls. Herewith I want
to have myself and before that the Christian truth things E. F. G.
submissively commanded, which God blessedly strengthens us and governs
us according to his divine will, praise and honor, amen. At Wittenberg;
on Tuesday after Simonis and Jude \[Oct. 30\] 1520. C. F. G. submissive
Capellan

D. Martinus Luther, Aug.

**No. 342.**

(Wittenberg.) October 30, 1520.

**To Joh. Greffendorf in Weimar.**

Luther is pleased about Greffendorf\'s good courage regarding the bull.
About Eck\'s reception of the bull in Erfurt. Luther despises the bull,
although he suspects that he will be expelled from Wittenberg on Duke
George\'s orders.

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 35; by De Wette,
vol. I, p. 519 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 503.

To the man highly respected by old nobility and learning, Johann
Greffendorf, ducal Saxon chamberlain, his! Friends in the Lord.

Hail! I am glad, my dear Johannes, that you have so much insight into
this bullosis. Certainly Duke Georg together with the bishop of
Merseburg, extremely excited by black bile, will refrain from doing
anything that can serve to ruin me and the university. In Erfurt, Eck
ordered the university to enforce the bull, but they disregarded it
because it had not been delivered to them in a lawful manner. There he
was searched for by some armed students, but he did not show himself. It
is said that he obtained the bull and his office as legate through
tears, so that he would not return empty and without glory. The bull was
printed in Erfurt and put up for sale, but the students tore it up and
threw it into the water with the words: It is a bubble,^1)^ it should
float in the water. Since they were accused by the book buyer and
demanded compensation from them, nothing happened to them, since the
council turned a blind eye to all this. I hope that the bull brought a
bubble (*bullam*), it is nothing else. I despise it extraordinarily;
only that I had the suspicion that it would happen at the behest of Duke
George that I would be expelled from Wittenberg. This I place in the
hand of God. May the will of the Lord be done! I have a copy of the
apostolic or rather apostatic letter to

1\) *bulla* means both bull and bladder.

**306**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 342 to 346.

**307**

the Duke John^1)^ read. Dear God, how great a dizziness is in these
people! But you are quite well, and let the matter be commanded to you.
Wittenberg, October 30, 1520.

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 3 43.**

Wittenberg. (October 1520.)

**To Hermann (Hieronymus) Mühlpfort at Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 986.

**No. 3 44.**

Cologne. November 3, 1520.

**Franz von Sickingen to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1636, no. 492.

**No. 3 45.**

Wittenberg. November 4, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2435, annex, no. 27.

**No. 3 46.**

Eilenburg. November 13, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther awaits Spalatin\'s return. About Hutten\'s attack on the papal
nuncios. Luther is not afraid of the bull. Melanchthon will respond to
Rhadinus\' writing. About Melanchthon\'s wedding. Of a bequest of D.
Schmiedberg to Luther. About the death of the bishop of Breslau.
Postscript: Of Luther\'s friendly reception at Eilenburg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Goth.* 399, fol. 131 and in *Cod Jen*. a, fol. 103. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 6K; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 523 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. II, p. 523. The postscript in Burkhardt, p. 34 and in Erl.
Briefw. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 721.

1\) This letter is not the letter of Eck, which he addressed from Coburg
to Duke John on Oct. 6, 1520, and signed himself as *Nuncius
Apostolicus* (St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 1575, No. 459), as De Wette
thinks, but a letter of the Pope to Elector Frederick, which the Duke
received, since the Elector was absent in Cologne; probably No. 439 in
the 15th volume.

To the godly and learned man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, court preacher of the
Saxon hero, his dearest \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I have received the bull which you sent, my dear Spalatin, and we
are daily awaiting your happy return with many news and an old story,
namely, that nothing can be hoped for from the court of Carl. I am glad
that Hütten has come forward, and God wished that he had written Marinus
or Aleander 3).

The ban by the bull (*bullatica*) is not feared by us, although we hear
that these two bishops 4) will precede, whom again I will also receive
quite nicely and adorn them with their due honors. Duke George, who is
extremely furious with himself, is said to have been tamed a little from
the outside. Our Philip Melanchthon answers under the name Faventinus
Didymus to Thomas Rhadinus, 5) that is, the Emsian in disguise.

Philip\'s wedding will be on the day after Catharine \[Nov. 26\]; the
danger of evil tongues forces to hurry.

The deceased D. Heinrich Schmiedberg 6) has bequeathed me a hundred
guilders, which pleases me more for no reason than that the deceased
righteous condemns the living wicked, as the wise man \[Wis. 4, 16.\]
says, and those have something to annoy them who have offered bowls and
gold 7) to the ambitious Eck for the dishonor of the Word of God; for I
have not given it either to

2\) This will mean the writing that has the title: *Dialogus Bulla*. *T.
Curtio Malaciola. Eq. BurIassio, Autore*. For on October 10, 1520,
Spalatin wrote in his *Annal*. (in *Mencken*, Vol., II, p. 603): Accepi
Bullam xxxxxxxx xxx xxxxx xxxxxx xxxxxxx.

3\) Marino Caraccioli and Hieronymus Aleander, Nuncios to the Pope in
Germany.

4\) Probably the bishop of Eichstädt, Gabriel von Eib, and the bishop
Philipp zu Naumburg und Freisingen. Compare St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV,
No. 475 and 476.

5\) This writing, which did not come out until February 1521, is printed
in its entirety in *Corp. ref.*

6\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2497, note 7.

7\) Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 778, towards the end.

1520\. no. 346. 347. **309**

**308** Letters from the year

seeks. Now Christ admonishes them already by this second sign. For who
should not count the disgrace that happened to the corner of Leipzig and
Erfurt among the miraculous works of God? Nevertheless, the stubborn
Pharaoh does not let up yet, so that many signs happen. But you see to
it that in good hope you confidently despise all the things of the
reproachful. Christas has started this, he will also lead it out, even
if I am killed or driven away. I came to Eilenburg, called in the name
of the same D. Schmiedberg, and in the meantime he had gone to the Lord
himself. It is said that he was very steadily secluded in the faith of
Christ, and even (what will torment those tremendously) held my teaching
and praised it publicly. See therefore how Christ is present! The Roman
Antichrist oppresses us, and Satan through him, but he who is in us is
greater than he who is in the world \[1 John 4:4\].

In the same faith died the bishop of Breslau, the best among all bishops
of that time. The bishop of Merseburg sinks very low in esteem, and his
little holiness is not enough to cover the godlessness, according to
which he decided to obey the pope more than his god. You will learn
other things from others. Fare well in the Lord. Eilenburg, 1520,
Tuesday after Martinmas \[Nov. 13\]. Mart. Luther.

We are held too gloriously by these high lords (*heroibus*), Mr. Fabian,
Haugold and Taubenheim 1) 2c., I and Philippus; the latter sends you his
regards.

**No. 3 47.**

Wittenberg. November 17, 1520.

**To Lazarus Spengler, city clerk at Nuremberg.**

Luther refutes the rumors of discord between Melanchthon and Carlstadt,
between him and Erasmus. He has the renewed appeal printed in Latin and
German.

1\) Fabian von Feilitzsch, Haugold (Haubold, *Hubaldus*) von Einsiedeln
and Hans von Taubenheim, the princely councilors.-Melanchthon had
accompanied Luthern to Eilenburg.

Printed from an Augsburg copy in the supplement to the Leipzig edition,
p. 30; in Walch, vol. XXI, 10; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 525; in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.53 and (after the original) in the Unsch.
Nachr. 1759, p. 434. We have used the variants of the latter.

To the careful and wise Lazaro Spengler, the city of Nuremberg clerk 2c.
2c., my special master and friend.

JEsus.

My service 2c. Honorable and wise, my dear Lord and friend! I read your
letter and your great courage in Christian truth with great joy; God
strengthens you and all of us with His graces. I also thank you
diligently for your great kind concerns, which you bear for my sake and
for the sake of all Wittenbergers. But you should certainly believe that
D. Carlstadt and Philipps are one in the best way; although one says
something in the school in a different way than the other, from which
such speeches may have arisen. But Magister Philippus is so skilful by
God\'s grace that he will have no quarrel with him. So it has never
occurred to me to have any displeasure or displeasure against Erasmum.
It pleased me well that he wants to be unnamed by me. I have also
written to him and promised not to think of him in this way again, nor
of any other good friends, because it weighs them down. People have a
lot of such things to say and write about me, so do not dispute their
words. Erasmus and I, God willing, want to remain one. It is true that I
sometimes secretly dispute with Philippo how close or far Erasmus is
from the path; he also has that and everyone has harmless and friendly
authority from me to do so. I do not want to attack anyone at first; it
is enough for me to protect myself if I am attacked. I now have my
appeal negated 2) printed in Latin and German, although I did not
consider it necessary: the bull is so public and impudent in its
antichristic condemnation. We do not know whether the bishops will
execrate. We consider it as if it had not been handed over to us by law.
Herewith I command you before God, Amen. At Wittenberg, in the year
1520, on the Saturday after St. Martin\'s Day \[Nov 17\]. D. Martinus
Luther, Aug.

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1602, no. 478.

**310**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 348. 349.

**311**

**No. 3 48.**

Wittenberg. November 28, 1520.

**To Johann Lang.**

Luther reports the return of the Elector. Bad things are to be expected
from Duke George. About the answer of the Elector to the requests of the
papal nuncios. About the burning of Luther\'s books in Cologne and
Leuven.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 399, fol 113 b. Printed in Schütze, vol. II,
p. 36; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 526 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 532.

Your venerable father, Mr. Johann Lang, Master of Sacred Theology,
Augustinian Hermit at Erfurt, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! We are glad that our prince has returned, venerable father, and I
ask you to pray for our cause. Duke George is senseless, yes, more than
furious. We expect daily dreadful things and thunderbolts from that
side. We intend to hold fast to our appeal. I see that the matter is
turning into a tremendous noise; may God turn it to the best. We have
read the answer of our Prince 1) given to your Jerome Aleander and
Marinas, the nuncios of the Pope; it is learned and perceptive, so that
we realize that they have done nothing with him. I will send them in
times. This same Aleander is accused of many vices in a pamphlet, but it
is witty 2) My books have been burned by the people of Cologne and
Louvain 3) We do not know what will happen. Fare well in the Lord. The
vicar 4) is after Stern

1\) From Homburg, the Elector sent a copy of this answer to the
University of Wittenberg on Nov. 18, 1520. Compare St. Louis edition,
vol. XV, 1573, no. 457.

2\) Aleander was strongly carried along in several satires, but the
xxxxxxxx mentioned by De Wette here can be,

*h. e. supplicatio ad D. O. M. pro Germania, habita in celebri quadam
germaniae urbe in die Cinerum* (printed in Kapp\'s Nachlese, vol. II, p.
500; translated in the St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1829, no. 556) cannot
be meant, because it appeared only in 1521.

3\) After Aleander had instigated the burning of Luther\'s books in
Louvain (see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1332), he did the same in Liège
and later (on Nov. 12) in Cologne.

4\) Wenceslaus Link.

berg 5), followed by the converted brother John. Wittenberg, 1520, on
the second day (*ante vigiliam*) before Andrew \[Nov. 28\].

Mart. Luther.

**No. 3 49.**

Wittenberg. November 29, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther wants, as requested, to defend the articles condemned in the bull
individually, and Spalatin should either translate the writing
[freely]{.underline}, or leave this to Luther. He asks for the titles of
Fabian von Feilitzsch, to whom he wants to dedicate the writing.
Luther\'s parents and sisters were at Melanchthon\'s wedding.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 293; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 527 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. II, p. 534. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 730.

To the learned and pious man, Magister Georg Spalatin, court preacher
and secretary to the Prince of Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Hail! I have given a letter 6) to you, my dear Spalatin, to the
messenger going to Grimma; now that the venerable Father Jacob is
coming, I will give him another, which will perhaps come to you faster
than that one. The individual articles condemned by the bull I will soon
undertake, and begin to defend them individually, as you have written,
and what, as I understand, is desired of me. 7) But if you will not
translate the Scriptures with great freedom, and with greater than you
have translated so far, I reserve this task for myself. For the images
and the subtleties of the speech and the discussions can by no means be
reproduced by any translation if it is not free, to say nothing of how
difficult it is to express the spirit of the author. Not as if I doubted
that you could do this, since you are extraordinarily skilled at
translating, but because I see that you are a little too self-conscious,
that you do not dare to change any sentence, which is necessary.

5\) in Mecklenburg, where there was an Augustinian monastery.

6\) This letter is missing. - Jakob\" is Vogt, the confessor of the
Elector.

7\) namely from the Elector, Köstlin,, M. Luther (3.) Vol. I, p. 405, -
The writing: \"Grund und Ursach aller Artikel\" 2c. is found in our
edition.,. Vol. XV, 1476, No. 448.

**312** Letters from the year

1520\. no. 349. 350, 313

But it seemed good to me to let this booklet go out under the name of
Fabian Feilitzsch, a man who is extraordinarily popular with us. 1)
Therefore, let it be your concern. Let me know his court title as soon
as possible, in Latin as well as in German. And you will make use of the
German, I want to know both, in order to then judge how the Latin is to
be formed; so I will go ahead, you will follow bravely. My parents with
my sisters 2) have honored the wedding of Philip, with other very
respected, even very learned men.

I ask again that we be granted the favor of obtaining a copy of the
prince\'s answer. For those people did not want to give it to us to read
even for the second time. You will receive the other things
\[mentioned\] in the earlier letters with the booklet on Christian
freedom 3). Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, the day before St.
Andrew\'s Day \[Nov. 29\] 1520.

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 350.**

Wittenberg. December 1, 1580.

**To Fabian von Feilitzsch.**

Luther dedicates to him his writing *Assertio omnium articulorum* etc:.
(\"Grund und Ursach aller Artikel\" 2c. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
1476, no. 448. Compare the introduction there).

This dedication is found only in the *Latin* editions because Feilitzsch
died soon after the printing began. In the Wittenberg (1551), tom. II,
fol. 94; in the Jena (1566), tom. II, fol. 292; in the Erlanger, *opp.
var. arg., tom*. V, p. 156; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 62; Hei De Wette,
vol. I, p. 529 and in the Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 1. Walch seems to
have overlooked this writing; we have not found it with him.

1\) Although Feilitzsch had died in the meantime, the dedication of the
*Assertio* to him precedes the Latin editions because the first sheets
had already been printed. In the German editions it is omitted. See St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 1476, the introduction to no. 448.

2\) \"Die Mackenrodtin und die Kaufmannin.\" Seidemann in Sachs.
Kirchen- und Schulblatt, 1857, sp. 76.

3\) The writing \"von der Freiheit eines Christenmenschen. St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XlX, 986.

To the man distinguished by high nobility and godliness, Fabian
Feilitzsch (*Foelici*), 4) German knight, his patron in the Lord, Martin
Luther wishes salvation in Christ.

What I have often testified before, Fabian Feilitzsch (*Foelix*),- yes,
you most fortunate (*foelicissime),* that in the laity is the spirit
that can judge and light a fire (that I speak with Isaiah sCap. 4, 4.),
which you most certainly show and demonstrate, who have given a splendid
sample of how you are able to judge and act purely, perceptively, godly
and beneficially about everything concerning Christianity, when we, my
Philip and I, were personally together with you in Eilenburg. 5) And I
do not doubt that in this court there are very many who emulate you, so
that I am full of joy, seeing the wonderful counsel and judgment of God,
according to which He transgresses with the perverse and purifies with
the pure \[Ps. 18:27\]. For since we, who belong to the spirituality
(*clero*) of the Lord and should be teachers of the laity, have turned
away and turned our backs on Christ and His Gospel, He measures us with
the same measure and also turns His back on us, so that, just as we
provoke Him in that which is not GOD \[Deut. 32, 21\], and in the word
that is not the gospel, he again provokes us in such a way in those who
are not *clerics* and in those who are not teachers, namely by
communicating to the laity the pure knowledge of him, and leaving us our
foolish and ungodly opinions. \"Thou, O Lord, art righteous, and thy
judgment is just\" \[Ps. 119, 137, Vulg.\]

Since I have written and said many things up to now, and do not know
that the shepherds of Israel are so blind, I have not been able to earn
anything but that they belittle me for what they should have loved me
for, and do me evil for good \[Ps. 109, 4. f.\], until they go so far in
their rage against their own salvation.

4\) Luther gave this form (*felix* == happy) to the name in order to use
ihu to the word play that follows immediately: *foelicissime*
(Allerglücklichster).

5\) See No. 346, especially the postscript.

**314** Letters from the year 1520. no. 350. 351. 352. **315**

that they publicly condemned my books and burned them in Cologne and in
Louvain. For these have a zeal for God before others, but with lack of
understanding \[Rom. 10:2\]. So much is lacking in this matter that I am
moved to anger, that rather I greatly lament their blindness and ruin,
even their childish foolishness. For what is easier than to burn the
books which cannot be refuted? The godless king Jehoiakim burned the
books of the prophet Jeremiah \[Jer. 36:23, 28.\], but he was not
justified by it. But, as I have said, this also belongs to our folly and
to our hardened mind, in which God gives us over \[Rom. 1:24\], that we
clergy condemn the truth which the laity seize, and those become priests
who are not priests, and laity who are not laity.

Therefore it has seemed good to me to write henceforth to you laymen,
the new generation of the clergy, and to begin that under your happy
name (*sub nominis tui foelicitate),* (what God wants to give) in a
blissful way, by asserting and fortifying everything that those
murderers have condemned by the bull quite similar to them. Therefore,
by this token of remembrance, let me, rather the Christian doctrine, be
commanded to you and all your nobility, and fare well. Wittenberg, 1520,
the first of December.

**No. 3 51.**

Mainz. December 4, 1520.

**Wolfgang Capito to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Capito reports on Eck\'s glorious letter, which he sent to Cologne about
his successes in Leipzig, and gives his opinion, both about Eck\'s
actions and about Luther\'s situation, which is judged very differently
from different sides. He speaks about the dialogue against Hoogstraten
and about Eck\'s and Aleander\'s relationship; about Murner\'s writings,
against which he recommends moderation, as in general the cause of the
gospel should not be fought with weapons, but peacefully. The success of
the Reformation was doubtful because of the fickleness of the people.

Printed in the *Bibliotheca Bremensis, Class*. IV, *Fasc*. V, p. 924 and
in Erl. Briefw., Vol. Ill, p. 3. The regest in Burkhardt, p. 34.

**No. 3 52.**

Erfurt. December 5, 1520.

**Crotus Rubianus to Luther.**

He warns Luther of the everywhere obvious persecution of the opponents,
who will not only destroy his books, but also try to take his life. He
comments on the events in Louvain and Cologne and Hutten\'s behavior.
About his own unethical life in Italy and Germany. He wishes Melanchthon
luck for his marriage. About his quarrel with Mutianus about marriage.

Printed in the Unsch. Nachr. 1723, p. 704, where it is noted: \"This
epistle was first published in Wittemberg *in* 1521 *in aedibus
Carlstadii* Onrlstaäii, which is printed by *J. C. O. \[Olearius\] in
Arnstadt.* \[Olearius) in Arnstadt possesses\" 2c. (according to
Kampschulte, Erfurt, vol. II p. 88, probably promoted for printing by
Luther); in Böcking*, opp. Hutteni, töm.* I, p. 433 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. Ill, p. 8.

Good luck! I do not have time to write much, nor do you have time to
read long letters, especially useless ones. Let it be enough for me to
give a friendly greeting to our Martin, whom the goodness of heaven has
given us as an evangelist in these corrupt times, although the
hypocritical holy (*sanctuli*) fathers and the chaste theologians
persecute \[you\] with such hatred that they would gladly allow the
eradication of the doctrine of the Lord, if only they could do away with
you. If such a reward is given to the warriors of Christ in these
temporal floods, we rightly revere the saints who have suffered scorn
and blows because of defending the truth, who have been cut up, sawn in
pieces, and killed with the sword \[Heb. 11:36. f.\]. It is generally
said how you are not at all frightened by the threats of tyrants, how
you are an undaunted despiser of death, how you wish to take on a
thousand dangers of your own free will for the sake of Christ: we
approve of this courage and acknowledge the spirit of the Lord, but we
fear that through this holy joyfulness of yours a danger may arise for
the world. For after Martin is taken away, another will not soon appear
who could do the same in the holy Scriptures. Make haste. When the roots
of the holy doctrine shall be laid deeper (jactl *\[sic!\] fuerint*), as
now is a good progress, then thou mayest say \[Phil. 1:23.\], \"I desire
to depart and be with Christ.\" Meanwhile, when you say \[Rom. 8:31\],
\"If God is for us, who can be against us?\" we do not want to hear this
in any other way than that you yourself also take care of your life. How
many perish in war through excessive joyfulness of courage, while others
perish through their

**316** Letters from the year 1520. no. 352. **317**

own guard be preserved! For the favor of God protects us in such a way
that He wants our care to be awakened by His providence; He certainly
wants to have joyful people, but not careless ones; brave, not daring
ones; whoever neglects the care for himself seems to me to be tempting
God. I believe that I appear to you as an ill-timed warner, but I gladly
admit this guilt, in which I have many comrades, because they think that
much danger threatens you everywhere through this apparent readiness of
mind of yours, which many interpret as carelessness. I have heard with
these ears of mine a strong horseman (*centaurum*) - it was a canon -
who certainly said publicly that it would not be a difficult task for
him, if he only wanted to steal Luther, and to deliver the stolen one
into the hands of the pope. Be prudent, be an Argus. I don\'t know how
many you make rich people: very many receive gold, not a few have been
offered the titles (*vocabula*): bishops and cardinals, with tremendous
rewards. An innumerable crowd is incited by envy. If my cologners have
not shied away from burning the Gospel of Christ in your books, or
rather, Christ with the Gospel in a public place, what will they not
dare to do against your person? A great sum of money has been laid out
for the burned books: how now? not against the author? Against this
place is a heavy hatred of the heavenly celestial bodies, by whose
influence the people subject to them race in constant nonsense. The old
memory of the tragedy of the venerable Capnio 1) comes back to my mind,
whose spectator I was a year ago. Both the tongue and the pen would not
suffice if I wanted to describe the nonsense of the theologians, whose
emotions I have found more agitated than those of angry women. Oh, that
the dark ones would come forward with their cunning suggestion, so that
the fathers in darkness would be illuminated anew according to their
merit, who neither want nor can be illuminated in any other way than
with their own light, that is, which they receive from their heaven. But
I hope they will come forth. But the Louvain have not sinned so much,
because all that is their nonsense in this judgment has come from the
Cologne and from Hoogstraten; who will not rest until his wretched soul
is

1\) Reuchlin.

will wrestle with death in the ruined body. The error of the people of
Louvain seems to me to deserve leniency in many things. The Cologne
people sin deliberately, whose wicked leader would have perished by
Hutten\'s sword not far from Louvain the other day, if the magnanimous
youth had not considered it unworthy of him to kill the Hoogstraten; he
dismissed him trembling and pale, but with very great threats, if he did
not 2) stop disturbing you and the Capnio; but his rage knows no end. He
has subsequently made many wicked plots, which would be too long to
recount; time will make it known after revenge has been taken on the
rebellious father. He \[Hutten\] was with me for five days at Fulda, a
few days later than he had met with Hoogstraten. I wish you knew the
artifices of the most holy fathers both in Italy and in Germany, for
Rome has also migrated into this. I am not allowed to write it, it is so
big; everywhere are great reenactments. We 3) have written something
jocular about the arm of the Lord against the worldly arm, which is
invoked by those who invoke everything ungodly. But where do I end up,
since I wanted to be brief? I am carried away to the opposite error;
forgive me, Martin, most holy pope, love for you has made me loquacious
and taken away a part of the time.

I wanted to communicate this to the highly learned Philippus: he
requested me to write again by a very learned letter; however, it was
delivered to me late. For while he \[the letter\] is looking for me in
Italy at the same time as yours, he finds me wandering around in Germany
after a period of six months. For it was a very inactive year for me,
both in Italy and in Germany; if I wanted to rest above all things, I
had to wander above all things, which also happened in these days. Since
I was recently on the journey to my Dornheim (*Rubianois*), I stopped
here in Erfurt with old friends. Not two days had passed when they
offered me, who did not suspect anything of the sort, the leadership of
the scholastic order 4). I refused, but since I refused, I was forced,
for the sake of shame, to accept it. Therefore, contrary to the duty of
a caring householder, with neglect of my own duties, I bear

2\) We have adopted *ni* instead of *in with* Böcking.

3\) Crotus and huts. See No. 354.

4\) On October 18, 1520, Crotus was elected Rector of the University of
Erfurt.

**\
318**

Letters from the year 1520. \'No. 352. 353. 354.

**319**

new affairs Care for foreign things in the community of the Studirendem,
which your corner is endeavoring to confuse. But you will respectfully
greet Philip on our behalf, and obtain forgiveness from him if we write
briefly or nothing. He has taken a wife; God grant to this exceedingly
holy communion his prosperity, that the happy father may see his
children \[like the olive branches\] 1) around his table \[Ps. 128,
3.\]. I have been arguing with Mutianus, the despiser of marriage and
the praiser of the life of the Mass priests, for several years now. I,
on the other hand, prefer marriage; therefore, those wives who follow my
advice get married. In the greatest haste, at Erfurt, on the evening
before Nicolai \[Dec.\] 1520.

**No. 353.**

Wittenberg. December 7, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

About the pastor at Lochau. About the dedication of the *Assertio* to
Fabian von Feilitzsch, which was already printed when he died. Why the
German translation of this book should not be dedicated to Franz von
Sickingen. About the dedication of a book to the Counts of Mansfeld.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 240. Printed by *Buddeus, p.* 13; by De Wette, vol. I, p.
530 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 12. German by Walch, vol. XXI,
731.

To the godly and learned man, Georg Spalatin, court preacher to the
Prince of Saxony, his patron in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I send the letter, and I write to the pastor at Lochau,^2)^ my
dear Spalatin, but you also do what you so often recommend to me, that
you keep your mind a little in check. He will not soon be able to cause
such a great conflagration in that corner, since he does not spread
anything into the world. I have received the little stone picture. The
book dedicated to Fabian Feilitzsch was already printed in that part, so
it was not necessary to make a change; but what is the point of
dedicating it to the one who lives more now than before? It does not
seem feasible to many to dedicate the German book to him!

1\) It seems to us that instead of: *filiorum* suorum according to the
Vulgate should be read: *filios sicut novellas olivarum.*

2\) Franz Günther.

Franz Sickingen, because one must be careful not to arouse the envy of
many, especially of the Franconian nobility. I am considering whether I
could finally dedicate something to my Counts of Mansfeld,^3)^ since
they have long desired this and it is in my way that there are so many
of them. One will see what is most advisable. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, 1520, on the day before the Conception \[of Mary\] \[Dec.
7\].

Martin Luther, Augustinian.

**No. 354.**

Ebernburg. December 9, 1520.

**Ulrich von Hütten to Luther.**

Hutten complains about his few successes and the aergernisse, which have
their reason in the inconstancy of the crowd. He praises the
steadfastness of Franz von Sickingen, who had almost wavered, but was
fortified again by him. Sickingen had a lot of influence with the
emperor and would \"intercede\" for Hutten; for the new doctrine,
however, there was little to hope for from the emperor. Hutten sent
several writings to Luther and asked for his. He also wrote to Spalatin
to inquire about the Elector\'s views and, if necessary, to find refuge
with him. Greetings from Sickingen, and to Melanchthon, Spalatin and
Fach.

Printed by Jo. *-Frid. Hekel, manipulus primus epistolarum singularium
etc.. (Plaviae Variscorum. 1595), p. 105; in Burkhardt, de Ulrichi de
Hutten fatis etc., Wolfenbuteli 1717, tom. II, p. 127; in Hutten. opp.
ed. Wagenseil, Lips. 1783, p.\'284; in Hutt. opp. ed. Miinch, Berolini
1823, tom. III, p. 617; in Hutt. opp. ed. Bocking, tom.* I, p.. 435 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. ill, p. 13.

Ulrich Hütten wishes salvation to the most insurmountable herald of the
divine word, Martin Luther, his highly beloved brother and friend.

You would truly pity me if you saw my battles here; so slippery is the
loyalty of the people. While I am gathering new troops, the old ones are
falling away. Everybody fears a lot, averts a lot. Above all, people are
frightened by superstition, by which it is impressed on their minds that
it is an unpunishable shameful deed to oppose the Roman pope, even
though he is exceedingly godless and wicked. But I stand up there

3\) On Nov. 19, 1521, Luther dedicated the winter section of his Church
Postil to Count Albrecht von Mansfeld. The letter is found in the St.
Louis edition, Vol. XI, Col. XXXIV.

**320**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 354.

**321**

and never give way to adversities. Of all of them, only Franz protects
us most steadfastly, but he was almost forced to waver the other day by
those who had persuaded him that you had written some terrible things;
but I believe that you never wrote them. As soon as I learned this, I
immediately considered it my duty to make every effort to ensure that so
great a protection would not be taken away from us by our adversaries. I
did this by reading your writings, of which he had hardly tasted very
few before. At first, as soon as I had taught him as much as I could,
the thing began to please him; shortly after, when he saw on what ground
and what a work (*molem*) you had built, he said: \"Some dare to destroy
this, but,^1)^ if he dares, will he be able to? Gradually I have
inflamed his mind more and more, so much so that I have now made him so
devoted to us that he does not let any evening meal pass without hearing
something of yours or mine. But he is a man of very keen judgment, and
you would not find anyone more learned without having scientific
education. Then, what eloquence he has; how does he take up any one
thing, that he may elevate it and make it great! We could not find a
better and more skillful *assertor.* And now there are people who
continue to try to turn him away from us with great effort, but I know
for sure that they will not be able to do so: I consider the man\'s
loyalty to be so tried and tested. Yes, even when he was tempted a few
days ago by some friends and relatives that he should leave the cause
that was in such great doubt, he resisted most persistently, claiming
that he was protecting a cause that was not at all doubtful, for it was
the cause of Christ and of truth; moreover, it was the duty of the
German community that our memories should be accepted, and also that the
faith should be defended. However, dear Luther, I do not want it to
remain hidden from you that he has caused me not to have done anything
to this day; but with the intention that, if I held back longer, the
cause would gain all the more favor, and the adversaries would become
all the more insolent, thinking that I was defeated and crushed by the
burden lying on me. I followed the memory of the friend. In the
meantime, he also pleaded my cause with the emperor, who promised him
that he would

1\) Instead of *aut,* we have assumed *at.*

I will not suffer to be oppressed, nor will I condemn myself unheard.
Now we want to wait and see what will be decided in the next Diet
(*concilio*). Everyone thinks that we will be negotiated, even with
great strife. We will see what will happen. You remain firm and cling to
the truth with a steady mind. But there is still little hope in the
emperor, for he has large crowds of priests around him, and he is even
subject to some of them; they all abuse his youth for advice that will
never be of any use to him. But Francis\' efforts are reliable, even
though he thinks that at this assembly of princes the emperor will
finally realize what to think of the faithless popes. And some think
that this time will be the beginning of a great hostility between the
two, where Francis will do his duty. He is very capable with the
emperor, but he is preparing to attack at the appropriate time. But
enough of that.

I send the bull \[Leo\'s\] of the tithe, which has been ridiculed by me
for Christ\'s sake, as much as it could be done in an exceedingly short
time and in only a few days, in several places. 2) It is said that you
have also written, 3) which I have seen no more than other things that
are said to be carried about. I wonder why you do not immediately send
your things to me, since you can have people who can easily deliver many
things to Franz. I am also writing a conversation, \"Die Bulle\", 4) as
I think, not without a fine wit. As soon as this will be published, you
will receive it immediately; at the same time I treat \"the worldly
arm\", 5) I have also raised a complaint about the burning of your books
in Latin and German verses,^6)^ both I send. Likewise a clear

2\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1425, no. 444. From our passage, the
more precise time determination results: \"Beginning of December 1520.\"

3\) This refers to the text \"Wider die Bulle des Endchrists,\" St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 1460, no. 446.

4\) *Dialogi Huttenici noui, perquam festiui. [Bulla]{.underline} uel
Bullicida* . . . (1521. *Böcking, tom*. IV, p. 309; I, 72\*). \"The
bulla belongs to the most dramatically lively things that Hütten has
written.\" (Strauß? 404, woselbst auch Inhaltsangabe.) (Erl. Briefw.)

5\) This writing does not exist. As we learn elsewhere, it is a speech.
Compare No. 352.

6\) *In incendium Lutheriunum exclamatio VIrichi Hutteni Equitis. Anno
Domini* MDXXI. \"Ehn Klag über den Luterischen Brandt zu Metz durch Herr
Vlrich vonn Hütten.\" Reprinted in *Böcking*, tom. Ill, x. 451 and 455.

**322**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 354. 355.

**323**

1\) for which the measuring monkeys do not consider a punishment
sufficient with which I would like to be tormented; so much, they say,
have I transgressed all bounds of respectability. Let Christ judge what
will be useful for his community, in which way these evils must be
cured. Those, of course, have long since condemned me, but I hope that
those whom they have condemned will be absolved by God. Your writings
have already burned three times 2). How now? Do people abandon our cause
because of this? No! Rather, I write you the truth, dear Luther, the
crowd is more inflamed and more inflamed. It has helped them so much
that they have burned one or two pieces of paper. Yes, my friends write
that in Mainz even little was missing that Aleander was stoned. I have
undertaken to publish a rather detailed epistle about this matter, in
which I have summarized the whole thing, how they succeeded with this
burning. Your name is held in high honor by everyone here. You will do
something worth the effort if you write here in great detail what is
being done there and what hope there is in each one, what each one would
like to dare freely. I had written to Spalatin that he should
investigate the prince\'s mind, and write to me about it in detail, as
much as he is able; for I wish to miss what kind of assistance one can
expect from him, for it seems useful that this is known not only to you,
but also to those who want to lend a hand for this cause 3) and lead the
weapons. You too, I beg you, direct your efforts to this, for you do not
know how much it will help our cause if he either wants to help the
armed men himself or turn a blind eye to a good deed, that is, that we
are allowed to seek refuge in his lands if the occasion should require
it. When I shall have learned this, I have resolved to visit you at
last, for I do not think I can restrain myself any longer from flying
here to see you, whom I love so much for the sake of his virtues. This I
have written in haste, for I could not be careful as I was hurrying.
Franz greets you on

1\) \"Clag vnd vormanug gegen dem übermässigen Unchristlichen gewalt des
Bapsts zu Rom, vnd der vngeistliche geistlichen\" 2c. *Böcking*, tom.
Ill, p. 473.

2\) namely at Louvain, Cologne and Mainz.

3\) Instead of *opponere* we have adopted *apponere.*

the friendliest, and wishes that you are safe and sound, and of good
cheer. And be also greeted by me, dearest and most valuable brother. At
Ebernburg, December 9. Greetings to Philip, Spalatin, Fach and all of
us.

Postscript. Because I suspected that you would have my writings
reprinted there, I am sending carefully improved (*emendatiora*) copies
from which they can be copied by a scribe (*notarium).* Write again very
soon and quite a lot. Capnio will come here soon. He has written back to
Franz that he will do so. 4) The preachers \[monks\] are trembling. We
will see how it goes out.

**No. 355 .**

(Wittenberg.) (December 10, 1520.)

**Luther\'s call to the Wittenberg student body to show up for the
burning of the ecclesiastical law books.**

Handwritten in the Rathsschulbibliothek zu Zwickau in Peter Schumann\'s
Annalen, I, 121. Printed in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 26 and in Erl. German
in Kolde\'s \"Martin Luther\", Vol. I, p.289. We reproduce this
translation here.

Everyone who is seized with zeal for the evangelical truth should be
outside the city walls at nine o\'clock at the Holy Cross Church, where,
according to ancient and apostolic custom, the ungodly books of the
papal constitutions and scholastic theology are to be burned, because
the audacity of the enemies of the gospel has progressed so far that
they have burned the godly and evangelical books of Luther. ^6)^ Well
then, you godly 5) studying youth, come together for this godly 5) and
religious spectacle; perhaps now is the time in which the Antichrist
shall be revealed.

4\) The earlier verdict favorable to Reuchlin had been passed in Rome in
the summer of 1520, and another had been passed in favor of Hoogstraten.
Therefore, Sickingen invited him to the Ebernburg and Reuchlin accepted
this invitation. But later he seemed to feel safe enough in Ingolstadt
and did not come.

5\) Kolde translates *pius* by \"pious\".

6\) Instead of *exusserit* we have assumed *exusserint* (*exusserite*).

**324**

Letters from the year 1520. No. 356. 357.

**325**

**No. 356.**

Wittenberg. December 10, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports the burning of the books of spiritual law, the papal bull
and other writings. He asks for a longer leave for the preacher at
Eilenburg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 320. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p.
294; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 531 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill p. 18.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 732.

To the learned and godly man Georg Spalatin, princely court preacher and
his \[friend\] in the Lord.

**JEsus.**

Hail! In the year 1520, on the tenth of December, at nine o\'clock, all
the books of the Pope were burned at Wittenberg in front of the eastern
gate 1) at the Holy Cross Church: the Decret, the Decretals, the Sestes,
the Clementines, the Extravagants 2) and the latest Bull of Leo X.;
likewise the Summa Angelica , the Chrysopassus Ecks ) and other writings
of the same author, Emser\'s writings and several others which were
written by others.The *Summa Angelica*,^3)^ the Chrysopassus Ecks^4^ )
and other writings of the same author, Emser\'s writings, and several
others added by others, so that the murderous papists see that it does
not take great power to burn books which they cannot refute. This will
be the news.

By the way, what you asked for the preacher in Eilenburg 5) that I
should do, see, that I do now. For he desires that I, through you,
should appeal to the most illustrious prince that he procure for him
permission from his superiors to stay in Eilenburg for eight years 6).

1\) This is the Elsterthor. See the \"History of how the antichristian
Decretals of D. M. Luther were burned\". St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
1616, no. 486.

2\) These parts form the so-called *Corpus juris canonici*. See St.
Louis edition, Vol. I V, 627, note 2.

3\) This is a casuistry for the administration of the Sacrament of
Penance, whose author is *[Angelus]{.underline} Carletus,*

from whose first name the 8nmma takes its name.

.4) The *Chrysopassus* was written in 1512, printed in Augsburg in 1514,
introduced by a poem of Urban [Rieger]{.underline} (not Urbanus
[Regius]{.underline}, as the Erl. Briefw. indicates), who had already
decorated Eck\'s *Orationes in a* similar way. See Wiedemann, \"Eck,\"
pp. 454 and 452.

5\) Georg Kunzelt.

6\) This is obviously a joke. Walch took it seriously and therefore made
[years into]{.underline} as many [days.]{.underline} He translates:
\"that he be allowed to live eight days with his superior, where he
might want to study diligently.

He may do as he pleases, perhaps in strenuous study; because he has been
tossed about for many years by their commandments in various ways, it is
fair that he should at last enjoy a time of rest for his benefit. This I
have now done and do, asking that you also do it. See, there you have
what you wanted! Farewell. Wittenberg, December 10.

Martin Luther.

**No. 357.**

(Wittenberg.) December 15, 1520.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a book by Hutten to the Elector for submission. All kinds
of news.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 81 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 304. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 294b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 533 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 20. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 733.

To the godly and learned man, Georg Spalatin, princely court preacher,
his extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! Behold, there is Hutt\'s book, 7) which, as you see, has been sent
to me by Crotus, my dear Spalatin; you will see to it that the Prince
receives his copy, I will keep mine. Dear God, what will be the end of
this news? I am beginning to think that the hitherto unconquered papacy
is one that can be overthrown even against the expectations of all, or
the last day is imminent. I believe that the copies of the letters,
which you have demanded back, have long since reached you.

It writes B\[ernhard\] Adelmann,^8)^ that the

7\) Probably *Ulrichi de Hutten, Equitis Germani, ad Carolum Imperatorem
adversus intentatam sibi a Romanistis vim et injuriam conquestio.
Ejusdem alia ad Principes et viros Germaniae de eadem re conquestio.
Ejusdem ad Albertum Bran- denburgensem et Friderichum Saxoniae Ducem,
Principes Electores, aliaeque ad alios epistolae.* In *Bocking, tom*. I,
p. 371.

8\) Eck had included him in the papal bull of excommunication. He feared
for his sinecure and called the Bavarian dukes for protection. As early
as November 8, he sought absolution from Eck and received it from him on
the 15th.

**326** Letters from 1520 and 1521. no. 357 to 360. **327**

The bishop of Augsburg would have taken action against him and others at
Eck\'s instigation if the dukes of Bavaria had not stood up for him.
This is how this restless man rages. He also writes that he heard from a
credible man that the Parisian theologians considered all the articles
condemned in the Bull to be entirely Christian, except for two which
they considered disputable. We have heard the same from the Netherlands.
May the Lord grant that it is and will be so!

The Cardinal 1) of Mainz has banned my writings in Magdeburg by public
notice. In Halberstadt they have burned them, likewise the Minorites in
Cottbus. The ass Alveld has again written against me, but I despise it
and do not want to read it. You are well and pray to the Lord for me.
1520 On the Octave of the Conception \[15 Dec\].

Mart. Luther, Aug.

**No. 35 8.**

Coburg. 20 December 1520.

**Duke John Frederick of Saxony to Luther.**

He promises Luther his continued support and that he has also
recommended his cause to your Elector.

The original is in the Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg. Printed in
Burkhardt, \"Luthers Briefwechsel,\" p. 35, with the correct note: \"Ist
jedenfalls die Antwort auf das Schreiben Luthers vom 30. Oct. 1520\"
\[No. 341 in this volume\], and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 22.

My greetings and gracious will before, respectable, worthy, dear doctor
and spiritual father! I have read your letter and graciously understood
it, and I also thank you graciously that you have given yourselves to my
writing, even before and before it came to you, and preach and write as
before, and do not let the papal bull (poul) deter you, and stand firmly
by the Gospel as before. I will recognize this in all graces toward you,
and I will gladly have you in gracious command together with the
Christian truth, and I will gladly do my part. Please also graciously
acknowledge that the highborn prince, my gracious dear cousin and va

1\) *galerus* == cardinal\'s hat.

ter,^2)^ on my writing, as I have sent you *Copia* before, again written
the following opinion: \"Highborn Prince, friendly dear cousin and son!
I have heard your dear letter, concerning Doctor Martinus Lutter, all
contents, and such kindly noted by E. L.. E. L. should also not doubt, I
will take care of the matter, as much as possible and as much as I want
to suffer. In my gracious opinion, as my spiritual father, I did not
want to do this to you. I am inclined to show you mercy; I hereby place
myself in your prayers. Date at Coburg, on St. Thomas\' Eve \[Dec. 20\]
in the fifteen hundred and twentieth year.

**No. 359.**

Wittenberg. December 21, 1520.

**To Spalatin in Allstädt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1884, no. 574.

**No. 360.**

1520 or early 1521. 3)

**Luther (?) to Bugenhagen.**

For a true Christian, a moral doctrine is not necessary.

The original of these lines is on the title page of a copy of the
*Epistola Lutheriana ad Leonem Decimum,* which belongs to the church
library at Wolgast. Printed by Mohnike, \"Luthers Lebensende,\" p. XIX,
with the note that the name, which had been under the brieze, was cut
away, but the similarity of the lettering with Luther\'s handwriting is
unmistakable; by De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 20 and in the Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol.

To D. Johann Bugenhagen.

You wrote that I would like to write for you a way how to live. A true
Christian does not need the rules of morality, because the spirit of
faith guides him to everything that God wants and brotherly love
requires. Therefore, read this. ^4^) Not all believe the gospel. Faith
is felt in the heart.

2\) This does not refer to Duke John, but to Elector Frederick. Compare
No. 341.

3\) The letter is to be placed in this period, because Bugenhagen was
immatriculated in Wittenberg on April 29, 1521.

4\) namely the *Tractatus de libertate christiana*, to which the letter
to Leo X. is the dedicatory writing. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
783, no. 346. The writing \"von der Freiheit eines Christenmenschen\" is
found in the St. Louis edition, vol.

**328**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 361 to 367.

**329**

**No. 361 .**

Wittenberg. January 14, 1521.

**To Staupitz in Salzburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2422, annex, no. 20.

**No. 362 .**

Wittenberg. January 14, 1521.

**To Wenceslaus Link.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2507, annex, no. 66.

**No. 363 .**

Wittenberg. January 16, 1521.

**To Spalatin in Worms.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2505, annex, no. 65.

**No. 36 4.**

Wittenberg. January 21, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2494, annex, no.58.

**No. 365 .**

Wittenberg. January 22, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends Carlstadt for the Probstei, which was settled by
Henning Göde\'s death, and Amsdorf for the Archidiaconate.

The original can be found in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten
in *Cod. Dessav*. V, No. 88 and in Cod*. Jen.* a, fol. 110. Printed by
*Buddeus*, x. 14; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 547 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
II, p. 77. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 738.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, George Spalatin, your pious and learned man,
Christ\'s servant.

JEsus.

Hail! In a short space of time, I have sent you two letters with small
works, my dear Spalatin; I do not know whether they reached you before
this one. With regard to the new provost to be chosen, it would not seem
unreasonable if you gave the prince the hand to appoint Carlstadt and
Amsdorf his archidiaconate, so that this very good man would be provided
with a richer salary; but in these matters you will use your better
insight. Everything else you can see from the

previous letters. Fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, the second and
twentieth of January, 1521. Mart. Luther, Aug.

**No. 366 .**

Wittenberg. January 25, 1521.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1887, no. 575.

**No. 3 67.**

Wittenberg. January 29, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks that Spalatin finally answer. He intercedes for Jodocus
Mörlin.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 89 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 110. Printed by *Buddeus*, p.
14; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 553 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 78.
German in Walch, vol. XXl, 740.

To the godly and learned man, Georg Spalatin, princely court preacher,
who is staying in Worms, his \[friend\] in Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! We expect that you will finally answer, my dear Spalatin; for
there is nothing new here except what you have heard. I recently wrote
foolishly about Provost Carlstadt. The German *Assertio* 1) is being
worked on daily. By the way, the Magister Jodocus Mörlin 2) appointed
for the parish of Westhausen is very poor; for the sake of Christ, he
desires your and my mediation, so that the presentation at that court 3)
will be less expensive for him as much as possible. So I ask, you also
ask. I will see to it that he has at least something, a little. Be well
and pray to the Lord for me. Soon more with him who is a reliable
messenger, D. Jerome. ^4)^ Wittenberg, 1521, January 29.

Mart. Luther, August.

1\) \"Reason and cause of all articles\" 2c. St. Louis edition, vol. XV,
1476, no. 448.

2\) On Mörlin, see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1725, note 2.

3\) This is the court of Margrave George of Brandenburg. Seidemann-De
Wette, vol.VI, p. 606, note 2.

4\) D. Hieronymus Schürf, who left for Worms on February 3. - D.
*Hierony*. is to be taken as *Doctore Hieronymo*; not as genitive.

**330-** Letters from the year 1521. no. 368. 369. 370.

331

**No. 368.**

Wittenberg. End of January or beginning of Feb. 1521.

**To H\[augold\] E\[insiedel\].**

Dedication of the manuscript: \"Auf des Bocks zu Leipzig Antwort D.M.
Luther.\" See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1256.

**No. 369.**

Wittenberg. End of January or beginning of Feb. 1521.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1710, no.527.

**No. 370.**

Wittenberg. February 3, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

About the death of two cardinals; about an accusation against Staupitz;
about Luther\'s work for printing; about a writing sent to him from
Bohemia; about the translation of some of Luther\'s writings into
Bohemian, and so on.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 91 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 112. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 305; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 558 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 81. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 745. - Only the Erl. Briefw. and
Burkhardt, p. 37 give the correct date according to the original: LX.
\[*Sexagesima*, 3 Feb.\], while the other editions: *Quadragesima*
\[XL., the 17th of Feb.\].

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Magister Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant.

JEsus.

Hail! It is a wonderful boldness of Christ that he dares to kill such a
great cardinal 1) in the middle of the imperial diet, and has not shied
away from the Creator 2) nor from the creature. Our Wenceslaus writes
that such a creature also died suddenly in Hungary.

The Roman pope has accused our Staupitz to the Cardinal of Salzburg, as
one who would stand with me. The latter has answered

1\) William of Croy, Cardinal-Diacon tit. *S. Marine in Aquiro* since
1517, fell from his horse on the hunt near Worms on January 6 and died
the same night. (Erl. Briefw.) According to the list of the princes and
estates assembled at the Imperial Diet at Worms (St. L. Ausg., Vol. XV,
1874), he died \"Thursday after the Three King\'s Days,\" that is,
January 10. He was not yet 23 years old when he died.

2\) The \"creator\" is the pope; the \"creature\" is the cardinal.

I do not know whether he will be expelled. 3) That beautiful Concilium
in Florence will be published^4)^ and the articles for the consolation
of those who want to confess, 5) although the presses are very busy. I
had breakfast with Duke Bogislaw (*Bugslao*) of Pomerania, and he also
listened to my sermon in the parish church today.

From Bohemia, a learned young man has sent me a booklet in which he has
endeavored to prove with eighteen conjectures that St. Peter never came
to Rome or was there, but he does not prove it. They have sent my \"Ten
Commandments\" and \"The Lord\'s Prayer\" 6), translated into the
Bohemian language, printed with their own types, and they greatly
promote the word among their own.

You will learn the rest from our Jerome. Farewell, and let the matter of
Mörlin be your command. I am also waiting for the prince\'s answer for
the Belzig castle. 7) Wittenberg, on the Sunday of SIXDAY \[3 Feb\]
1521.

Mart. Luther, Aug.

3\) Walch translated the previous words as, \"He answered: I don\'t know
if he will get through.\" De Wette also has a colon after *respondit*;
the Erl. Briefw. puts (as we nieinen, correctly) a semicolon. The sense
would thus be: Jener \[Staupitz\] has responded; I \[Luther\] do not
know 2c. - Incidentally, as Walch notes, *evellatur* can mean both:
\"whether he will get away with it\" and \"whether he will be
destroyed\". The sense is the same in both cases.

4\) Aleander had referred to the Florentine Concilium of 1439 in
December 1520. A print of the same is not known.

5\) \"Luther\'s Instruction to the Children of Confession,\" 2c., St. L.
ed. vol. XIX, 808.

6\) The title of the book is: *In hoc libello gravissimis,
certissimisque, et in sacra scriptura fundatis rationibus variis
probatur, Apostolum Petrum Romam non venisse, neque illic passum,
proinde satis frivole, et temere Romanus Pontifex se Petri successorem
jactat, et nominat etc.* 6 sheets in 4, without place and year. Another
issue cited by *Panzer, Annal*. IX, 128, 180 has at the end the date:
Nov. 24, 1520. At the beginning of the book the author calls himself:
*Ulrichus Velenus*. Several counter-scripts have appeared against it. -
The \"Ten Commandments\" are \"Die zehn Gebote dem Volk zu Wittenberg
gepredigt\" 2c., St. Louis edition, vol. Ill, 1132. The Bohemian
translation appeared at Prague on Nov. 9, 1520. (*Erl. exeg. opp. lat.,*
tom. XII, p. VI.) - The \"Auslegung deutsch des Vater-Uusers für die
einfältigen Laien\", St. L. edition, vol. VII, 752.

7\) Walch makes *Pelltizensi* a personal name: \"for the castle
Pelitzen\".

**332**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 371. 372.

**333**

**No. 371.**

Wittenberg. February 9, 1521.

**To Staupitz in Salzburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2424, annex, no. 21.

**No. 372.**

Wittenberg. February 17, 1521.

**To Spalatin in Worms.**

Luther complains about letters and shipments being delayed or lost.
About Emser\'s writings, which he wants to answer. About the reprinting
of his \"Works on the Psalter\" at Basel. About the burning of his books
by the bishop of Merseburg. About the reoccupation of the terminated
Hebrew and medicinal professorships. He sends his lessons for the
confessional children. Report of a mockery of the pope by the students
in a carnival performance.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 94 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 114. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. 1, p. 305 b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 559 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 86. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 747.

To Magister Georg Spalatin, the pious and learned man, his \[friend\] in
Christ.

JEsus.

Hail! I hope that the letters and little books have finally come to you,
my dear Spalatin. I wonder, however, what obstacle may have intervened
that you have not received them long ago, since I have received two
letters from you in the meantime, and there is no news of the ones I
have received. What wind may have carried away the very detailed letters
I wrote to Hütten? I don\'t know what to do henceforth with what I have
to write and send. Six quatrains of my German writing \"Grund und
Ursach\" I have already ordered to fly to you before, which were rippled
damp from the press, but I see that they have become lame; I am sending
the remaining ones, and will send the ones that the press will finish.

Emser has finally spit out his poison for the benefit of Duke George.
^1)^ I am forced to answer the man, just because of his quite impure 2)
lies. To the

1 ) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Ein!., p. 40.

2\) In the original: *impurissima*; in the editions (except the Erl.
Briefw.) *impudentissima.*

Murner I can not yet, and how could I answer all? My Psalter 3) is
printed by Adam Petri at Bafel, which I would rather not have seen. The
bishop of Merseburg has burned my books, the holy man, the pope\'s
servant.

Matthew Adrian asked for permission to leave, which we immediately gave
him. Therefore, we are freed from this man, since God wanted Aurogallus
to deserve to be his successor. Moreover, it has been heard that our
Prince will put a certain stranger in the place of the physician D.
Peter Burkhard 4), although M. Augustin Schurs has long asked for it,
and we for him; why is not rather one taken from our midst? Or, if our
petitions could not obtain Augustin, it would be fair that D. Stephan
Wild, the new son-in-law of the old Schösser, be put in his place. I say
this so that you can suggest suitable persons from ours, if it should be
necessary, and you can.

I am sending the instructions for the confessionals, 5) which you have
requested. In Magdeburg, Emser\'s book is posted on the public scouring
post with the title: Such a book is worthy of such a place. They add
that it is accompanied by a rod, which should indicate his punishment.
Incidentally, Emser rules in Leipzig and is able to do a lot and is
subject to many things as one who soon wants to make an end with
himself, as people of this kind are wont to do.

During these carnival days, our young people led a masked pope around in
a highly exalted manner and with great pomp. At last, in the
marketplace, by the brook, they stood as if to throw him in. As he fled
with the cardinals, bishops and his servants, they scattered them in
different parts of the city and pursued them according to a very witty
and subtle plan. For the enemy

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 198. - About the correct understanding
of the words: \"what I would rather not have seen\", see the note there,
Col. 200.

4\) He went to Ingolstadt and died there in 1526. Compare No. 311.

5\) \"Luther\'s Instruction to the Children of Confession on the
Forbidden Books,\" St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 808.

**334** Letters from your year

1521\. no. 372. 373. **335**

Christ, who mocks the highest kings, even Christ, is worthy of this
mockery. Now this story is printed in learned verse. ^1)^ I believe that
D. Jerome is with you today. And now farewell. Wittenberg, Sunday
Invocavit \[17 Feb\] 1521.

Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 373.**

Wittenberg. February 27, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends several writings. About the reproach of bitterness,\' which
one makes to him. About the burning of his books. About the writing
against Emser, the Magnificat and the Postillen. About a writing of
Erasmus, which was printed in Leipzig. About the rage of the Romanists
against the Gospel.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 90 and in *Cod. Jen.* a, fol. 111. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. 1, p. 306b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 56l and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 89. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 749.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, M. Georg Spalatin, princely Saxon court
preacher, Christ\'s servant.

JEsus.

Hail! I have previously sent the German script \"Grund und Ursach\" up
to the letter L; there are still L, M, N left, which I am sending; the
last one will be ready on Saturday 2). I am surprised that my letters
are delivered so late. The booklet that was issued by Confession 3) is
being brought to you by the bookkeeper Schott.

But see to it that you do not also believe those who accuse me of
excessive bitterness in my writings. For they go about defiling my name,
since they can do nothing else; but first of all I learn that they are
such people who do not read, but follow what others say, and then are
not accustomed to vices being bitten. I am aware of such a

1\) \"The Latin poem about that farce: *Selneccer, vita Lutheri -
disput. subj., J. F. Mayer*. Witeb. 1687, p. 133.\" (Köstlin, M. Luther
(3rd), vol. I, p. 798 ad p. 425, note 3.)

2\) March 2. However, the writing was already completed on March 1. See
St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1476, no. 448.

3\) \"The teaching of the confessionals? He had already sent it with the
previous letter (?).\" (De Wette.)

I was not yet aware of my great rage when they accused me. Enough of
that.

My book written for the confessors is of no use to the people of
Merseburg and Meissen; they burn whole wagonloads of my books. That is
how those wretched saints rage. That Rhadinus is Emser, you cannot yet
talk me out of it, my dear Spalatin; we also have our reasons, but that
I answer him is the friends\', not my advice. I had despised him, the
beast, but it seemed good to him that the fool must be answered.

I am now working on the Canticle of Mary, 4) which is to be dedicated to
your younger prince, so that I can finally give him an answer to his
last and gracious letter addressed to me through the booklet. 5) The
so-called Postillas, of which the Advent Epistles and Evangelia are
finished, will go out in this Frankfurt fair, as a kind of foretaste, so
that I can see what people think of this work.

No less \[than you\] we are annoyed that those sentences 6) of Erasmus
and the answers of our prince have been printed at Leipzig, and I do not
know where these are concerned, since we do not know and wonder very
much where they may have gotten copies from; ours are with us. It is
therefore nothing that you accuse us in this matter, which we have

4\) The Magnificat, St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 1372.

5\) No. 358.

6\) *Axiomata D. Erasmi Roterodami pro causa Mar. Lutheri Theologi,
Coloniae ex tempore scripta, et Georgio Spalatino, a colloquio sereniss.
principis Friderici ducis Saxoniae, Electoris, tradita V. No- vemb. Anno
1520*. printed in the lat. Wittenberg edition (1551), tom. II, fol. 115
b; in the Jena (1566), tom. II, fol. 314 and in the Erlangen, *opp. var.
arg.,* tom. V, p. 241. In the original edition, the *Axiomata are*
followed by the \"Report of the Action at Cologne between the Papal
Envoys Caraccioli and Aleander and the Elector Frederick of Saxony,
concerning Luther\" (St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1612, no. 483); then a
letter from the Elector to Peter Burkhard, Rector of the University of
Wittenberg, dated t8. Nov. 1520, with which he sends a copy of the
\"Report\" (this letter is found in the Erlangen edition, *opp. var.
arg.,* tom. V, p. 248 sq., note), and finally some news with the
[heading]{.underline}: \"Written by Heinrich, Prior zu Gent
(*Gundensem*)\" (in our edition, I. c. Col.1615 from ? 14 to the end).
Ans *Gundensis* have made the editions (except the Erlangen one)
*Zudphaniensem.* See Köstlin, M. Luther (3.), vol. I, p. 796 ad p. 399.

**336**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 373. 374. 375.

**337**

are very unwilling about these publications, which also make us
suspicious of fear and boasting. ^1)^

[Erasmus once wrote that there is nothing to be hoped for from
Carl]{.underline}, [who is besieged by Sophists and
Papists.]{.underline} 2) The Lord Himself is the author and protector of
His word alone, but it pleases us that for the time being their raging
is postponed by the counsel of God; when it breaks out, everyone
prophesies that it will become a riot similar to the Bohemian one, which
will also rage against our clergy. I am without blame, since I have
striven for this, that the nobility of Germany did not set a measure for
those Romans with the sword, but with advice and decrees (which they can
easily do). -For waging war against the defenseless clergy is the same
as waging war against women and children.

But I fear that the rage of the Romans cannot be dampened by advice and
decrees, and that this stubbornness in raging will bring misfortune upon
itself. Amsdorf writes lovely things about the precentor (*de succentore
januensi*). Fare well and pray for me. Greetings to our courtiers.
Wittenberg, the February before last, 1521. Martin Luther, August.

**No. 374.**

Wittenberg. (End of February) 1521.

**To Conrad Pellican in Basel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 1224.

**No. 375.**

Wittenberg. March 3, 1521.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Dedication of the Latin Advent Postil.

The first printing has the title: *Enarrationes Epistolarum et
Evangeliorum, quas postillas vocant, in IV. dominicas aduentus, D.
Martini Lutheri Witten*

1s According to your sense, this passage is translated in the same way
in the old edition: \"and thereby we become suspicious, as if we feared
and boasted\". The words: *quae et nobis metu et jactantia suspectos
faciunt* would literally be translated like this: which also make
\[people\] suspicious against us because of fear and boasting.

2\) The blocked words were underlined by Luther himself.

*bergensis. Wittembergae 1521.* At the end: *Wit- tembergae apud
Johannem Grunenbergium Septima Marcii Anno M. D.* XXI. quart. Then in
the Latin Jena edition (1566), tom. II, fol. 321; in Aurifaber, vol. 1,
p. 308; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 563 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p.
94. In German, this letter appeared in 1522 in the \"*Postjl* Oder vßleg
der Epistel vnd Euangelien durch den Advent, Doctor Martin Luthers\" 2c.
Without place and year. Probably Leo Judä in Zurich is the translator.
This translation is printed in the St. Louis edition, vol. XI, col. XXX.
Two different, much better translations are found in the old edition of
Walch, Vol. XI, p. 41 and Vol. XXI, 751. In order to have a better
translation in our edition than the un-German, difficult-to-understand
one, which is already included in the 11th volume, we did not want to
leave it at a mere reference, but provide here, as it has been done with
all other letters, a new translation according to the Erlangen
correspondence.

Martin Luther, Augustinian, wishes grace and peace from our Lord Jesus
Christ to the most noble Prince and Lord, Frederick, Prince of the
Empire, Duke of Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen, his
most gracious Lord.

Most Serene and Gracious Prince! I do not know to whom I should
attribute the fact that I have not yet been able to comply with the
wishes of Your Electoral Grace, and, since from day to day more and more
matters are arising from one another, I have been forced to postpone
\[the fulfillment of the wishes\]. Of course, E. C. F. G.. has decided,
according to very good advice, that I should devote myself to holy and
quiet studies, setting aside the quarrelsome, biting and restless
writings, with which I have now already lost the third year, and besides
the work of explaining the Psalter, the interpretations of the Epistles
and Gospels, which are generally called postils, for the common pastors
and the people, in the opinion that in this way it would happen that I,
taken up by the heavy burden of this work, would also have peace against
the will of the adversaries. For such is E. C. F. G.\'s innate nature,
as their name indicates, peaceable, that they have made known to me with
clear and frequent indications how annoying E. C. F. G. those quarrels
and questions about useless things (*de lana caprina* 3) as one speaks)
are (because it fei

3\) *Horat. epist., lib*. I, ep. XVIII, v. 15.

**338** Letters from the year 1521. no. 375. **339**

I am allowed to despise those seemingly splendid disputes of spiritual
greed and to make BethEl into BethAven with the prophet \[Amos 5:5\]).

But even I myself could not easily say how reluctantly I have been
tossed about by these disturbances and torn away from my studies, so
that I have not been able to control my flesh and blood completely, that
I would not have treated these gross insolence of the godless people
more harshly than it befits a religious, yet with humility. As I do not
reject the guilt in this matter, I hope that forgiveness will not be
denied to me by anyone who at least considers how many lions Moab \[Is.
15, 9\], how many Rabsakhs of the Assyrians \[Is. 36, 2\], yes, how many
extremely poisonous Simei \[2 Sam. 16, 5. ff.\] I alone have been forced
to suffer for so long, to my and many people\'s detriment, whom I could
have benefited with the word of God. Nevertheless, my mind stood in
these storms in such a way that it never despaired of the hope of
finally attaining peace once, so that I would want to comply with E. C.
F. G., through which, which cannot be doubted, the mercy of God has
given your Gospel of Christ no little encouragement.

But now that I see that my hope has been a mere human thought, and that
I am being drawn deeper into this great, deep sea every day, as
innumerable boils, the great beasts, join their forces and efforts with
the small ones, I see at the same time that Satan, by challenging my
hope, has sought nothing else than that I, distracted by the feeling of
my insignificance, would finally completely abandon my purpose, and that
I would have to go to Babylon before I would provide my Jerusalem with
defense and food. So cunning is his wickedness. Contemplating this, I
remembered the holy man Nehemiah, and, leaving the idle reflections to
Ezra, the very learned scribe, began to despair of peace, preparing
myself on both sides for the works of peace and war, seizing with one
hand the sword to repulse my Arabs, and using the other to

to build the wall, lest, if I gave myself to only one of the two labors,
I should not accomplish either of them. For Jerome also says that he who
does not resist the adversaries does as much harm to the church as he
does to the other side.

And the apostle commands \[Titus 1:9\] that a bishop should not only be
able to exhort by sound doctrine, but also to punish the gainsayers. Not
as if I think that I am a bishop, since I lack both the riches and the
bishop\'s miter (*infula*) by which one is a bishop nowadays, but
because he who executes the office of the word executes the office of a
bishop, who is an ehud \[Judg. 3,15. ff.\], who knows how to use both
hands with equal skill, and with the warlike left, which is prepared for
the time of war, must kill the very fat Eglon by the sword thrust into
it. And I, who am a stouthearted despiser in the midst of the swords,
bulls, trumpets and war trumpets of the papists, who seek to frighten me
in vain, by the grace of God, do all the work of peace, and take before
my hand the interpretations which E. C. F. G. has desired of me. For
what should I not be able to do in Him who makes me mighty? \[If I
wanted to look at my powers, I could not even devote myself to the one
Psalter, even if I were Luther seven times: so great intellect,
scholarship, diligence, spirit and grace does this book require, to say
nothing of the fact that I have the task of preaching twice \[daily\].
^1)^ For of the other occupations, except the service of the word, I say
nothing.

But I fear that this work will turn out far worse than was expected. For
since in the hearts of all there is nothing more sacred than the value
of the Gospel, and rightly so, whose ineffable majesty is to be duly
worshipped, then perhaps many will expect an interpretation befitting
your Gospel, and it will finally become of the birth of the mountains
hurried Maus, 2) and

1\) Luther preached continuously twice a day, on the first book of Moses
and on the Evangelia (Köstlin

Vol. I, p. 433).

2\) *Horat. ars poet. v*. 139.

**340**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 375 to 383.

341

having conceived with a great fieriness, I shall give birth to a
\[glimmeuden\] straw. I do not say of eloquence and of the daintiness of
Latin speech. For as I am inexperienced in these things, so I do not
work this at all for the high scholars, but for the sake of the common
people, and for those who have breath in their noses, who are highly
esteemed by God, as Isaiah \[Cap. 2, 22\] says. I have to fear their
judgment, no matter how coarsely they speak, especially yours, most
noble prince, since you are not only favorable to the holy Scriptures
with incomparable zeal, but are also so knowledgeable that you could
trouble every theologian, even the greatest, if you even begin to raise
questions; so much is lacking that the Romans E. C. F. G. with the empty
pretense and buffoonery of their bulls, or could ensnare them with their
godless laws of superstition, while nowadays they completely deprive all
bishops of sense and reason with this crude jugglery.

But I will have done enough, if I have countered the unrhymed and
ludicrous glosses of some people by bringing to light the quite pure and
simple mind of the Gospel, and the people can at least hear the words of
their God alone, purified from human dung, instead of fables and dreams.
For apart from the purity and sincerity of the understanding of the
Gospel, which is adapted to a lower capacity and that of the people, I
promise nothing. But whether I have also fulfilled this, let others
judge. But opinions and questions, which serve nothing for the matter,
certainly no one will learn from me.

Therefore, most noble prince, accept this service of mine, which is not
to be valued according to your dignity, but according to your grace, and
for the gospel of Christ, as you do, keep us long the Friederich, the
godly, great Duke of Saxony, Churfürsten, in the grace of Christ. E. C.
F. G. be well in Christ. Amen. Wittenberg, in the year 1521, on the
third day of March.

Martin Luther, August.

**No. 376.**

Wittenberg. March 6, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2496, annex, no. 59.

**No. 377.**

Wittenberg. March 6, 1521.

**To Johann Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2508, annex, no. 67.

**No. 378.**

Worms. March 6, 1521..,

**Emperor Carl V\'s citation to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 1786, no. 543.

**No. 379.**

Worms. March 6, 1521.

**Carl V\'s escort letter for Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1787, no. 544.

**No. 380.**

(Wittenberg.) March 7, 1521.

**To Wenceslaus Link.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2497, annex, no. 60.

**No. 381.**

Wittenberg. March 7, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2498, annex, no. 61.

**No. 382.**

Worms. March 8, 1521.

**Duke George of Saxony\'s escort letter for Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1790, no. 546.

**No. 383.**

Wittenberg. March 10, 1521.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 1372.

**342** Letters from the year 1521. no. 384 to 387. **343**

**No. 384.**

Worms. March 11, 1521.

**Elector Frederick of Saxony to Luther.**

Letter accompanying his escort letter for Luther.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives E, fol. 20 k, 107.
Printed from it in Burkhardt, p. 38 and in Erl. Also in Müller\'s
\"Entdecktes Staats-Cabinet\" 2c, Jena 1714 ff, vol. VIII, p. 290. -
There are many corrections in the concept.

God wills it. By the Grace of God. Our greeting before, venerable,
ecclesiastic and reverend, dear devotee! We graciously inform you that
the Roman Emperor\'s Majesty has requested us. Majesty has requested us
to provide you with an escort at her Majesty\'s request. We hereby send
you a written escort to our brothers and our \[principality\] 1)
officials, cities and other our subjects, \[that they\] 1) shall provide
you and those who will be with you at the ends where our brother and we
have to escort, with sufficient escort and assurance. His Imperial
Majesty also sends you an escort. Maj. also sends you an escort and
writes to you, as you will hear. 2) We do not wish to be gracious to
you, for we are inclined to be gracious to you. Date from the Imperial
Diet at Worms, on the 11th day of March, Anno Domini 1521.

\[To\] D. Martinus. 3)

1\) Inserted by us.

2\) As Förstemann, \"Neues Urkundenbuch\", p. 64 notes, instead of this
sentence: \"It sends\" 2c. in the Concept was originally written: \"Your
Mt. has also requested us to write to you in addition to your Mt.
writing, which we therefore do not want to have omitted on your Mt.
intentions, and where you will come on kais. Mt. request to come, as we
consider inconvenient according to the opportunity of the things, but on
your favor, so you want to have your thing on the way and in hostels
with food and drink and otherwise everywhere in good care.\" This
passage is deleted and the above is written in the margin. - In the same
place, Förstemann erroneously says: \"Walch erroneously gives March 12
as the date,\" because Walch does not have this letter, but only the
escort letter (the next number), to which this letter is the
[accompanying]{.underline} letter. Förstemann has considered these two
documents to be identical and has given this letter the title:
\"[Geleitsbrief]{.underline} für Dr. Luther. However, the Geleitsbrief
has the same date in the [concept]{.underline} as this letter. See
Burkhardt, p. 38, note f).

3\) We have taken this inscription from Förstemann 1. o. ; in Burkhardt
and in Erl. Briefw. it is missing.

**No. 3 85.**

Worms. March 12, 1521.

**The Elector Frederick\'s escort letter for Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1789, no. 545.

**No. 3 86.**

Wittenberg. March 19, 1521.

To Spalatin.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1724, no. 535.

**No. 3 87.**

Wittenberg. March 22, 1521.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Schneeberg.**

Luther advised him either not to accept the pastorate in Zwickau offered
to him or to be prepared for a fight with the papacy.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Goth*. 122, kok 21, and in other copies at Zerbst, Zwickau, Wolfenbüttel
and Hamburg. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 315 ; in De Wette, vol. I,
p. 577 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 115. German in Etliche
Trostschriften und Predigten\" 2c., published by Georg Rörer, Jena 1554,
p. Svj; in the Eisleben edition, vol. l, p. 30; in the Altenburger, vol.
I, p. 555; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 302 and in Walch, vol. X,
1880. The fact that De Wette notes: \"This letter is not to be found in
Walch\" has its reason in the fact that the latter has not provided any
proof in the 21st volume. Although this letter is also found in the St.
Louis edition, vol. X, 1606, we have nevertheless translated it
according to the original in the Erl. Briefw. newly translated.

To the highly esteemed brother in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
faithful servant of Christ in Schneeberg, his exceedingly dear
\[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! I have received your letter, dearest Nicolaus, by which you
indicate that you have been appointed to the parish office in Zwickau
4), and you desire comfort from me. You know how dangerous these times
are, and

4\) Since 1519 Hausmann had been a preacher (not yet a pastor) in
Schneeberg, where he had a hard time with the pastor M. Wolfgang Krause,
who was papal-minded. He accepted the call to Zwickau, where he was
probably introduced on Pentecost (May 19) 1521.

**344** Letters from the year

1521\. no. 387. 388. 345

It is entirely that time of flight of which Christ prophesied \[Matth.
24, 16, 20. For it is the time when they suffer not sound doctrine \[2
Tim. 4:3\], and wolves have become the shepherds \[Acts 20:29\], so that
we have no consolation but to beseech the Lord that either we also may
be able to flee, or to stand fast in these evil days. Every day I learn
more and more how far and deep Satan reigns, so that I am afraid to take
a close look at the shape of the church, indeed, so far has it come with
my conviction that no one can be saved who does not, in life and in
death, fight with all his might against the statutes and commandments of
the pope and the bishops. This may be strange and new to you, but that
is how it is, dearest Nicolaus. If you cannot grasp this, you will not
be able to grasp my consolation either. We have found that the pope with
his own is entirely an abomination of Christ \[2 Thess. 2:4\], so that
no one can preach but he who takes care to deprive him of the sheep and
to cast him off as a wolf. You know with how great a clamor this offense
is proclaimed nowadays as a *schism*, heresy and extraordinary evil; but
what shall we do? There is no other way to be saved at this time of
perdition.

Therefore, my dear Nicolaus, since my counsel, if it is evil, must be
most pernicious to the counselor, I leave it entirely to your free will,
and let you act at your peril. If you accept the priesthood, you will
make yourself the enemy of the pope and the bishops by contradicting
their decrees; but if you do not contradict, you will be Christ\'s
enemy. The supremely free faith of Christ cannot stand with their cords
and deceits. In all these things I prescribe nothing to thee, but advise
thee as I would be advised. It was up to you either not to desire my
advice or to bear this advice I gave you in a godly and kind way. I have
(I call God to witness) nothing else; in Him you are quite at ease.
Wittenberg, March 22, 1521.

Your Martin Luther, Aug.

**No. 3 88 .**

Wittenberg. March 24, 1521.

**To an unnamed person.**

Luther is without concern for himself, and determined not to do the
recantation at Worms that is demanded of him.

From a very faulty copy of a letter found on the back of a letter from
Seb. Dietrich\'s letter to the Ansbach chancellor Georg Vogler, dated
Dec. 4, 1540, printed with Veesenmeyer\'s improvements in De Wette, Vol.
I, p. 579 and in Erl. Veesenmeyer assumes that the letter was addressed
to Joh. Lang, but Luther had written to him on March 6; therefore, the
beginning of the letter does not fit him. (De Wette.)

Hail! I do not write to you, my venerable father; it is your fault,
since you sin twofold: first, because you too have written only once,
then because you have sent no messenger to bring a letter to you; for
where and from where else could I, who am hidden in this corner of the
world, find a messenger? I write, and now I also beseech thee, that thou
pray, not for me, but for the word of GOD with thine own. For I am not
concerned for me, in whose still warm blood (it is strange to say) many
thousands of murderers throughout the world have become guilty. And that
most holy adversary of Christ, the supreme instigator and teacher of
murderers, is laying all his might to destroy me, amen. Let the will of
the Lord be done. My Christ will give me the spirit to despise these
servants of Satan in life and to overcome them in death. You do not send
money to your brother Peter, as he tells me; see that you provide for
him. There is nothing new with us, and you wrote that all my things are
sold with you. Then you hear from Worms sooner than I what is being
negotiated about me. They are working to have me revoke many articles,
but my revocation will be this one: Formerly I said that the pope was
Christ\'s governor; now I recant it, and say, The pope is Christ\'s
repugnant, and the devil\'s apostle. I am compelled to do this by the
very wicked and blasphemous bull by which they evidently condemn Christ.
Fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, 1521, on the day of Palmarum \[March
24\].

Martin Luther, August.

**346** Letters from the year 1521. no. 389. 390. 391. **347**

**No. 3 89.**

(Wittenberg.) March 29, 1521.

**To Johann Lang.**

On March 26,^1)^ Luther had received the Emperor\'s citation to Worms
through the imperial herald Caspar Storm. Now he reports that he will
probably come to Erfurt. He sends his writing \"Antwort auf das
überchristliche \... Buch des Bock Einsers\" (St. Louis edition, vol.
XVIII, 1270).

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. V 399, fol. 132 d. Printed in Schütze vol.
II, p. 40; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 580 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. ill, p.
118.

To the venerable father, Magister Johann Lang, Augustinian hermit, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

JEsus.

Hail! Next Thursday or Friday 2) I will visit you, venerable father,
with the imperial Ernhold, who calls me to Worms, if there is no danger
of going into Erfurt or an unknown case prevents it; then I will talk in
more detail. But if not, you will certainly find me on Saturday in 3)
Eisenach. I thank you for the Göldgulden (*aureo*) sent. You see how I
treated my Emser, the donkey. Farewell. On Friday of the Passion of
Christ \[March 29\] 1521.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 39 0.**

Wittenberg. March 31, 1521.

**To Johann Friedrich, Duke of Saxony.**

Luther answers the question about the good works of Christ and his
sleeping. He sends the beginning of the Magnificat, which cannot be
completed now because of his trip to Worms.

Printed from a copy of the original in the archives at Weimar, in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 30; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 581; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 11 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 63. De Wette did not
find the original, nor does Burkhardt mention it.

Sublime, highborn Prince, gracious Sir! Your Princely Grace Grace
Scripture

1\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 1787, No. 544. In this determination
of time we followed Kolde, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 321.

2\) That is, the 4th or 5th of April.

3\) We have assumed De Weites Conjectur, *in* instead of: *ex.*

and content I have received submissively, namely from the good works of
Christ and His sleeping.

Now it is true, one ran in the Gospel not more than once that he had
slept, which E. F. G. reports. But if one should have written all his
sleep, what kind of a book would have become from it? It is enough that
once the natural true humanity is indicated in the piece. He may have
prayed, fasted, walked, preached, and performed miraculous signs more
than once, as is clearly written in the Gospel*:* But some are written
to teach us and to make us believers 2c. But that he has always done the
Father\'s good pleasure is true; his eating, drinking, sleeping, all
things, are pleasing to the Father, as the highest miraculous works. For
the Father looks not at works, but at the will in works, as I have
superfluously taught in the book of good works 4). It is not necessary
to believe that Christ on the cross prayed the whole Psalm \[Ps. 22\]:
*Deus, Deus meus, rescipe, orally,* but it is also not unchristian if
someone believes this. All this is in the good free will of each one;
for the Scripture says nothing about it, so others do not need to
believe.

I hereby send E. F. G. the Magnificat I have begun, the fourth quatern
is still in the press, I must leave it until my return; for E. F. G.
sees how I, called upon for the Reichstag, must leave everything. If God
helps me back home, E. F. G. shall have it very quickly. Hereby I
command myself to E. F. G., whom God let be in command of His grace,
Amen. At Wittenberg on Easter Day \[March 31\] 1521

subservient

Martin Luther.

**No. 391 .**

Wittenberg. April 1, 1521.

**To Wenceslaus Link.**

Letter and Epilogue to \"Luther\'s Answer to the Book of the Eminent
Magister noster, M. Ambrosius Catharinus\" 2c.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1436 and 1580.

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1298.

**348** Letters from the year 1521. no. 392 to 395. 349

**No. 392 .**

Frankfurt a. M. (April 14) 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1827, no. 553.

**No 393.**

Worms. April 17, 1521.

**To the Imperial Council Joh. Cuspinianus in Vienna.**

Luther applies for Cuspinian\'s friendship at the instigation of the
latter\'s brother, and gives news of his first interrogation before the
imperial assembly in Worms.

From the original allegedly in the imperial library in Vienna in
*Gleichen, Annal eccles.,* Dresden 1730, Vol. Ill, p. 823; in De Wette
Vol. I, p. 587 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. ill, p. 128.

To the highly famous and highly learned man, Mr. Cuspinianus,^1)^ the
Imperial Majesty\'s librarian at Vienna, his \[friend\] in the Lord,
salvation 2c.

Your love, highly famous Cuspinianus, has easily persuaded me that I
dared to write to you in the midst of this unrest, since I previously,
because of the fame of your name, wished to be exactly acquainted with
you. Therefore, include me in the list of yours, so that I may test the
truth of what your brother has praised to me with such a full mouth.

At this hour I stood before the Emperor and his brother and the Roman
Empire 2) and was asked whether I wanted to revoke my books. There I
answered: the books are certainly mine; by the way, what I would decide
in relation to the revocation, I would say tomorrow, since from me no
more space and time for thinking over is desired, and has been given to
me from the other 3) side. But I will also not revoke even one tittle,
so Chri

1\) Johann Cuspinian, actually Spießhaymer, born 1473 at Spießheim near
Schweinfurt, died April 19, 1529 at Vienna; humanist and as such editor
of a number of classics, physician, but especially diplomat and used for
many legations.

2\) Here the text seems to us not to be in order. Instead of: *et fratre
Romano* should be read well: *et fratre et imperio Romano*. According to
this we have translated.

3\) Here we have assumed *ab altera parte* instead of: *parte, from*
which we could not derive any sense.

stus is gracious to me. Farewell, my dearest Cuspinianus. Worms,
Wednesday after Misericordias Domini 4) \[April 17\] 1521.

**No. 39 4.**

Ebernburg. April 17, 1521.

**Ulrich von Hütten to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1845, no. 564.

**No. 395 .**

(Worms.) (April 17, 1521.)

**Luther\'s own handwritten account of his interrogation at the Diet of
Worms.**

The original is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. E. fol.* 20 b
(incomplete). Printed by Burkhardt, p. 39 (with the wrong date: March
17) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. ill, p. 125.

Alls r. kais. Majesty\'s request and demand I appeared yesterday and
still appear in God\'s \[name\] 5) Peace and His Imperial Maj. Maj.
Christian free escort humbly and obediently to hear and receive \[so\]
that which would be held against me according to Imperial mandate and
content. Mandate and content would have to be held out to me.

However, after two pieces were held out to me on my arrival yesterday,
namely whether I want to keep or revoke the books that went out under my
name, as has been told, and confess them as mine, I first gave my
correct answer and confessed all the same books and still confess them
as mine, on which I also finally remain.

On the other part, which concerns the highest good in heaven and earth,
the holy Word of God and faith, I have humbly requested \[and obtained
out of the kindness of R. Cai. Maj.

And howbeit under the speech is included, as\....

4\) The Latin editions given above offer *Quasimodogeniti*, which, as De
Wette has already noted, is incorrect, for Luther did not arrive in
Worms until April 16.

5\) The words in \[ \] in this writing Luther himself crossed out again.

**350**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 396 to 403.

**351**

**No. 396 .**

Ebernburg. April 20, 1521.

**Ulrich von Hütten to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1846, no. 564k.

**No. 397.**

Worms. April 26, 1521.

**The Landgrave Philip of Hesse\'s escort briefs for the return
journey.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1791, no. 547.

**No. 39 8 .**

Frankfurt a. M. April 28, 1521.

**To Lucas Cranach.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1935, no. 593. .

**No. 399 .**

Friedberg. April 28, 1521.

**To Emperor Carl V**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1893, no. 580.

**No. 400.**

Friedberg. April 28, 1521.

**To the Electors, Princes and Estates of the Empire.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1899, no. 581.

**No. 401.**

Friedberg. April 29, 1521.

**To Spalatin in Worms.**

Luther sends him the two previous letters, which Spalatin probably
requested at the Elector\'s request, back through the herald. He reports
that he will travel to Grünberg today. He sends greetings from himself
and Amsdorf, namely to the von Pappenheim.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 96 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, kok 117. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 323k; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 601 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 143. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 756.

For the attention of Magister Spalatin in Worms.

Hail! Here you have the letters you requested, my dear Spalatin; you
will take care of the rest. We have the Ernhold

Today we are leaving for Grünberg. ^1)^ Greet all of us, especially
Joachim and Ulrich von Pappenheim, also in the name of Amsdorf, to whom
we could not say goodbye when we left. Fare well in the Lord. Friedberg,
Monday after Cantate \[April 29, early, 1521.

Mart. Luther, Aug.

**No. 401.**

Eisenach. May 3, 1521.

**To the Grasen Albrecht zu Mansseld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1912, no. 591.

**No. 402.**

(Wartburg.) (Before May 12, 1521.)

**To Melanchthon\'s**

(Fragment.)

Luther reports that they were very worried that his whereabouts would
become known, and hardly wanted to allow him to send the letter. He also
admonishes to conceal him and to wait and see what God wants to do
through his concealment.

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 18; in De Wette, vol. II,
p. 12 (to Spalatin, May or June 1521) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p.
146. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 769 (to Spalatin, 1522).

I have hardly been able to get it that I sent this letter, so much one
fears that it would be revealed in some way where I am; therefore you
also take care, if you believe that this is done for the honor of
Christ, that it remains doubtful or becomes doubtful whether it is
friends or enemies who keep me safe, and keep quiet. For it is not
necessary that others besides you and Amsdorf know anything, except that
I am still alive. Who knows what God has done through this counsel of
silence?

1\) In Upper Hesse.

2\) *Buddeus*, who brings this document from Luther\'s original, notes
that it could only be read so far, the rest was so faded that no one was
able to read it. He assumes that it is addressed to Spalatin and assigns
it to the year 1522. According to its content, it must have been written
to a Wittenberg, probably Melanchthon. It was not necessary to advise
Spalatin to keep Luther\'s whereabouts secret. Apparently, it was
written in the first days after Luther\'s arrival at the Wartburg; the
following three numbers are from May 12.

**352**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 403 to 409.

**353**

I want to work in these heights. The priests and the monks, who raged
when I was free, are so afraid now that I am imprisoned that they are
beginning to mitigate what they have done against me in a senseless way.
They cannot bear the great multitude of the common people who threaten
them, and do not know by what artifice they would like to escape. I see
the hands of the mighty one in Jacob \[Gen. 49, 24.\], what he works
while we are silent, tolerate, pray. Is not the word of Moses true \[2
Mos. 14, 14.\]: \"You will be silent, and the Lord will fight for you\"?
A certain Romanist wrote to the Cardinal 1) of Mainz: We have lost
Luther as we wanted, but the common people are so excited that I suspect
we will hardly keep alive if we do not light candles and look for him
everywhere and call him back. He was joking; but how, if the jest brings
seriousness? \[Ps. 4:5.:\] \"Speak with your heart upon your couch, and
tarry\" 2c.

**No. 404.**

Wartburg. May 12, 1521.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2513, annex, no. 69.

**No. 405.**

Wartburg. May 12, 1521.

**To Amsdorf.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2516, annex, no. 70.

**No. 406.**

Wartburg. May 12, 1521.

**To Johann Agricola.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2520, annex, no. 72.

**No. 407.**

Wartburg. May 14, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2510, annex, no. 68.

1\) *Galeritae* == the one with the Cardinal\'s hat.

**No. 408.**

(Wartburg.) (Around mid-May 1521.)

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1906, no. 584.

**No. 409.**

Strasbourg. May 18, 1521.

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

Gerbet reports the various rumors about Luther\'s fate. He asks Luthern
for news about it, also for the transmission of the writings he has
published, and that he may soon complete the interpretations on Matthew.
He sends greetings to Melanchthon, Carlstadt and Blaurer, and from
Uringer, Otto Braunfels and Lucas Hackfurt (*Bathodius*).

Printed in *Jo. Fr. Hekel, Manipulus epistolarum* etc., p.65; in part in
Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth., lib*. I, p. 161, add. Ill (with the wrong
date: May 26) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. ill, p. 159.

Nicolaus Gerbel wishes salvation in Christ Jesus, the crucified, to the
generous man, D. Martin Luther, the theologian, his extremely dear Lord
and teacher.

With respect to you, everything is so uncertain that you have never been
able to see or hear anything more uncertain. For there is a constant
rumor that you were attacked and captured, and then also killed by a
sword being thrust into your neck. Some say that you returned safely to
Wittenberg. Now one is in doubt which of these things is true. There is
certainly no one among the learned or righteous people who would not
wish the latter to be so. You cannot believe how the followers of the
opposite party rejoice over the former, how they thank their gods.
Truly, they are senseless people who do not know how much evil, even how
much human blood your downfall would cost. Of course, we, all of us who
have sought salvation and freedom and recognized that you are the
champion of the gospel and the true faith, are of a completely different
mind, and you do not believe how much we are concerned about your life.
It is not that we envy you this glory, that you live with the heavenly
ones, dead to the world, for which you have overcome with such sublime
courage and with such unbelievable constancy these changeable events
(rerum *motus*), but that you have been esteemed for treating with a few
the gospel of Christ in the most correct manner, and under whose not
deceptive

**354**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 409 to 414.

**355**

geric leadership, we drew hope that all that had been erased by the
injustice and sloth of our ancestors could be restored.

Therefore, my highly learned Luther, if you love me, if you love the
others who still care for you and the Gospel of God with me, which has
been preached by you with such great work, with such great care, with
such great efforts, with so many dangers, then let us know whether you
are alive or imprisoned, whether you are deprived of the freedom to
write and to teach us, or how your affairs stand. If the rumor is true,
then water and fire will be denied to all who read your books, who will
believe that you have taught the truth. You now see what the future
shape of things is, which must be held against those who have confessed
the gospel of the Son of God. May God grant that in sincere and true
faith we may not receive all the wiles, wiles and wiles of all our
enemies other than that they are utterly null and void.

By the way, I implore you, my dear Luther, in the name of our
friendship, to send us secretly your books that have been published
after your departure from Worms, if it can be done by any opportunity.
But we all wish that the interpretations of the whole of Matthew, which
you have begun, will be completed as soon as possible, for in these you
can give us the most suitable form of the whole Christian doctrine.

Greet my Philip in my name; I ask you to recommend me to him in the best
way. My wife sends her regards. Greetings from the house of Caspar
Uringer,^1)^ who is the librarian of our council. Greetings from Otto
Braunfels, the Carthusian. Greetings to Lucas, 2) the priest. Greet in
my name Carlstadt and Thomas Blaurer, the excellent young man, and
farewell. Strasbourg, 1521, the day before Pentecost \[May 18\].

Postscript. I have written a letter 3) to you in the past few days, I
don\'t know in what impetuosity of spirit, very hastily and with too
little care, and since I have heard about my

1\) In Luther\'s reply letter of November 1, 1521 (St. Louis edition,
vol. XV, 2520, annex, no. 71, § 8) he is called Urniger according to
Aurifaber; according to *Fechtius*: Winzer.

2\) Lucas Hackfurt, Bathodius. See vol. X V, appendix, no. 71.

3\) This is Gerbel\'s letter mentioned on May 14, 1521 in the letter to
Spalatin (vol. XV, appendix, no. 68 at the beginning). The same is not
available.

Since I was pushed too much by my friends, who did not want to suffer
any delay in the desire to visit you, something quite inconsistent has
slipped my mind, which I ask you, by all that is holy and by our
friendship, to improve before it gets into anyone\'s hands. The passage
in question reads thus: *Aliis alia placentibus*. You put in this 4)
place for the expression *placentibus*, which I dislike extraordinarily,
*probantibus*. I cannot wonder enough through what sleepiness or
carelessness such a word may have crept in. I am uncertain whether this
has happened through the heat of the spirit, or through the all too
great desire to please you, or through my occupations, which are all too
contrary to better studies. You interpret this to my best advantage
according to your admirable honesty.

**No. 410.**

Wartburg. May 26, 1521.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2542, annex, no. 79.

**No. 411.**

Wartburg. June 1, 1521.

**To Franz von Sickingen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 814.

**No. 412.**

Wartburg.

June 8 and 20, 1521.

**To Justus Jonas in Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1056 and 1199. 5)

**No. 413.**

Wartburg. June 10, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition vol. XV, 2526, annex, no. 74.

**No. 414.**

Wartburg. July 13, 1521.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2528, annex, no. 75.

4\) Instead of *cum,* Wohl *eum* should be read.

5\) 1. c. Col. 1201 to end read: \"the 20th of June\".

**356** Letters from the year 1521. No. 415 to 418.

**357**

**No. 415**

Wartburg. (July 13) 1521.

**To Amsdorf.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2550, annex, no. 81.

**No. 416.**

(Wartburg.) July 15, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2538, annex, no. 77.

**No. 417**

Wartburg. (Soon after July 15) 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther wants to deceive about his whereabouts by an artifice, namely the
following fingirten letter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, ich. 85 and in *Cod. Jen*. ua, kok 108. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 8; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 31 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 201. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 743.

To Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, court preacher to the Elector of
Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Hail! I believe that my letter has reached you, my dear Spalatin, now I
am sending another one and other things. ^1)^ Hear also my little
friend. Since the rumor about my whereabouts is becoming so strong that,
although they do not dare to claim it, they still cannot be dissuaded
from it, 2) I would like this enclosed letter addressed to you to be
lost through your or your people\'s deliberate carelessness in such a
way that it would come into the hands of the adversaries, as it were
stealthily, and as if it had to be kept hidden with great secrecy. 3)
And would God that my manuscript would come into the hands of the pig of
Dresden, who will undoubtedly make it known easily and gladly. You see
what

1\) Among them a piece of the Postille, which Spalatin forwarded to
Melanchthon for printing.

2\) Walch translates the preceding thus: \"that, if [I may]{.underline}
not affirm it, I may not disguise it either, but deny it: so I would\"
2c.

3\) We do not know whether Spalatin responded to this suggestion. - The
\"pig at Dresden\" is Duke Georg.

seem advisable. That I am well, you will learn from this bearer. For I
hope it will be better. Fare well in the Lord. From the desert, 1521.

**No. 418.**

Wartburg. Soon after July 15, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

A letter from a friend. While people assume that Luther is at the
Wartburg, he is safe in his place: nobody thinks of Bohemia. About Duke
George\'s wrath. About the riots in Erfurt.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. u, fol. 10. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p.
8K; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 30 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 202.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 744.

Hail! I hear, my dear Spalatin, that the rumor is spreading that Luther
is in Wartburg Castle (*Wartpurg*) near Eisenach; and this leads people
to suspect that I am imprisoned there in the forest. But while they have
such a suspicion, in the meantime I am safely hidden here, if only the
brothers keep faith who are with me. If my published books should betray
me, I will change the place. It is astonishing that no one thinks of
Bohemia now.

St. George, Duke of Saxony, is still very angry (*iraxit*), as I hear;
it is well with him, and yet God wanted him to be angry as long as he is
a pope. I will punish him as the Landgravine of Hesse, who is now the
wife of Count von Solms, did; she knew how to answer such a great man
properly, since she instructed her envoys \[to say\] that he should be
mindful of his grandfather P\[odiebrad\] and his mother,
P\[odiebrad\'s\] daughter. 4) Do you not know what she, the very
perceptive woman, answered his envoys during the Diet of Worms?

4\) Duke George will have reproached the Landgravine Anna of Hesse, the
widow of Landgrave Wilhelm II, who married Count Otto of Solms-Laubach
in 1519, about this miss-marriage, whereupon she reminded him that he
was of Bohemian descent, descended from the marriage of his father
Albrecht with the daughter of Podiebrad, Zdena or Sidonia, which was
also considered a miss-marriage. Compare the Table Talks of Cordatus,
No. 772, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXll, 1902.

**358**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 418 to 422.

**359**

At Erfurt, Satan has stalked us by his own authority, so that he may
brand our people with slander, but he will achieve nothing; it is not
our people who are doing this. In this way, since he cannot resist the
truth, he intends to defile it by the foolish zeal of fools against us.
I am surprised that the council of this city suffers this. I am well
now, thank God, and I have peace from the papists. ^1)^ Pray for me and
be well. It is the will of our most noble prince that my whereabouts are
not yet known, for this reason I write nothing to him. Again, I bid you
farewell. From my place, 1521. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 419.**

Wartburg. July 31, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2540, annex, no. 78.

**No. 420.**

(Wartburg.) August 1, 1521.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2585, annex, no. 99.

**No. 421.**

(Wartburg.) . August 3, 1521.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2590, annex, no. 100.

**No. 422.**

(Wartburg.) August 6, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther explains himself about Carlstadt\'s and another\'s writings
against the unmarried state, because it does not want to occur to him
that the monks are allowed to marry; he sends writings for printing and
touches other printing matters.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 116. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 348 b; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 40 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 215. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 758.

1\) The words: *et a papistis ferior* Walch translates: \"and be beaten
by the papists\".

His Georg Spalatin.

Hail! From my landlord 2) I have received the talks and two quatrains of
Carlstadt. 3) Dear God, do our Wittenbergers also want to give wives to
the monks? But they will not force a woman on me! The author of the
conversations did not have enough gifts, not enough erudition. And yet
God wanted Carlstadt\'s writings to be more luminous, since there is a
great abundance of understanding and scholarship in them.

It is not my opinion that everything I send should be printed.
Therefore, I would like the protective writing of Philip 4) to be
postponed (if it should not please you otherwise) until the presses are
unoccupied. The same should have been done with the Psalm *Exsurgate* 5)
since there are plenty of such writings, which are necessary and urgent.

I ask you, is my Magnificat 6) not yet finished? I am surprised that the
118th 7) Psalm, which I am sure I added at the end of the Sermon of
Confession, has been lost in such a way that one part of it was in the
same quatern with the last part \[of the Scripture of Confession\], so
that necessarily the Sermon of Confession must also have been mutilated.
The remaining part, however, I have especially sent with the other
bundle; 8) perhaps you are not looking carefully. . What I send back
here \[from the Scripture) against Catharinus, 9) send to its place; for
I have the same whole.

2\) the castle governor of Wartburg, Berlepsch.

3\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2590, note 2.

4\) This does not refer to Melanchthon\'s Latin writing against the
Parisian theologians, but to Luther\'s own translation of it, St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII, 960. Melanchthon\'s writing had already appeared in
June.

5\) The 68th Psalm, St. Louis edition, vol. V, 656. See also the note
there.

6\) St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 1372. See also the note there.

7\) According to the Vulgate count. This is the translation of the 119th
Psalm, St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1252. See the note there.

8\) \"The other bundle\" which contained the rest of the psalm will be
one and the same with the \"other things\" in No. 417 at the beginning.

9\) Probably several too many sheets of the manuscript were sent to
Luthern, which he wants to have sent back to the printer. This will
refer to the second edition, which appeared in July; the first came out
in April.

**360** Letters from 1521. no. 422 to 428. **361**

My obesity (as I see) will be permanent, and must always be alleviated
with medicines; every four days, indeed generally only on the fifth day,
I have an opening once. A strange stomach! Fare well and pray for me,
and beware that you do not take a wife, lest you fall into tribulations
of the flesh. ^1)^ On the day of Sixtus \[August 6\] 1521.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 423.**

(Wartburg.) (Before August 12, 1521.)

**To the Christians of Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis ed. vol. V, 306.

**No. 424.**

(Wartburg.) August 15, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2521, annex, no. 73.

**No. 425.**

Wartburg Castle. .\' September 9, 1521.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1794.

**No. 426.**

Wartburg. September 9, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2535, annex, no. 76.

**No. 427.**

(Wartburg.) September 9, 1521.

**To Amsdorf.**

Siebe St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2584, annex, no. 97.

**No. 428.**

(Wartburg.) September 17, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Duke John had demanded from Luther an explanation of the passage about
the ten lepers, because in it one could find reasons for refutation
against his book about the

1\) This will refer to the persecutions that the provost of Kemberg,
Bartholomäus Bernhardt, had to suffer because of his marriage. Compare
No. 629 and 630 in the 15th volume.

confession. Luther sent it to Spalatin with the request that he have it
copied and forwarded to the duke. If he deemed it worthy of printing, he
should prefix it with the enclosed Zueignung (the following number).
This interpretation was at the same time to be a sample of the German
postilla.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 100 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 128. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 360; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 53 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 234. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 762.

To the Magister Spalatin\'s own hands.

Hail! Since Prince John was attacked with the passage of Lucas about the
ten lepers! that one must believe that those sent by the Lord to the
priests teach confession, he demanded, when he was here in the place,
through my host 2) that I should interpret this gospel, so that he would
have something to answer these gray Pharisees 3) and hypocrites, who, as
it were, want to forestall my booklet on confession 4) and strive to
capture the prince\'s mind in advance through this gospel and turn it
away, because they have heard that the sermon on confession is under the
press.

Therefore, I have had this interpretation 5) sent to you for the reason
that you may see to it that it is carefully copied by a foreign and good
hand, since you have a lot of such hands that have time for it, and my
handwriting must be kept hidden; therefore, send my handwriting back to
me, since I have no other copy, and it could not be given to anyone else
to copy, so that I would not be betrayed.

And although I have dealt with this passage in the booklet on
confession, I have nevertheless so despised \[the opponents\'
interpretation\] that a careful refutation seemed superfluous to me.

2\) Duke Johann will not have seen Luthern during his presence, since he
sends his request through Berlepsch.

3\) This refers to the gray brethren (the Franciscans or clog-footed) at
Weimar, who were fiercely hostile to Luther. Cf. St. Louis edition, Vol.
XVllI, 1418 ff.

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 814. See also the introduction there,
p. 38 f.

5\) to *eum* is to be added: *evangelii commentarium*.

**362** Letters from 1521. no. 428. 429. 430. **363**

For I did not believe that anyone would be so limited that he would
seriously want to prove confession from this passage. That is why I have
treated the passage carefully and abundantly here, and refuted its
nonsense. If you should now judge that it should be printed, then
preface the preface which I have enclosed, attributed in my name to
anyone you want, either to Haugold (*Hugbaldo*) Einsiedel, or to whom it
seems good to you, only not to the prince. The cause you see. For I
would have it printed primarily so that it would help my sermon on
confession, then, because it covers almost the summa of the Christian
being and amply exemplifies a godly life, so that the Germans would also
get a foretaste of the postils. I would have added what Philip misses in
this sermon, but I cannot yet understand what he misses. If it does not
please you that it should be printed, then destroy the preface and give
the rest to Prince John; you will send me my manuscript again.

I believe that you have heard what the Parisians have done against their
sophists in my name for mockery. This priesthood of Baal and Peor begins
to be despised, which is cursed by the Lord through the mouth of Paul.
God be praised! And that which the pope counsels with the emperor has
not yet come to maturity; both are guided by God as they deserve and
where they should be led, but in the meantime they do not think about it
until the iniquity 1) of the Amorites becomes full. I rejoice and
begrudge the emperor this happiness, but because of the mystery of GOD.
Fare well and pray for me. On the day of Lambert \[Sept. 17\] 1521.
Mart. Luther, Aug.

**No. 429.**

(Wartburg.) September 17, 1521.

**To Hangold von Einsiedel, Hans von Dolzk and Bernhard von
Hirschfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XII, 1438.

1\) In the Erl. Briefw.: *iniquitatem* instead of *iniquitates*;
probably a misprint.

**No. 430.**

(Wartburg.) October 7, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther has recovered. He apologizes for not having been able to answer
all the letters. He asks that Melanchthon be removed from the danger of
the plague and announces that he will publicly attack the indulgence
mischief at Mainz. - Postscript. There is a mass priest in the castle
who holds private masses daily. Luther wishes that an end be put to the
corner masses.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. The postscript is
enclosed on a separate sheet. Handwritten in *Cod. Dessav*. No. 101 (the
postscript is marked as No. 102) and in *Cod. Jen. a*, fol. 130. Printed
in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 361; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 59 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 236. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 764. In
Aurifaber, De Wette and Walch, the postscript is attached to the letter
of I. Nov. Nov.

His Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant.

Hail! I thank you for what you have sent. My back and my body are
finally reconciled with me again, so that I no longer need any medicine,
and, thank God, am quite healthy, as before. I was not able to write to
Gerbel through this messenger, he was in such a hurry, nor to
Taubenheim. I have been forced to receive yours in one and the same hour
and to pour this out. At a later time, I will write more extensively.

I pray that Philip will not stay because of the plague. This head must
be preserved, so that the word does not perish, which the Lord has
commanded him for the salvation of souls. I will not be deterred from
attacking privately and publicly the idol at Mainz with its whorehouse
at Halle. 2) Farewell. In the greatest haste. Monday after Franciscus
\[Oct. 7\]. Mar. Luther.

There is a mass-keeper in the castle who says mass daily, I fear, with
great idolatry; so that nothing else may be added: yet God would that he
\[be abolished\] and all such private mass-keepers (*privatarii*) at
least be diminished, if they do not come to a

2\) Luther did the former through his letter to the Archbishop of Mainz,
Albrecht, on Dec. 1, 1521 (St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 548), the latter
through a writing: \"Wider den Abgott zu Halle\" (\"Against the God of
Halle\"), whose publication, however, was prevented by Spalatin, and
which has disappeared without trace. Compare St. Louis Edition, Vol.
XIX, Introduction, p. 27.

**364** Letters from the year 1521. No. 430 to 434. **365**

times can be entirely detached. It is an injustice against the mass if
it is held privately, since it has the name \[assembly\] and *communio*
\[communion\], and Christ\'s and Paul\'s ordinance demands that it be
celebrated publicly and held in a gathered congregation for the
proclamation of the word, that is, in his memory. O thou Antichrist!

**No. 431.**

Wartburg. November 1, 1521.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2517, annex, no. 71.

**No. 432.**

(Wartburg.) November 1, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends letters and asks for them to be forwarded. He complains
about challenges.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. , No. 103 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 180. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. I, p. 362; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 91 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 243. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 765.

To his extremely dear Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant and his friend.

Hail! You will see to it that this is given to Philip, my best Spalatin,
but I am also sending my letter to Gerbel. You see that he wants my
books; this requires your help and effort, I cannot arrange it. I have
shown him a register of all of them; you can take care of the rest, if
you wish. You will also give his letter to Taubenheim.

I have now nothing else what I could write. For you, who have to do with
all-occasions, it comes to you to write to me, who am only now truly and
actually a monk (*monacho* == a single one). But I am not lonely
(*monachus*), because there are many and wicked and cunning devils with
me, who, as one is wont to say, pass the time, but in a troublesome way.
Pray that Christ does not leave me to the end, and be well. On the day
of all saints \[Nov. 4\] 1521. Mart. Luther.

**No. 433.**

Wartburg. November 1521.

**To the Augustinians at Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1068.

**No. 434.**

(Wartburg.) (Probably in November 1521.) 1)

**To Melanchthon.**

(Fragment.)

Luther throws the accusation that he does not write back on himself and
asks him to write to Wider Emser, which he is obliged to do as
Baccalaureus of Theology.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 359; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 92 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 244. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 761.

You have no reason to accuse my silence at this time, because you
yourself have not written anything here until now, which you were guilty
of during the turmoil 2) in your affairs, unless you would have been so
upset by the one voice of Emser, that you must not make a fuss. Eh, you
theologians and brave defenders of the Christian doctrine, which one
man, and a wicked one at that, and that in the matter of godliness, so
submissively maintains! Why do you not oppose him? Why do you not bring
out the learned weapons against him? Why do you not make known to your
poor people the nonsense and godlessness of man? And although all who
teach Christ should do so, it concerns you above all, who bear the
theological laurel 3) and, if I am not mistaken, have bound yourself by
oath to resist and refute heresies. When will we see something worthy of
a baccalaureate of theology? If it has been correctly noted by the
naturalists that the thunderbolts do not

1\) This time determination has De Wette. The Erlanger Briefw.: \"Anfang
November 1521.\" Aurifaber places our writing i perhaps more correctly)
among the letters written in September. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol.
XVIII, introduction, p. 41 d.

2\) at the abolition of the Mass and the departure of many monks from
the monasteries in Wittenberg (De Wette).

3\) Melanchthon was a Baccalaureus of theology.

**366**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 434 to 440 a.

**367**

for even Tiberius, when the heavens thundered, had himself crowned with
the same against the fear of the thunderbolts 1): why then are you so
afraid of the Salmonean thunderbolts of Emser, since you are adorned
with laurels? Why are you not afraid of the inevitable thunderclaps of
Christ \[Marc. 8,38.\]: \"He who is ashamed of my words\" 2c.? Since the
seeress of Apollo, as it is read in Lycophron 2), had eaten the laurel,
she received at the same time the divinity and the prophesying
enthusiasm, and as the poet says: xxxxxxxx xxxxxxxx xx

xxxxxx xxx \[as he ate the laurel, enthusiastic speech sprang from his
mouth\]. How happy the theologians would be if they received the spirit
of divine teaching at the same time as the laurel! But dare you; you
have taken an oath to the holy scripture; why do you hesitate? why are
you silent?

Even if I am only an inexperienced beginner, you will still have me as a
companion, and it will not grieve me to take on the military service and
the difficult work of war under you, such a master. Who should not
rejoice to do military service under one who has brought such gifts to
theological things, so much knowledge of things, who has studied natural
things, since you have been engaged in the medical art for many
years,^3)^ who knows all the sayings of the philosophers like his
fingernails. For I believe that those who consider philosophy and the
knowledge of nature to be useless for theology are very, indeed,
completely mistaken; for what else should our professorships serve us
for?

1\) Compare *Plin hist. nat.* XV, 30. - Salmoneus, son of Aeolus, king
of Elis, wanted to be like Jupiter and imitated Jupiter\'s lightning and
thunder by throwing torches and driving with four-horse carriages over
bronze bridges, but was struck dead by lightning. *Virg. Aen., lib*. VI,
v. 585 seqq.

2\) Lycophron, a poet from Chalcis in Enböa, around 280 BC, wrote among
others a Cassandra or Alexandra, in which v. 6 the mentioned passage is
found.

3\) *versatus in Herculanis medicorum* xxxxxxxx, literally: who stayed
in the warm baths of the physicians. *Erasm. Adag. s. v. Herculana
balnea: Vulcanus muneris vice submisit Herculi fervida balnea, unde
omnia calida balnea Herculana dici coepta sunt.*

**No. 435.**

(Wartburg.) November 11, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2548, annex, no. 80.

**No. 436.**

Wartburg. November 19, 1521.

**To Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XI, XXXIV.

**No. 437.**

Wartburg. - November 21, 1521.

**To his father House Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1500.

**No. 438.**

Wartburg. November 22, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1800.

**No. 439.**

Wartburg. December 1, 1521.

**To Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 548.

**No. 440.**

Wittenberg. Between December 5 and 8, 1521.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 560.

**No. 440a.**

(Wartburg.) (Mid-December 1521.) 4)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther agrees to postpone the printing of the book against the
archbishop of Mainz, but reproaches Spalatin for his timidity; one must
finally act for the sake of the gospel. He sends a document to be
printed and asks that the missing sheets of Melanchthon\'s *loci be
sent* to him.

4\) Since Luther wrote this letter after his return from his stay in
Wittenberg, which lasted until December 10, and has already received an
answer to No. 440, it cannot be dated before the middle of the month.

**368** Letters from the year 1521. No. 440a. 441.369

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 221 (incorrectly placed in 1524); by
De Wette, vol. II, p. 110 (beginning of Decembers) and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. Ill, p. 254. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 910.

Hail! See, so that it does not seem as if I had not granted you
anything, my dear Spalatin, I allow that the publication of the booklet
against the Mainz 1) is postponed, but I want you to hand it over to
Philip, whom I have instructed to eradicate what is too sharp. For I
absolutely want the letter 2) to be sent to him, and I will send a new
one to him by my own messenger. I am satisfied that you write about his
future sermon, and you do well that you do not judge presumptuously, but
you do not do well that you do not finally believe me. I know the
thoughts of Satan, my dear Spalatin, but nothing against the thoughts of
the Lord; yes, I know that there will be another trick of Satan\'s,
which would like to attack us with greater! I know that there will be
another of Satan\'s tricks that would like to attack us with a greater
pretense than this one, and I will not even fear him in this way. For
the Lord lives, whom you, as befits courtiers, do not believe, if he
does not arrange his works according to your will, so that zero belief
is no longer necessary. In this court, nothing is so offensive to me as
unbelief, which neither believes that what happens is done by the
counsel of God alone, nor approves of anything unless there is hope that
it can be accomplished by our powers. So far, nothing has been
accomplished by so many experiences and examples in this matter alone.
You write that the priests were let go by those, as if this letting go
would not be seven times more cruel than imprisonment, if they had
killed them right away, since they forced the poor people to take a
false oath and to deny the truth of God. Namely, these are the people of
whom you want to boast that they have returned to the good path, and of
whom you expect

1\) \"Against the Abgod at Halle.\" Spalatin did not send it to
Melanchthon, however, but kept it back.

2\) Luther did not know that Melanchthon, to whom it had come from
Spalatin, had meanwhile sent the letter to the archbishop.

that they might one day want to preach the gospel from the heart.

I ask you, if it is the truth that the celibate state and monasticism is
condemned by God, as it undoubtedly is, why should it not be free to do
the opposite and follow it? Or should one continue to argue about the
words of God alone and always refrain from putting them into practice?
But what am I telling a fairy tale to a deaf person? For your mind does
not believe, which is too courtly, that is, too wise and too fearful. I
will believe that the bishops will preach the gospel when I have seen
that they have given up their bishoprics and devoted themselves to the
word alone, and I will not believe it sooner. In the meantime, I will
not fear the counsel of Satan, who blasphemes this office with
blasphemous pretenses. I see that it is finally necessary to break
through the counsels of men in this matter, by which I have been
hindered in many ways up to now, because they vainly fear that heaven
will invade. If nothing else is to be done than what we have done so
far, nothing else should have been taught. I also send the German
exhortation, 3) which I would like to see published as soon as possible,
to counter those crude and unruly boasters of our name. This quatern G
of the Methodus of Philippus I have too much, but I lack at the end the
three last quaterns *Q. R. S*. which you will complete in due time. You
will hand over the Greek testament to Philip, and be well with the whole
court, which Christ finally wants to make believers in uncolored faith.
Amen.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 441.**

Wartburg. December 18, 1521.

**To Joh. Lang in Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2554, annex, no. 82.

3\) St. Louis ed. vol. x, 360.

**370** Letters from the year 1521. no. 442. **371**

**No. 442.**

Wartburg. December 20, 1521.

**To Wenc. Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther seeks to convince him of the nullity of the monastic vows and of
the impossibility of preventing the departure of many monks from the
monastery, and wants him to declare publicly the freedom to leave. Of
his presence in Wittenberg and his works.

Handwritten in the Börnersche Sammlung in Leipzig; in the Dresden
Archives, Locat 10,299, Bl. 12a (with the date: *fer. 4ta post Luciae*
\[Dec. 18\]; a simultaneous copy somehow procured for Duke Georg with
abbreviatory notes) and *Cod. Seidel*. in Dresden, p. 351. Printed by-
Schütze, vol. II, p. 41; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 116 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 257.

To the worthy and Christian man, Wenceslaus Link, Vicar of the
Augustinian Society, his superior in Christ.

Hail and glory to your Lord! My dear Wenceslaus, that you liked my
Catharinus, I am glad about it, because I give a lot to your judgment;
but see that I may act with you as one says: He who admits the prefix of
a good conclusion, cannot deny what follows from it. But that which
follows from it is that which you now see in this monastery. For if it
is contrary to the gospel to make sins from the use of food, place,
person, time, and other things: where then will the vows, the
monasteries, the rules, the statutes remain? For all these things are
contrary to the gospel, and yet it is as true that it is contrary to the
gospel to make sins in these things, as it is certain that the gospel is
the gospel. What therefore wilt thou do? whom canst thou compel to obey?
whom, having left, canst thou call back? whom canst thou accuse as an
apostate, when thou shalt teach, as thou art guilty, that there is
liberty here, and no sins? You may desire counsel from me; rather, you
do not need my counsel. For I am sure that you will not do or suffer
anything against the gospel, even if all monasteries would have to be
destroyed. However, I am displeased with this departure from the gospel.

1\) \"Vicar\" set by us according to the variants given by De
Wette-Seidemaun, vol. VI, p. 538, note 5 from the Dresden manuscript.

Noise of which I have heard. For they should part from each other with
mutual consent and in peace, unless this is the punishment for a vow
made in an evil and ungodly way, that it should be dissolved with
disorder because it was entered into with ungodly concord. But that they
could be recalled, I do not see for right and good au, although they
have not acted right and good. Nor do I believe that you could prevent
it if, in addition, there should be some who want to leave; therefore it
would be best for you to see to it at this imperial diet of yours 2)
that, after the example of Cyrus,^3)^ that freedom be given by public
edict to those who want to leave, that no one be expelled, that no one
be held back by force. But you should remain in the service of Babylon
like Jeremiah for the time being \[Jer. 40, 6\], because I will also
remain in this clothing and in this way of life, unless the world
becomes a different one.

I do not see what you could do differently here. For I do not want you
to encourage ungodliness or to be a leader in ungodliness. When you read
my booklet on the vows, you will see my opinion. I was in Wittenberg,
but I was not allowed to go to the monastery, 4) so that I would not be
betrayed. Therefore, you must dare something here, since you see that
the time and the work of God demand it. I confess, it is unheard of, but
at the same time also insurmountable. I have been convicted by vivid
things (*demonstrative*). You have Philip Melanchthon and others whom
you can consult. For it pleased me that you held this meeting in
Wittenberg. I do not know where our dearest father Staupitz may be. But
I hear that he is a courtier at the Salzburg idol 5), which I do not
begrudge the very good man. You will greet him. For I believe, from my
books he will

2\) Link, as vicar of the order, had called together a convent of the
Augustinians, which gathered in Wittenberg around Epiphany 1522.

3\) Ezra, Cap. 1.

4\) That is, I was not allowed to do anything in the monastery regarding
this matter.

5\) Cardinal Matthew Lang.

**372** Letters from 1521. no. 442. 443. **373**

to know who I am and what I am dealing with. Now I am working on the
Postille and on the translation of the Bible into German. Farewell. From
the desert, on Friday after St. Lucy the Virgin \[Dec. 20\].

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 443.**

Halle. December 20 and 21, 1521.

**Capito to Luther.**

Capito wrote that he had another way of serving the Gospel than Luther,
namely, that he had worked with his prince over and over again so that
nothing decisive was done against the person of Luther and the Gospel.
He encouraged his prince to read the Scriptures and some of Luther\'s
books, which strengthened him in the truth. He excuses and glosses over
the behavior of his lord. About the marriage case of the priest at
Vatterode in Mansfeld. About the kind and gracious answer of the Elector
to Luther\'s letter, to whom one must be gentle and not challenge like a
gladiator to a fight.

Manuscript in Bern in *Cod. Spalatini* == *Epp*. *variae* XVII, 4°, fol.
8 a. and 7 b and in Strasbourg in Thes. Printed in Krafft, Briefe und
Documente, p. 35 and 38 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 259.
Luther replied on January 17, 1522.

Greetings! I have not written to you for a long time, firstly because I
did not want to confront this course, which I would like to be as happy
as possible; secondly, because I have adopted a way of promoting things
that is different from yours, which you are certainly quite capable of
asserting your position in open combat and displaying a fierceness of
spirit that no one can resist. That is why I thought I could come to
your aid with mines. And indeed, something seems to be in place. For
Erasmus, who has a fine nose and a sharp mind, and who is very
sympathetic to the affairs of our religion, although he has a different
kind of judgment, publicly advised at Cologne 1) that I should see to it
that the matter was postponed; victory lies in the recognition of the
matter, which requires time. I have carefully followed this advice and
have so far worked through my prince to ensure that nothing is decided
against you too soon. What have I not tried in Cologne, what have I not
endured?

1\) In November 1520 after the coronation of Carl V at Aachen.

by whichever means I could come to the aid of your troops. And with this
I have not earned great thanks from the Romans, whose counsels and
undertakings, as I believe, did not fall by without common benefit
through these diligent efforts. How often, moreover, did my prince, the
Mainzer, at Worms, while it was being discussed whether to exterminate
you, sometimes by hesitating, sometimes by advising something quite
different, bring it about that the minds of most decided in favor of
postponing the matter. Although he has often gone astray by certain
artifices, because he is a prince and inexperienced in the text of the
Holy Scriptures, he has nevertheless always been brought back to the
right path without much reluctance. But in the meantime, while I was
with him, he tasted something of the Holy Scriptures, not without fruit,
and even instilled in me the not at all vain hope that with him there
would one day be something more decisive. I will say no more, lest you
think that I am either inventing something or expressing myself too
ambitiously, since I desire nothing so much as that the leniency of
Christ should prevail in general against the tyranny of men. I have left
the most substantial studies 2) I have adopted a way of life that is
foreign to my customs, so that I could thus remove the obstacles from
the way for you who walk godly. And it did not turn out unhappily at
all. For everyone who knows can testify to me how often the Cardinal of
Mainz has stood on our side, how often he has aroused the displeasure of
the Romans, yes, how often they in their writings have rebuked him in a
hidden way, but me openly, as if he, influenced by me, was protecting
them too indolently. I have - what should I hide it from you - acted
cunningly, but godly, and used human diligence to promote the service of
faith. By the way, in order to obtain such things, I have often promised
my prince that no one of our order would be the least bit repugnant to
him, that not all should accept with open hands the confession and the
sincerity of his faith, if only he would continue to understand the
purpose of the thing rightly and make an effort to express it in life,
since much is at stake that no one should think that vain things are
preferable to true ones. For in the meantime he has appeared as if he
were too attached to ceremonies.

On the other hand, I persuaded him and drove the man to read the
Scriptures, esp.

2\) in Basel.

**374**

Letters from the year 1521. No. 443.

**375**

He has already had these things in his hands for eight days and is
occupied with them; as far as I can see, they promote his Christian
judgment quite nicely. He has already had these things in his hands for
eight days and is occupied with them; as far as I can see, he is
beautifully encouraged in his Christian judgment by them. But after the
return to Halle, he immediately, because he was not accustomed to what
he had read, without my knowledge, I do not know what he did with regard
to indulgences 1), which I had only learned late; but nevertheless I
opposed it so that he was undoubtedly moved by remorse over his deed.
Also, as far as I know, he has done nothing from that day on to get the
indulgence going again, but rather, through reading and daily
conversations, he draws more and more the light of truth, as he is by no
means an ignorant man. I am happy about your letter. What I have already
done, you now accomplish through this letter. His mind will be
fortified, but I expect it to become exceedingly firm after he has
become accustomed to stronger food, and nothing stands in the way of
this except that he is a man, as he says, not inaccessible to flattery,
because he is a born prince and a young man. I see that you have sought
nothing else than that he should not retrieve the buried indulgence,
lest he should deceive the people by his prestige. Therefore, you work
very beautifully with me, and I thank you. Only I ask that you do not do
something careless, that you do not heckle the one who continues well,
that you do not deter the one who starts fine, but rather continues, by
insults, that you do not miss something out of zeal and diligence, and
give me at least some small things, if he has any, and exercise leniency
against them for a while, as those that are to be improved next, if, I
say, there will be hope that he will become better. How righteously he
insists with me that the Christian sermons should be heard! By his
command, the Gospel of Matthew is freely preached here from the day he
stopped the indulgences. In his own words, he refused the monks who
sought permission to preach against you, even though they were
instructed to do so by papal bulls. In my absence, he said: \"If you
preach the gospel, without anyone

1\) On Sunday after the Nativity of Mary \[Sept. 15\], Cardinal Albrecht
had the sanctuaries of the collegiate church in Halle displayed and
proclaimed an indulgence to the visitors.

2\) Gellius 14, 4, 3.

I will not be against them, but I will never be an inducer of those who
speak of strife. Then, when they stopped in an impetuous way, he had me
answer them in the same way, but a little later. Such things have
happened innumerable times, of which the physician Stromer,^3)^ the
godly and extremely devoted man, knows a good part. All this is proof to
me that the cause of this error, if he still harbors one, is the
insolence of the flatterers, whose enmity against the gospel I have to
suffer, even though they cleverly pretend otherwise. But in the meantime
such things occur, which I do not approve of. How now? Are we out of
this world, that we want to wipe away all stains with impetuous remedies
at once? One must close one\'s eyes to small things and direct one\'s
mind to the truth, then what is wrong will fall away of its own accord.
I therefore urgently request, even for the sake of Christ, that you
handle the matter in and for itself, without reference either to me or
to another, the prince, so that the one who has long since been attacked
will have more strength left to resist. Consider the judgment of the
common people, who have a disgust for the bravery and insolence in
speech. ^4)^ You may also be moved by my danger if it seems to you that
something must be added to friendship in this matter, since I have
promised the prince all security with regard to you and have brought it
about by the fact that something was not decided against you by the
Germans until late, and then that the decision did not come to any
force, so that your cause gained strength through void edicts. For it
would have been full of danger if these people had fought the cause too
spitefully by force sooner than it had become known to the people other
than orally. Through trembling, your followers\' courage grew and
returned, which, as I had foreseen, would occur. This I write casually,
as it were, no less sure of your faith than of your spirit, because I
know that you will interpret everything for the best. For I seek nothing
but the prosperity of the Gospel and the safety of my innocent prince,
lest in the meantime a union of the great should finally come about,
and, as hitherto in pretense, all freedom to write should now be
seriously cut off, which I fear will happen,

3\) Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1168, note 1.

4\) Luther expresses this in his reply of Jan. 17.

1522: \"The common people are annoyed when you bite so hard.

**376** Letters from 1521. no. 443. 444. 444a.

**377**

will happen, not without the infinite shedding of Christian blood. If
you now have something with my prince, you may communicate it privately
to me and to him, and I will gently bring him back on the right path,
for through reading he has become more compliant and is becoming more so
day by day.

With regard to married priests, many things are suspicious to me, and I
fear such cases very much, as if they were festering, especially that
those who have entered the marriage state with the consent of the
people, after perhaps living badly with each other or having grown tired
of the discomforts of the marriage state, might divorce again by force
of their superiors, and therefore have not far-fetched excuses for their
attitudes on both sides, which would provoke the people against us. If a
few good and steady men would dare the matter first or otherwise see a
suitable way, I would indeed hope more for success. But with regard to
our priest in Vatterode 1) (*Vaterrode*) look at the matter like this:
He took a certain whore, who had strayed from Switzerland, to live with
him, and since he had a love affair with her, the Grasen, incited by a
certain nobleman, who was very hostile to him, expelled him from their
territory, where he resides. The man defended himself, saying that he
had her as his wife and that it was wrong for any power to separate
those who were bound by God. Soon they showed him to my prince that he
should punish him as a pernicious innovator, and with such urgent words
that they finally drove him to it against his will and in spite of his
refusal. But now he has become free and is again applying for the
priesthood, which I hope we will soon obtain for him under some good
pretext (*ingenio*). Finally, so that I may fully reveal myself to you:
if the prince does not increase in heart and spirit, then

1\) On July 2, 1521, Balthasar Zeiger from Oschatz (inscribed in 1503)
had boldly defended himself in a letter against Hans von Trotte, Count
Hoyer of Mansfeld\'s marshal, because of his marriage. Count Hoyer
himself reported this to the Elector of Mainz, and Zeiger was thrown
into prison until he recognized his error and offered to amend. Through
the intercession of many pious people, he was released from prison, but
had to swear a vow of reconciliation at Calbe on Nov. 4. The chancellor
of the Elector, Laurentius Hoch, and Capito were present at the notarial
execution of the vow. Zeiger, however, took his wife back and had to
leave Mansfeld. Later (since 1523) we find him again as a preacher in
Belgern. See Luther\'s letter to the Elector John of Sept. 10, 1527.

Henceforth, there will be nothing to cause me to torture myself almost
to death with this morose court life, and I will no longer serve him for
four months, even if I serve this expectation as a desperate one for a
little while. Yes, I will soon devote myself completely to the holy
scriptures again, which I now only enjoy in passing, looking at them as
it were through a veil. For it is not given to the heart that is weary
with the turmoil of business to enjoy it fully and completely for
consolation. Fare well and love us again in the bond of love; we desire
no further favor; and answer through Melanchthon when he has time. Given
at Halle, on the 20th of December, Anno 1521.

Your devoted

W. Fabricius Capito.

Postscript. The prince has answered your letter; if he were a private
citizen, he could not have done it more kindly or submissively. It will
be up to us to show a not in the least insolent disposition, so that we
do not appear to seek and excite battle in the attitude of a gladiator.
I have said many things to Jonas that I thought were relevant to the
matter. Your love will take it for the best and in the meantime try to
answer us, so that I can help with all my power for the best. Fare well.
On the day of St. Thomas \[Dec. 21\] Anno 1521.

From the heart your Capito.

**No. 444.**

Hall. December 21, 1521.

**Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz, to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 552.

**No. 444a .**

**1521 To an unnamed person.**

This writing is in all previous editions after process of the
Wittenberger, Bd. IX, Bl. 304, in the year 1529 set, but it belongs
(Erlanger Briefw., Bd. Ill, S.448) to the year 1521, to which it is
assigned by the manuscript 8. 22 of the Königsberg library, which was
already completed in 1523. The locations find St. Louiser Ausg., Bd. X,
Vorrede, Col. 147 given, but it is to be added here that the 142nd Psalm
is found with De Wette, Bd. VI, p. 110.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1732. - There Col. 1735, line 2 read: on
the blessed side. Thinks the soul 2c. The same Col. 1736 f. does not
include the sayings from the first book of Moses and from Zechariah;
these were first added by the Jena edition.

**378**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 445 to 449.

**379**

**No. 445.**

(Wartburg.) January 13, 1622.

**To Amsdorf.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2557, annex, no. 85.

**No. 446.**

(Wartburg.) January 13, 1522.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2599, annex, no. 103.

**No. 447.**

Wartburg. January 17, 1522.

**To Wolfgang Fabricius Capito.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 554.

**No. 448.**

Wartburg. January 17, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2606, annex, no.104.

**No. 449.**

(Wartburg.) January 22, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther rebukes Spalatin for being unjust and harsh to a certain
\"Creuze\" who wanted to exchange his parish for another so that he
would not have to say mass.

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p.76b; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 246
(wrongly dated: 10. Sept.\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. III, p.287.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 800.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have seen your letter, which you wrote to
Amsdorf about Creuzen\'s 1) priesthood 2c., and I am very saddened, not
so much for his sake as for yours, that you are so taken in by courtly
sentiments and immersed in them, that you think and write so little
Christianly about your brother. You say that you will henceforth be more
careful and do not want to interfere with other people\'s inconstancy,
and I do not know what great things, so that you have forced me to write
this to you, certainly out of a brotherly heart.

1\) Michael Creuzen. See vol. XV, appendix, no. 61.

I ask you to receive me with a brotherly heart for the sake of Christ.
But if not, show it to me; and I shall be more dumb than a fish.

If you consider the matter rightly, you know that man is not evil, then
also that he is not guided in what he does in the change of the
priesthood by recklessness nor inconstancy, but by the highest necessity
and the power of conscience (which is the greatest in all creation),
unless you do not know with how great tyranny and impiety such
priesthoods are possessed and are to be possessed, and with what
difficulty they are to be obtained. I confess that he obtained them
before through us without knowing what he was applying for; now that he
has recognized the matter and understood the danger, he jumps back and
thinks of changing what you should approve, praise and extol with the
greatest willingness; and you accuse and condemn him with such great
impetuosity of mind that you promise that henceforth you will serve no
one. Because you think and teach like this in the court, it would be
better if you were eternally mute. Here comes to light what I always
suspected at this court; now I understand why he rejected Pfaffenbeck so
completely. 2) But there is hidden that secret evil of revenge and the
ignorance of the long-suffering found in all of Christ and highly
praised in all of Paul\'s letters, which is a slowness to take revenge,
even if mau, provoked to it, would have just cause. Or do you think that
this is not revenge, if you do no harm, but still deprive the brotherly
service, so that he either cannot overcome the evil or cannot ward it
off, which he could avoid through your help? My dear Spalatin, do not be
mistaken: God cannot be mocked, not even by the court, however good a
hypocrite it may be. For even you did not want anyone to do to you what
you intend to do to this man, and you are now sinning against the whole
law and love; lest I allow you to be lost in this sin, brotherly concern
surely compels me to admonish you. Your glory is not fine!

2l It was a matter of money matters in which Pfaffenbeck was in the
right.

**380**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 449.

**381**

But (you say) the sacrilege and the inconstancy must be chastised, lest
there be occasion for an evil example. Quite right; but first it must be
seen whether it is wickedness or rather godliness that is to be
chastised, lest there also be occasion for an evil example to punish
innocence and godliness. But here godliness is at the bottom, because he
does not dare to take upon himself and administer the ungodly nature of
the masses. Now even if it is sacrilege, it must of course be chastised
in such a way that it is chastised and corrected, not that it remains
unchastised and the brother is abandoned in his misfortune. But if you
carry on the matter here with such great severity, you will not only
deprive the man of the priesthood, but also deliver him into the hands
of his superiors (*parentibus*) to his greatest danger and utmost harm;
in short, you will have ruined him. But thou, I beseech thee, wilt thou
dare to call this a chastened sacrilege, who teachest the gospel? I do
not expect such a thing from you. But suppose you could not do
otherwise, for such is the custom of the court and the manner of the
prince. I hear that; now what do you do as an evangelist at court? For
you must work toward this with the word that this custom and such a
manner is not there, or at least that it is there for you without an
evil conscience, that is, that you denounce the sin of the wicked and
save your soul, as Ezekiel Cap. 3, 19. You know with what powerful words
you courtiers have so often punished my sharpness; but now see, I ask
you what is to be thought of you, whether it is not more wholesome to
treat ungodliness sharply, even with many people\'s annoyance, than to
flatter it, so that peace and tranquility may be preserved. If then you
are so patient in chastising the attitudes of the court, which are
incomparably worse than even the inconstancy of this man, will you not
be found to be one who judges unjustly? For I do not expect that you
would thunder about the court or about a misstep of the prince as you
thunder about the inconstancy of this man. Why then are you different
against this one than against that one? Only because you do not have the

You should not look at the person who serves you, but at the person.
Therefore, either you must also receive this one with the patience and
kindness with which you receive the missteps at court, or you should
know that Christ has been rejected by you.

O wretched people, who in such a way deceive ourselves with human
pleasing and false appearances, and do not realize the secret omission
of Christian love. The cause of the brethren we act coldly, even
ungodly. Why is that? Because we treat it as if it were someone else\'s,
not ours. But love, on the other hand, cares for what is foreign as for
what is its own, as it is written \[Gal. 6:2\], \"Bear one another\'s
burdens,\" and again \[Phil. 2:4\], \"Look not every man on his own, but
on the things of others.\" Love also chastises error, but does not
abandon it. Certainly, this peculiar evil of this court has often
annoyed me, that it does not harm those who have once given offense (in
which it has the fame of not being bloodthirsty), but nevertheless rages
so persistently by withdrawing help that it would be better to suffer a
bloodthirsty man from time to time than one who withdraws. Whoever may
praise this, I condemn it as contrary to Christian long-suffering. See
to it, therefore, that you do not, by wriggling out of foreign
inconstancy (carefully, as it seems to you), entangle yourself on the
other side in foreign cruelty (carelessly, as it seems to me).

God would have you receive this with a brotherly and grateful heart,
that you may see how great and glorious a thing it is to instruct the
wicked and to act upon the word of God, and how few there are who
undertake this purely and freely. I therefore ask, if you can help this
Creuzen (*Creytz*), that you not only not be offended, but also take
care that the prince does not become too ungracious against him. Then,
if it is possible, that he exchange this priestly position for another
one in which it is not necessary to say mass. to say mass; but if you
cannot, that you receive the man gently and graciously. For we are
brothers, and he has done nothing wrong, but intends to act godly and
Christian, wherein

**382**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 449 to 461. **383**

we owe it to him to help him. If you do not want to help, I will have
fulfilled my duty to you and to him through this letter, and my
conscience will be saved. See to it that you teach Christ, acknowledge
Christ in your brother, and act accordingly. Fare well in the Lord, who
enlightens and enkindles you in his knowledge, amen. Wednesday after
Marcelli \[22 Jan.\] 1522. Martin Luther.

**No. 45 0**

**To the Wittenbergers.**

The document, which the Erl. Briefw. inserts here with the time
determination: \"end of February 1522\", is [not]{.underline} a letter,
but a Summarium of the first five Sermons, which Luther preached at
Wittenberg the 9th to 13th March 1522.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1979, no. 641. - The locations of this
writing are given in our edition, vol. XX, col. 6, note.

**No. 451.**

(Wartburg.) (End of February 1522.)

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1984, no. 643.

**No. 452.**

(Lochau.) (End of February 1522.)

**Instruction of the Elector Friedrich for Johann Oswald.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1985, no. 644.

**No. 453.**

Borna. March 5, 1522.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1989, no. 645.

**No. 455.**

Wittenberg. 7 Mar; 1522.

**To the Elector Friedrich zu Lochau.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 1998 ff, No.648 and 649.

**No. 456.**

(Wittenberg.) March 7, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

This letter is [spurious]{.underline}, as we have already noted in the
20th volume, Introduction, p. 16, note 1; it is a part of the letter to
Nic. Hausmann of March 17, 1522, which we have included in Vol. XV,
2011, No. 658. We refer to it here because it is found in all previous
editions, namely in the Wittenberg (1569), vol. IX, p. 146; in the Jena
(1585), vol. II, p. 71 b; in the Altenburg, vol. II, p. 92; in the
Leipziger, vol. XVIII, p. 273; in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 112; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 145 and in Walch,-Bd. XXI, 14. See the introduction
to No. 658 of the 15th volume of our edition.

**No. 457.**

Wittenberg. March 9, 1522.

**Here. Schürf an den Churfürsten Friedrich.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1995, no. 647.

**No. 458.**

Lochau. March 11, 1522.

**Letter from Elector Frederick to Hier. Schurs.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2002, No. 650.

**No. 459.**

Wittenberg. March 12, 1522.

**To the Elector Friedrich in Lochau.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2005, No. 652.

**No. 460.**

(Wittenberg.) March 13, 1522.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2003, No. 651.

**No. 454.**

Lochau. March 7, 1522.

**Instruction of the Elector Friedrich to D. Hier. Prospect.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1994, no. 646.

**No. 461 .**

Wittenberg. March 15, 1522.

**Here. Schürf an den Churfürsten Friedrich in Lochau.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2008, No. 653.

**384**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 462 to 469.

385

**No. 462.**

(Wittenberg.) (Mid-March 1522.)

**To Hartmuth in Kronberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1662, no. 507.

**No. 463.**

Wittenberg. March 17, 1522.

**To Nic. Househusband.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2011, no. 658.

**No. 464.**

Wittenberg. March 18, 1522.

**To Mc. Gerbet in Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2013, No. 659.

**No. 465.**

Wittenberg. March 18, 1522.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2226.

**No 466.**

Wittenberg. March 19, 1522.

**To Wenc. Link.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2609, annex, no. 107.

**No. 467.**

(Wittenberg.) March 24, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends several letters to him asking if he may dedicate a paper to
his Wartburgwirth.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 107 and in *Cod*. *Jen*. a, fol. 136. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 52; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 158 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 317. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 771.

To the evangelist of Christ, Georg Spalatin, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Hail! I am sending you these letters from Hartmann von Kronberg 1) for
the sake of your

1\) These will be the \"Uier Christliche schrifft des Edle vnd Ernuesten
Hartmundts von Cronenberg\" 2c., which were published in Wittenberg in
1522. These are printed in our edition, Vol. XV, No. 503 to 506. From
this letter it follows with certainty that the remark of the Wittenberg
and Jena editions given in the introduction to No. 503 is wrong, and
that Luther was not the author.

you send them back to us, copied by another hand, with your advice that
they should be printed. For ours have despised them too much, so that I
cannot well publish them if I do not take your name and your advice as a
pretext.

You also see the letter of Duke Albrecht, 2) the Margrave. If something
of such books should reach the prince, then inform me about it and send
it back. Read also the letter of Duke Carl,3) for the sake of the
attitude, and send it back; likewise the letter of Duke Johann
Friedrich. By the way, I want your advice. In my desert, I have decided
to dedicate a booklet of the statutes of men to my host, 4) because he
wanted to be informed about it by me; but I fear that the place of my
imprisonment would be betrayed by it. 5) And so write, so that I can
send him your judgment, if you should advise against it, and I will
attribute it to another. I wish to write to him also and send to him
what is printed, if you had a messenger to him. Farewell and pray for
me. On the Monday after Oculi \[March 24\] 1522.

Martin Luther.

**No. 468.**

Wittenberg. March 25, 1522.

**To Johann Heß in Oels.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2015, no. 662.

**No. 469.**

Wittenberg. March 26, 1522.

**To Nic. Hausmann in Zwickau.**

This letter contains the answer to some questions and advice regarding
the celebration of Holy Communion.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Manuscript in the
Zwickau Rathsschulbibliothek XXXIV ; in *Cod. Goth. A* 122, fol. 20 b;
in the Franciscaneum in Zerbst, Ms. 26, fol 6b; in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod.
Aug.* 19, 15, tob 152b; there *Cod. Aug.* 20, 5, fol. 207b

2\) of Prussia.

3\) Duke Carl of Münsterberg in Silesia.

4\) \"To be Shunned by Human Doctrine,\" St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 598.

5\) Therefore, the dedication was omitted.

**386** Letters from the year

1522\. no. 469. 470. **387**

and in the Hamburg City Library, Ms. 46,4, 86. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 52 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 160 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 320. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 772.

To Nicolaus Hausmann, evangelist in Zwickau, his brother in Christ.

Hail! This man, your messenger, my dear Nicolaus, has submitted to me in
your name questions of funerals, of confessions, of sermons of the
Minorites and their privileges (*privilegiis*). Above all, my advice is
that you attack and fight all this with words alone, and let those cry
out and blaspheme, deceiving and seducing those who deceive them. For
this is what Christ and the apostles did: they let go those who could
not keep them by word. By the way, it is the duty of the authorities to
forbid those things which they do not like. And they are obliged to obey
them for the sake of the common peace, to which all privileges must give
way, yes, also help to it. They have nothing to say against it, since
their mouths can be stopped up with the privileges by the gospel, since
it says \[Eph. 4:3. f\], \"Be diligent to keep the bond of peace.\" But
since your part acts what is gospel, but their part pursues human
things, they must give up theirs for the sake of peace. Now if they will
not hear the Senate, let them shout and rave, and turn the people away
from them as much as is possible, as Peter said in Acts, Cap. 2, 40:
\"Let these naughty people help you.\"

About the innovation in other things I have written to you before, and
now I write that you may follow our institution at Wittenberg if it
pleases you; you will hear about it shortly. 1) For we have made both
forms free, but only for those who are worthy and stand in fear. 2)

1\) This was done by the writing: \"Von beider Gestalt des Sacraments zu
nehmen und anderer Neuerung\" (St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, 62), which
appeared in mid-April.

2\) *et timorati fuerint*. Thus read all editions and all manuscripts
with the exception of the Zerbst, which offers *honoruti.* Burkhardt, p.
44, states that the original reads donorati; the Erl. Briefw. doubts
this.- Perhaps: *onerati*?

We leave everything else to its use, and each one to his own mind. But
we act by the word alone, teaching what the Gospel says about the Mass
and Communion, and not forcing anyone to abstain from it or to celebrate
it. Let the conscience of every one see to it that he keep himself
according to the Gospel, until all grow and all become evangelical. For
in this matter the people must be governed, not according to what the
gospel contains, but according to how the gospel is apprehended; for not
all apprehend the gospel, therefore not all can be governed in an
evangelical manner. But all must be taught evangelically until all grasp
it. In the meantime, others who do not yet grasp it must be carried.
Greet Mayor Mühlpfort, and tell him in my name that he should stand by
the Gospel. I would have written to him if I were not overwhelmed with
many writings. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Wednesday after
Oculi \[March 26\] 1522.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 470.**

(Wittenberg.) March 28, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends letters and books to be forwarded to the main mason of
Wartburg Castle; likewise an intercession for Christoph Pfaffenbeck,
which he asks to be handed over to the Elector.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 108 and in *Cod. Jen* a,

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 53 V; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 172 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 321. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 774.

His brother in Christ, Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court.

Hail in the Lord! As I wrote the other day, 3) I am now sending letters
and books to be sent to my hermit; you will see to it, as you promised,
that they are brought there. And this intercession for Pfaffenbeck you
will faithfully hand over to the prince, and help the poor man, so that
he may receive from the court his

3\) in No. 467. The \"hermit\" is Hans von Berlepsh, the castle captain
of the Wartburg.

**388**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 470. 471.

**389**

I do not want to get a livelihood. For I am very sorry for him, and I do
not believe that he is making light of his distress, for he is doing his
work for me with such warm words. Behold, God, who casteth down the
mighty from their seats, and humbleth the proud, that they come to
nought; but he will also raise up the humble again, if he believe. 1)
You are well, and pray for me also. The Lord be with you, Amen. Friday
after Oculi \[March 28\] 1522. Yours, Martin Luther.

Be mindful that the prince, since he is able, is obliged to help such
people. For love prescribes such things, and makes us servants and
debtors even to our enemies, as Paul confesses \[Rom. 1:14\] that he is
a debtor both to the wise and to the unwise. For it is not enough \"to
do no wrong,\" but \"to do well\" is also required, and \"to do him his
right\" not in a casual manner. 2)

**No. 471**

(Wittenberg.) (March 28, 1522.) 3)

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Intercession for Christoph Pfaffenbeck.

This letter is found twice in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p.
189; in the Jena edition, namely (1586) vol. II, p. 354 and (1553) vol.
Ill, p.435.; in the Altenburger, vol. II, p. 491; in the Leipziger, vol.
XXII, p. 548; in Walch, vol. XXI, 33; in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 129
and in De Wette, vol. II, p. 173.

Favor and peace in Christo, Amen, and my most humble services, most
noble, highborn prince, most gracious lord! I do not like to trouble
Your Lordship with intercession and intercession for other people; the
pleasure, if I have it, I would like to do without.

1\) Aurifaber, De Wette and Walch have inserted the postscript here.

2\) *non requiritur in the* editions is a conjecture for non *requitur*,
which should be in the original. We have conjicited *non segniter*
instead, since the other conjecture, \"to do him his right [is not
required,]{.underline}\" does not satisfy us.

3\) The Wittenberg and Jena editions place this letter in the year 1523,
but there can be no doubt that it is the intercessory letter to the
Elector mentioned in the previous letter to Spalatin, and must therefore
be given the same date.

Necessity presses and love compels us to do so. I have previously
written from my desert 4) to your churfl. N. \[Pfaffenbeck\], who has
asked me so far out of necessity, but has finally come to me again; now
he asks me again so piteously that I am moved, and his misery is
heartily painful to me, so that I have immediately become scanty in
writing to your church. I have been forced to write to your honorable
Grace, because I did not think that there would be such need.

I do not want to be right with your Lord. I will let it be, he deserves
it, he is worth even more aggravation, I know well that the mind of your
electoral grace is sincere. Grace\'s mind is sincere not to do injustice
to anyone. Again, I also know that no prince can be so pious, so wise,
that he or his officials will not do someone a disservice. David was the
core of all princes on earth, nor does he do wrong to poor Mephibosheth
by showing off Ziba, yet he thinks he has not done wrong \[2 Sam. 16, 1.
ff\]. A prince must consider that his rule is mixed with injustice, even
he who has it least: therefore he also needs to show the more mercy and
charity against it, so that the mercy against the judgment keeps the
protection, as St. Jacob says \[Cap. 2,13\].

Therefore, I fall at the feet of your electorate. I therefore fall at
your feet, and humbly beg your honorable Grace to have mercy on this
poor man. Please have mercy on this poor man and feed him to the end of
his old age. It is never enough to let him perish and go begging; for I
feel that poverty hurts him so much that he may finally lose his senses.
And E. churfl. Gn. can easily help him with a table, food and drink, or
otherwise. God has even more snow mountains, 5) that E. churfl. Gn.
Principality must not worry that it will become poor from spending so
much, and has not become poor from it until now. *Quia verum est, date
et dabitur vobis* \[Luc. 6,38.\], where *date* \[prayer\] is rich, there
*dabitur* \[so you will be given\] is still much richer, and to whom
much is given, from him much will be demanded.

Your Elector. Grace should be certain that

4\) This letter does not exist.

5\) In Schneeberg there are rich silver mines, which in 1520 produced a
particularly large yield.

**390** Letters from the year 1522. No. 471 to 475. **391**

I will not leave the man like this, I will beg for him myself, and if
that does not help, I will also rob and steal, mostly from the Elector
of Saxony, which I find closest; because E. churf. G. owes me to feed
him. Therefore, I ask that E. C. F. G. also graciously hear me in this,
so that it is not necessary for me to steal and take; for I still want
to be unhanged by E. C. F. G., if I already robbed all the saints 1) of
a treasure in such distress.

Such my poor or foolish letter, I humbly ask, E. C. F. Gn. will not take
it ungraciously. My heart is in God, as much as I feel his. The Almighty
God spare E. churf. Gn. healthy and blessed according to His mercy,
Amen.

E. churfl. Gn.

subservient servant Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 472.**

Wittenberg. March 28, 1522.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2596, annex, no. 101.

**No. 473.**

Wittenberg. March 30, 1522.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2555, annex, no. 83.

**No. 474.**

(Wittenberg.) March 30, 1522.

**To Caspar Güttel, Augustinian prior in Eisleben.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2016, No. 663.

**No. 475.**

(Wittenberg.) April 12, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther fears that his use of Pfaffenbeck has harmed him; he has another
petition for the pastor at Lochau. About Jakob Probst\'s case. Of
Luther\'s negotiation with the new prophets. Finally, interpretation of
two Bible passages for Spalatin.

1\) This is an allusion to the All Saints\' Monastery and the relics of
the Castle Church in Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. Ill and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 139. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 57d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 178 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 327. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 775.

To Georg Spalatin, ducal evangelist, his superior in the Lord.

Hail! I wonder very much what Pfaffenheck\'s fault may be that he has
made the prince so hard against him. I also suspect that perhaps my use
of him was detrimental, that the prince wanted to make it known through
this universal sign that my use of him was unpleasant. Therefore, you
see to it that I find out about this. Henceforth I will not burden the
prince with such scribblings, but not without his harm. For I do not
want to drive anyone to good against his will; he does what he can
answer for against God. I have another intercession for the pastor at
Lochau, 2) who is seeking the parish at Herzberg, since he hopes to
preach the gospel with greater fruit to a large crowd than to a few
people. But I will not ask until you have written again. I have a
natural abhorrence of the court, so this will not be an undesirable
opportunity for me if I never have anything to do with it, even with
writings.

I have read the letter of the exceedingly clever apostate Minisch 3),
and as much as I grieve over the lamentable fall of Jacob, I am
indignant over the exceedingly godless hypocrisy of this man.

I have suffered the new prophets, and Satan has been found to have
shamed himself in his wisdom. Their spirit is very hopeful and
impatient, since it cannot stand even friendly exhortations, but wants
to be believed at the first word with complete certainty, also wants
that no one disputes, nor resists. I

2\) Franz Günther. He did not receive the parish of Herzberg, but
remained in Lochau until the end of his life in 1528.

3\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 105, col. 2608, note 4;
about Jakob Probst ibid. note 3. - Instead of \"Spreng\", at De Wette,
*lperensis* (from Ypres) is to be read. After his revocation ani 9 Feb.
in the Gndula church in Brussels, Probst was sent to a monastery at
APern, hence called *Iperensis.*

**392**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 475 to 478. **393**

Since they were so obstinate, I also caught them in blatant lies, and
since they tried to escape by miserable, slippery words, so that one
could recognize the old serpent, I finally asked them to prove their
doctrine by miracles, which boasted about and against the Scriptures.
They refused the miracles, but threatened that I would finally be forced
to believe them. At this, Magister Martin, 1) who had neither been asked
nor asked to speak, foamed and raged, so that he did not leave room for
me to speak either. When I dismissed them, I forbade their God that he
should not do any miracles against the will of my God. Thus we parted.

\"Blessed are they that hear and keep the word of God\" \[Luc. 11, 28.),
and, \"If any man keep my word, he shall not die\" 2c. \[Jn. 8, 50.)
This is absolutely said of faith, so that. \"To keep\" and \"to hold\"
is not to do a work, but to firmly adhere to the word of promise, and to
live and work in it. Christ certainly teaches faith, not works.
Therefore, these passages 2) are quite without evidence for works, but
very strong for faith, for the word of faith that is kept maintains that
one does not see death. Herewith farewell and pray for me. Greetings to
all of us. On the day before Palmarum \[April 12\] 1522, Martin Luther.

**No. 476.**

Wittenberg. April 12, 1522.

**To Joh. Lang in Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2607, anh., no, 105.

**No. 477.**

(Wittenberg.) April 12, 1522.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Eisleben.**

Luther invites Link to come to Wittenberg before Easter, where he null
give him the letter of Melchior Mirisch to read.

1\) Martin Cellarius. Cf. Tischreden, cap. 37, s 2. St. Louis edition,
vol. XXII, M1 f.; ibid. Col.I820, No. 113; ibid. Col. 1822, No. 125. See
also vol. XX, Introduction, p. 11.

2\) *tormenta* == guns or projectiles; this is the name given here to
the biblical passages invoked as proof.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 60; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 181 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 332. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 777.

Hail in Christ, venerable Father! I will not write anything to you, but
talk everything with you, that is, I await your arrival, which I would
like you to hurry up and come before Easter (because I did not know that
you would be in Eisleben), because during the feast days, the doctor and
father, Magister Caspar,3) can preach enough. For after Easter I will go
out to visit the villages and towns. I have promised to do so, so that
you can hardly find me thereafter, for two weeks after Easter. But if I
should learn that you are there, I will turn back to Wittenberg,
wherever I will be. You can read the letter of the exceedingly glorious
Solon with us, I am talking about Mirish, who denied Christ so cleverly
that no one dares to call this a denial of Christ, except for everything
that is not Mirish, the measurer 4). Fare well in Christ and come soon.
On the day before Palmarum \[April 12\] 1522.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 478.**

(Altenburg.) (Around April 12, 1522.)

**The City Council of Altenburg to Luther.**

Request for an orthodox learned preacher by May 2. On the upcoming feast
days, Luther himself may come and preach there.

Printed in the Mittheilungen der Geschicht- und Alterthumforschenden
Gesellschaft des Osterlandes, vol. VI, p. 42 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol.
Ill, p. 333.

Respectable, worthy, highly esteemed, especially in Christ beloved
Doctor! Our very willing and undaunted services are E. A. W. always
before. And since we poor people are very badly supplied with preachers
who are to instruct and teach us and our poor congregation Christian
truth, in which our salvation stands, even though we have a large number
of clergy with us,

3\) Güttel.

4\) *Meslerus*. To this D. Enders: \"This word weih I not to explain.\"
Also Seidemann in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 683, Weih nothing to say about
it. We have taken the expression \"Meßler\" (perhaps == Meßpfaff) from
the old edition of Walch.

**394-** Letters from the year 1522. No. 478 to 483. 395

who would much sooner and rather collect treasure and combine fields and
grounds for their own use, than seek the salvation of our souls 1) as in
the daytime; for the mouth of truth speaks in the Gospel itself that no
one can serve two masters; for which reason we have refused our provost
2) of the monastery on the mountain the preacher\'s chair at future
Walpurge 3), therefore we need to provide the same again with a
Christian, evangelical, learned preacher. Because in this case,
according to our most gracious Lord, to whom this is not known, we have
nowhere to go but to E. A. W., as a Christian doctor and teacher of
Christian truth, we humbly ask E. A. W., for the sake of God, to provide
the poor common people with a Christian, evangelical and learned
preacher for the special consolation of their souls, towards the
aforementioned time of Walpurge or before, in the most conducive manner
without delay, who would also fearlessly resist the clergymen who would
oppose him. He shall be adequately provided for his efforts with his own
dwelling and honorable remuneration. E. A. W., if it were not possible
for him to do so sooner, would also like to join us and preach in his
own person on these Easter holidays, or if it is convenient for E. A.
W., so that the common poor people are relieved of the suspicion of the
alleged heresy, into which they are daily led by the other, disinclined
preachers, and their useless chatter is stopped. And whether E. A. W. is
also afraid of some uncertainty, we ask for all information, how far and
how we should forward to E. A. W.; nothing should weigh against us,
whether it should also extend to Eilenburg. For God\'s sake, E. A. W.
wanted to show a Christian will towards us and the poor community in
these two cases, as we undoubtedly hope for comfort. We do not want to
omit to ask the Almighty for you and to deserve our highest fortune.
Request E. W. described and reliable answer with present. 5)

1\) Erl. Letter: \"our salvation\".

2\) Benedict Bischofs, provost of the regular Augustinians in the
monastery of Our Lady on the Mountain, outside the city, who did not
administer the parish in the church of St. Bartholomew himself, but had
it administered by M. Koler. He was the last provost and after the
monastery\'s confiscation he converted to the Reformation and married.

3\) May 2.

4\) Erl. The same\" in the letter.

5\) That is, by the messenger who delivers.

**No. 47 9.**

(Kronberg.) April 14, 1522.

**Hartmuth von Kronberg to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 1672, no. 508.

**No. 480.**

Wittenberg. April 17, 1522,

**To the mayor and council of Altenburg.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2018, No. 665.

**No. 481.**

Wittenberg. April 17, 1522.

**To Gabriel Zwilling in Düben.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 2019, No. 666.

**No. 482.**

(Wittenberg.) April 21, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2615, annex, no. 111.

**No. 483.**

(Wittenberg.) April 24, 1522.

**To Johann Brismann in Cottbus.**

Since Brismann had become a doctor of theology in Wittenberg and
preached the gospel in Cottbus, his birthplace (born 1488), he had to
suffer the hatred and persecution of his Franciscan brothers. He
therefore sought to gain an accommodation elsewhere. Luther advised him
to come to Wittenberg, where he would find lodging in the Franciscan
monastery.

The original is in the von Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg. Printed in
\"Erläutertes Preußen,\" vol. II (1725), p. 304; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.*
82; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 187 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 344.

To the venerable Father Brismann, the theologian and sincere disciple of
Franciscus, his superior in Christ.

Hail! I am mindful of you, venerable father, and will be mindful of you,
but you know the dithering of this court, and, as one is wont to say,
its exceeding caution. And as yet I have received no answer from
Spalatin. But I will press him as soon as possible, so that I may be
sure whether the question concerning you is affirmative or negative.

**,396** Letters from the year 1522. no. 483 to 486. **397**

I will receive a negative answer. In the meantime, suffer as you can, or
if you can, break away and fly here. 1) For I believe that you can be
fed in your monastery with us, as before, even if the prince adds
nothing besides. For I will not suffer it to come to my knowledge that
your monastery is being spoiled by lack, just as I preach that they
should either feed them from their own, or again allow them to beg,
which has also been done. I have nothing else to write now, and you can
learn everything from your brothers what is going on here. May the Lord
keep you and multiply you to His glory with all yours; in Him be well.
On the Thursday after Easter \[April 24\] 1522, D. Martin Luther.

**No. 484.**

(Wittenberg.) April 24, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a clergyman to him. Wishes to know if his intercession
is pleasant at court, then he wants to ask for Brismann. News about
Link, Carlstadt and the exhibition of relics in the collegiate church.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 113 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 140. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II p. 61; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 186 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 345. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 778.

To the godly and learned man, Georg Spalatin, evangelist of the Prince
of Saxony, his \[friend\] in Christ.

Hail! First of all, I recommend this priest to you, my dear Spalatin,
who has a request to the prince, because that is what he asked me for;
but what he seeks, you will learn from him.

By the way, write to me, as I asked earlier, whether my letters and
intercessions are held in contempt (*sordeant*) at court or not. For in
regard to the father Johann Brismann, Doctor of Theology, a Minorite,
who is now a displaced person in Cottbus, I have something I would like
to ask. For he would like to be here at Wittenberg, if he can be

1\) Brismann went to Wittenberg toward the end of 1522 and remained
there until he received a call to Prussia in December 1523.

could be fed, and I promised him to write to you about it.

Vicar Wenceslaus is with us and will stay here for several days.

I hear that Carlstadt was refused the publication of the book 3) by the
Rector and the authorities.

I think of the exhibition of the relics 4) in this way, because they
have already been shown enough, and very much exhibited and held up in
the whole world for show; but they will arrange it in such a way that
they will be publicly presented in the middle of the choir, so that they
can all be seen on one table, while all other ceremonies will be
maintained, as is the custom. Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg,
1522, on the Thursday after Easter \[April 24\]. Martin Luther.

At this hour, I set out for Borna, 5) to do enough for my promise.

**No. 485.**

Wittenberg. April 25, 1522.

**To Count Ludwig zu Stolberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 194.

**No.486.**

(Altenburg.) (April 28, 6) 1522.)

**Luther\'s draft of a complaint for the council at Altenburg.**

The original concept, in Luther\'s own handwriting, is in the city
archives at Altenburg. Printed in the third

2\) Link. See No. 477.

3\) against Emser, in which he also attacked Luther. Compare St. Louis
edition, vol. XX, introduction, p. 17b f.

4\) The relics of the collegiate church were exhibited Monday after
Jubilate \[May 12\] (not \"after Misericordias Domini\" as the Erl.
Briefw. says).

5\) Luther will not have left on April 24, because the next letter is
dated in the original: \"Wittenberg, on Friday after Easter,\" The
destination of the journey was Zwickau. In Borna Luther preached twice
on April 27 (St. Louis Edition, Vol. XII, 1830 and 1834); in Altenburg
on April 28 also twice (ibid. Col. 1836 and 1838), In the evening of the
same day he arrived in Zwickau, and held there several sermons (ibid.
Col. 1842 to 1855) until May 2. Then he returned to Borna and preached
there again on May 4 (ibid. Col. 1854). Via Eilenburg he then went to
Wittenberg, where he arrived on May 6.

6\) Luther set this writing during his presence in Altenburg (see the
last note to

**398** Letters from the. Year 1522. no. 486. 399

The first report on the existence and work of the Geschicht- und
Alterthumforschende Gesellschaft des Osterlandes 2c, Altenburg (1842),
p. 68; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 30 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 347.

First of all, we confess and know that in temporal goods no one should
interfere with another\'s, especially not in the rights or goods of the
sovereigns.

But when it comes to the doctrine and salvation of souls, no one is
obligated to yield to another, to follow, to do, or to refrain from
doing what is contrary to right doctrine.

But now that we find our provost and pastors not only not teaching the
gospel, but also refusing and persecuting it, we are moved by our own
conscience to act and do what is necessary for our own and our
neighbor\'s salvation, the city of Altenburg, as we are obliged to serve
them out of two duties, namely, for the sake of physical rule and
brotherly Christian love.

Therefore we intend to have an evangelical preacher, want to and shall
also be unhindered by it, even if an angel from heaven wants to prevent
it, let alone that men on earth should hinder us. Therefore we do not
want to enter into law or dispute with the provost in such a case, but
freely, regardless of whom it deems unjust and complains about it. And
we state our reason as follows:

In the first place Christ says Matth. 7, 15: \"Beware of false prophets,
which come in sheep\'s clothing, and inwardly are ravening wolves. This
saying is said to all Christians, universally and especially; from which
we derive such power and right that, if we wanted to act Christianly, we
should have appointed a Protestant preacher long ago, and, if we wanted
to follow this right strictly, we should have expelled the provost and
his people from Altenburg, as they are certainly found to be ravening
wolves.

Now let us do him the favor and let them stay, but still their wolfish
sermon

No. 484), presumably for the negotiations to be held on April 29 with
the commission appointed by the Elector, which consisted of Günther von
Bünau auf Breitenhain, Michael von der Straßen, Geleitsmann zu Borna,
and Jan von Wernstorf, Amtsverweser zu Altenburg.

We do not suffer from our people, and we know that we do them no wrong
in this, but too little right. But so far they have harmed our souls and
taken the interest with all injustice. For St. Paul says 1 Cor. 5:13:
*Auferte malum ex vobis ipsis; modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit*
\[1 Cor. 5:6\]. Now they are not only evil, but also harmful ravening
wolves, which here St. Paul calls to be put away and chased away; which
right we herewith do not want to forgive ourselves for tolerating them
among us, but want to be content for a while that they keep quiet or
preach the true gospel themselves.

And whether they say that it is not our place to judge which is the
gospel, or that it has not yet been decided by a council, we do not
admit to them, for the Scriptures do not give authority to a council,
but to every Christian to judge the doctrine, 1 Cor. 14:29.and to know
and avoid the wolves, Matth. 7, 15. and do not stand on what other
people conclude, even if they were angels, but on every man\'s
conscience, for every man must believe for himself and know the
difference between right and wrong doctrine, *quia quicunquo crediderit,
salvus erit* Marc. 16,16\].

So the church and the space are ours, they have built nothing on it or
in it; if they want to have their spiritual authority or district
unharmed, we let it happen, provided that they leave the gospel and our
souls\' salvation unhindered and unharmed; if not, they violate their
authority themselves. For the interest is not given to them to murder
souls, but to preach the gospel; if they do not do this, we will not
leave it to them, *juxta illud: qui von laborat, von manducet* \[2
Thess. 3, 10\]. We want to restrain our souls, not add money to them.

Even so, their power is already taken from God Himself, where they
strive against the gospel, because St. Paul 2 Cor. 13, 1) 10. says:
There is no power given by God in Christianity to corrupt the people,
but only to improve them. Now they only want

1\) Erl. Epistolary: \"1 Cor. 11\".

**400** Letters from the year

1522\. no. 486. 487. **401**

and have power to do so, our conscience and guilty love compels us to
protect the people from the wolves and to warn them, *q\[uia\] oportet
Deo mag\[is\] obedire q\[uam\] hominibus* \[Apost. 5, 29 \].

Summa Summarum: if we are Christians, this matter may neither be right
nor wrong. God has already judged it and pronounced the verdict Himself:
*Attendite a falsis prophetis et lupis rapacibus; it\[em\]: Expurgate
vetus fermentum.*\... Therefore, we kindly offer the provost *haec duo*:

*Aut taceant et non praedicent nobis, omissis tam potestatibus q\[uam\]
censibus;*

*aut solum et purum Evangelion doceant, retentis tam potestatibus
q\[uam\] censibus\....* \[Either they may be silent and not preach to
us, and let go both the power and the interest; or they may teach the
gospel alone and purely, and keep both the power and the interest.\]

**No. 487.**

Eilenburg. May 5, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports on his trip to Zwickau and Eilenburg and wishes that the
Elector request the council of the latter town to hire a Protestant
preacher. Last of the counter-scripts that appeared.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 114 and in *Cod*. *Jen*. a, fol. 140. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 61 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 189 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 350. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 779.

To the worthy man, Georg Spalatin, ducal evangelist, his friend in the
Lord. .

Hail! I do not know whether I received your letter, which you mention so
often, nor do I remember what you wrote. But the bearer assures me that
it was handed over to me; I will check on it in Wittenberg. By the way,
what I have done with this journey, you will learn from others or have
already learned.

That Doctor of Cologne is called Gerhard, 1) from

1\) Gerhard Westerburg, born in Cologne at the end of the 15th century,
matriculated in Cologne in 1514, studied jurisprudence around 1515 to
1517 in Bologna, where he became a true lawyer.

a rich Cologne bourgeois family, a sincere man who came here to seek the
truth and first fell into the teachings of the Zwickau prophets, from
whose number he had provided a young man in Cologne with sustenance and
had heard them, and even now (as a newcomer) he is very much moved by
their dreams. But gradually he is gaining ground on the right path.

At Zwickau, Thomas 2) had done monstrous things with his own.

Egranus is still sowing strange things; Satan is raging everywhere and
is persecuting the gospel. But Zwickau is now well supplied with three
excellent men 3) who preach the gospel, with the pastor himself, a very
good man, and two other priests who are masters.

I see, however, that some Eilenburgers are tardy in appointing an
evangelist, but others desire that our prince would exhort the council
by letter that they yield to the poor people in this necessary and holy
matter and either appoint Andreas Kaugsdorf4 ) or a certain Thomas at
Wittenberg. So you see that there is also an opportunity for your love
here, if you could obtain such an admonition from the prince. For the
prince, too, as a Christian brother, also because he is a prince, 5) is
concerned that the wolves be fought off and that he be concerned for the
salvation of his people. Therefore I commend this concern to you. Ge

He apparently also became a doctor. Returning to Cologne, he became
acquainted with an emissary of the Zwickau prophet Nic. Storch, then
went to Wittenberg and there came into contact with the Zwickau prophets
again. His life is eventful, as a Carlstadtian, as an instigator of the
civil uprising in Frankfurt, Easter 152\], as an Anabaptist, until he
finally entered the community of the Reformed Church and is said to have
died in East Frisia (at Neustadt-Gödens?) as a preacher (?) (1558?).

2\) Coiner.

3\) Nic. Hausmann, pastor at the church of Unser Lieben Frauen, M. Joh.
Zeidler, preacher at the same church (not Paul Lindenau, as Seidemann
assumes in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 675), and M. Wolfgang Zeuner, preacher
at the church of St. Catharine.

4\) Kaugsdorf had been cathedral preacher in Magdeburg since 1516, but
after various persecutions he was removed from his office in September
1521 and expelled (compare Luther\'s letter to Capito of Jan. 17, 1522,
St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 559), then through Luther\'s use he came to
Eilenburg after Easter 1522, where he died in 1543.

5\) Walch offers: \"Because it is also vem Fürsten und dem Bruder
Christian, des Fürsten wegen daran gelegen\" ro.

**402** Letters from the year

1522\. no. 487. 488. **403**

farewell. From the Schlöffe at Eilenburg, on Monday after Misericordias
Domini 1) \[May 5\] 1522. Martin Luther.

I have received Catharinus 2) and the Venetian archbishop, who wrote
against me, and finally it is good for Italy that it also has such
people as Rubeus and Alveld are, so that not only the Germans would like
to boast about such a great glory. They are not worth reading, let alone
worth answering. A book of equal value was brought to me by Mr. Gerhard
from Leipzig, namely a book by Hochstraten against me, in which,
however, he did not mention his name, but by his style and manner shows
himself as the donkey under the lion\'s skin shows himself by his ears.
This we have delivered to the fire. Christ makes his adversaries even
glorious fools.

**No. 488.**

Altenburg. May 6, 1522.

The city council of Altenburg to Luther.

The council of Altenburg asks Luthern to help him and the congregation
to retain M. Gabriel Zwilling as preacher.

Printed in the Mittheilungen der Geschichtforschenden Gesellschaft des
Osterlandes, vol. VI, p. 51 (Appendix V ibid. p. 50; Appendix L p. 51)
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 353.

2c. 2c. After we have been christianly comforted by Ew. A. W. in our
proposal against the provost of the preaching chair 3) we hope that we
will also obtain the same \[preaching chair\] by us without doubt,
although such in recent action of the commissaries 4) its

1\) Luther made a mistake in the Sunday. In the original it says: *post
Jubilate,* but Spalatin has here in the margin, as Correctur, and also
in the inscription made by him the time determination set by us.

2\) Here is meant the writing of Catharinus, which has the title:
*Fratris Ambrosii Chatarini (sic!) Ord. Praedic. Congregat. S. Marci de
Florentia Excusatio etc.* - The \"Archbishop of Venice\" is
Christophorus Marcellus, Venetian Patrician, Archbishop of Corchra, who
published a writing against Luther under the title: *De potestate summi
Pontificis*.

3\) Original: \"Christian confident\".

4\) The protocol of the action taken on April 29 was sent by the
commissioners on Friday Walpurgis, May 2.

not want to attain finality, and it is still with our most gracious lord
2c. we had not omitted, as soon as Mgr. Gabriel come to us, Saturday,
the day after Walpurgis \[May 3\], 5) under other action had report,
highly thought of our most gracious on account of Mgr. Gabrielis at the
diligent request and suggestion of the community, to write Laut\'s copy
enclosed here \[and have\] 6) enclosed a note, on which S. churf. G.
wrote to our bailiff, Laut\'s the other copy, 7) which copies we are
sending both to E. A. W. in special trust to hear about the matter.
Because E. A. W. had previously advised us faithfully to the
aforementioned Magister Gabriel, and we also heard him preach on the
next Sunday \[May 4\], although without the will of the provost, so that
he pleased us and the common city very well, we wanted to keep him with
pleasure. However, because the matter is so poisonous for our most
gracious Lord, we consider that, as we also diligently ask for it, as E.
A. W. would, according to the occasion, want to excuse Mgr. Gabriel of
such suspicion to his Lordship by a small document 8) and have such
document delivered by this messenger, however, this our document still
inserted copy not to be sent to his Lordship. G., as E. A. W. would like
to note the reason for this, and E. A. W. out of Christian, brotherly
love would like to be helpful, gracious and helpful to us poor people in
this, so that we would like to keep Mgr. Gabriel with us without
disgrace from our most gracious Lord 2c. 2c. Date Tuesday after Mis.
Dmi. \[May 6\] Anno 1522.

The Altenburg City Council.

**Attachment .**

Inserted note to the letter from the Altenburg City Council to the
Elector.

(No date.)

Also, most gracious Elector and Lord, we are today and the hour at One
Hora a Mgr. called Gabriel, to whom Doctor Martinus has sent us with

to the Elector, according to which the dispute over the unpaid interest
was settled, but no settlement was reached for the sake of the
preacher\'s chair.

5\) Here is a gap to be filled in this way.

6\) Supplemented by us. - In an undated letter written before May 2, the
city council presented the spiritual needs of the city to the Elector
and apologized for his actions regarding the appointment of a preacher.
To this letter he enclosed the note printed in appendix V.

7\) Appendix B.

8\) This Luther did in the letter to the Elector, May 8, St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XV, 2020, No. 667.

**404**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 488 to 493.

**405**

The congregation is also requested by the congregation that they keep
him on their own diet until the things have been discharged and put in
order, and that they neither hinder nor prevent the provost from
preaching in the usual hours, except that they may 1) outside of other
offices, set up the churches for him after noon or without danger, so
ardent and eager are they to hear the word of God. Therefore, we humbly
ask Your Lordship to graciously grant this to the community and to us,
because the Word of God, as mentioned above, should be free and
unrestricted. This they will undoubtedly not refrain from doing in
addition to us, E. C. G., in Christian love towards God, and to earn
obedience, as we are obliged to do.

**Attachment B.**

The Elector to the Amtmann 2) Jhan von Wernstorff.

May 5, 1522.

2c. 2c. We are now requested by the council of Altenburg, among others,
with the enclosed note, as you will hear. Now we would like to grant
them that the city would be provided with a skilled and good preacher.
But that they indicate, as if Doctor Martinus had faithfully advised
them to Magister Gabriel, we will report, how Doctor Martinus never had
any pleasure in the same Gabriel\'s preaching, because he has introduced
and aroused much error and displeasure in Eilenburg and in other places
with his preaching and preaching. Therefore, we request that you summon
two of the council of Altenburg before you and report this to them on
our behalf, with the request that they renounce the same monk and speak
out as may be appropriate. Then, when the matter between them and the
provost reaches a conclusion, we would like to help them to get a
skilled and learned preacher 2c. Datum Colditz, Montag \[nach\]
Misericordia Dom. \[5 May\] 1522.

**No. 489.**

Wittenberg. May 8, 1522.

To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2020, no. 667.

1\) that is, to the M. Gabriel. In the original \"them\", which also
otherwise stands for \"him\" and \"him\".

2\) The Erlangen correspondence erroneously has \"Geleitsmann\" instead
of \"Amtmann\".

**No. 490.**

Wittenberg. (May 8) 1522.

**To the Altenburg City Council.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2023, no. 668.

**No. 491.**

(Wittenberg.) May 8, 1522.

**To Gabriel Zwilling in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2024, no. 670.

**No. 492.**

(Wittenberg.) May 10, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2556, annex, no. 84.

**No. 493.**

(Wittenberg.) May 15, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther explains the passage Joh. 16, 8. About the treacherous behavior
of Erasmus against Luther. He asks for a German expression for eunuch. -
Postscript A. Request for return of the letters sent over. - Postscript
B. Intercession for an injured forester. News about Specatus 2c.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. The first postscript
is under the letter itself, the second on a special sheet, without
address, is also not folded like a letter. Handwritten in *Cod. Jen. a*,
fol. 142; the postscript fol. 236. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 63,
without the postscripts; in De Wette the letter vol. II, p. 195;
postscript B, vol. II, p.447 placed in the year 1523; in *Buddeus*, p.
30 only the postscript L, without the letter. Complete in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. Ill, p. 359. German in Walch: the letter vol. XXI, 781 and the
postscript 13 idick. Col. 882.

To his extremely dear brother, Magister Georg Spalatin, his \[friend\]
in Christ.

Hail! I am almost overwhelmed by reading letters; how much time do you
think I have to waste answering them? About the passage Joh. 16,8. ff.
hear my opinion. \"The Spirit will punish the world for the sin of not
believing in Christ,\" for the world did not know this sin of unbelief,
and trusted and still trusts in works. But just as no sin is sin to him
who believes, so no good work is sin to the unbeliever.

**406**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 493.

**407**

good work. \"But for the righteousness that I go to the Father, and the
world seeth me not.\" Of this righteousness also the world knows
nothing, which consists in believing that Christ went up to heaven by
his passion, and became the Lord over all things, that he might save
all. For for this cause he is not seen, that he might be believed: and
this is the righteousness of faith, not of works. \"But for the judgment
that the prince of the world is already judged.\" The world does not
know this judgment either, since it is only concerned with what is good
for the flesh and hates the cross; this is the wisdom of the old serpent
poured into us. But the righteousness of faith teaches to love the
cross, and to take hold of all that the prince of the world and the
world itself flees and hates, as opprobrium, poverty, death, reviling.
Therefore, the world is condemned and punished for adhering to this
judgment of its prince and for resenting Christ for the sake of the
cross.

I am sending several letters of friends, in which you can read for
yourself what you desire. In his collection 1) of letters, Erasmus
finally reveals himself as a man who is wholeheartedly an enemy of
Luther and his teachings, but lies with apparent and cunning words that
he is his friend. In this way, he will do great harm to his reputation
and his name. In this, Eck is better, who confesses to be an enemy
without any disguise. But this sneak and deceitful man, who is sometimes
a friend and sometimes an enemy, I detest. Christ lives and also
despises the prince of this world and all who follow his judgment.

Our Wenceslaus has another opinion concerning the passage Jn. 16, which
I like; I will write it another time, if you want. Deun what I have said
about the judgment, I myself do not like gauz, because I mean that the
world is punished quite simply because of the last judgment, of which
the world has not known that it will be, and for that reason it also has
not feared, also does not care about sin and about justice, although it
\[the

1\) Not the *Farrago nova epistolarum of* 1519 is meant here, but the
one published at Basel by Frobenius *Pridie Cal. Septembr.* 1521.

Judgment\] is so completely present that it has not only already begun,
but even the head of this world is already judged. Through the
revelation of the horror of this judgment, the Spirit wanted to inflame
the world to the knowledge of sin and to the desire for righteousness,
as that word Rom. 1, 18. says: \"For the wrath of God from heaven is
revealed in the gospel\" 2c. Farewell and greet all our people. Your
German word for eunuch is not enough for me; I have learned that in
Westphalia it is called \"a ron\", and \"ronen\" is to cut, especially
the people; I do not know if we should use it. I am waiting for the
promise of the gems. Thursday after Jubilate \[May 15\] 1522. Mart.
Luther.

\[Postscript A.\]. Send the letters back as soon as possible so that I
can answer them.

\[How I would like that you could obtain something for a certain poor
farmer who was our forester 2) in Rehsen, and who was recently wounded
in the thigh by a boar during a hunt that was commissioned by the
prince, who became lame and unable to work, and who suffers from lack
and poverty. However, he wishes to be helped with some grain so that he
will have bread. I know that the princes receive these services and
dangers from their subjects, but at the same time I also know that the
princes should benefit their subjects, and that they often go too far in
hunting and using people in this service; therefore, not only love but
also justice requires compensation here.

The Viennese theologians have started a tragedy with Paul Speratus,3)
the former

2\) The monastery forester in Rehsen near Wörlitz in Dessau.

3\) His real name was Paul Hoffer and he was from Ellwangen, where his
father was bailiff of the castle Röthlen belonging to the Ellwangen
provost (Speratus also calls himself *de Rutilis*). He was born on Dec.
14, 1484; matriculated in Freiburg in 1503; studied in Paris and at
Italian universities; at the beginning of the Reformation, preacher in
Dinkelsbühl; appointed cathedral preacher in Würzburg in 1518, but had
to leave there already in 1519 after the death of the Bishop of Bibra;
then preacher in Salzburg, and since late 1520 without official position
in Vienna. Admitted as a preacher with episcopal approval, he preached
on the 1st Sunday after Epiphany, Jan. 12, 1522, in the St. Stephen\'s
Church in

408Letters from the year

1522\. no. 493. 494. \' 409

He was a preacher in Würzburg and was expelled from there, and is now in
Iglau in Moravia. He wrote to me and sent me an excellent booklet on the
vows. 1) In addition, Siegmund von Schauenberg has interpreted the
Creed, sent it to me for evaluation and will publish it. The stones
begin to cry out as the apostles are subdued.

And what I almost forgot, you may tell Mr. Bernhard Hirschfeld that I
have received 2) what this messenger brought me, which I believe I also
wrote before.

**No. 494.**

Wittenberg. May 16, 1522.

**To Paul Speratus in Iglau.**

Luther praises Speratus\' sermon delivered in Vienna on January 12,
1522, and wishes to see it printed. He speaks out about the doctrine of
the Pickards and the Bohemians on Holy Communion, and sends him the
Scripture on vows.

Printed in the manuscript \"Von dem hohen gelübd der Tauff, sampt andern
Ein Sermon czu Wienn ynn Osterreych geprediget. Paulus Speratus.
Konigßberg yn Preussen. 1524.\" At the end: \"Gedruckt czu Königßberg In
Preussen.\" 8 quarto sheets. Printer: Hans Weinreich. Reprinted in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 32 and in Erl. The letter was undoubtedly
written in Latin by Luther, but translated into German by Speratus to
precede his writing.

To the worthy Doctor Paulo Sperato, preacher at the Iglau, his dear
friend in Christ, Martinus Luther.

Salvation and peace in Christ! May the Lord Jesus strengthen you through
the power of his

Vienna on the epistle Rom. 12, I. ff. and was zealous against the
monastic vows. Already on Jan. 14, the theological faculty met and
summoned him for Jan. 15 and again for Jan. 18. When he did not appear,
his excommunication was publicly posted on Jan. 20. Speratus had left
Vienna to go to Germany, but had been detained as a preacher in Iglau in
Moravia by the abbot of the Dominican monastery there. From here he
wrote to the theologians in Vienna demanding to know why he was
excommunicated and offering to recant if he were convicted of error.
They replied that he should first send them the sermon, then they would
deal with him further. He now sent this answer, along with his sermon
delivered in Vienna, to Luther.

1\) From this passage it is clear that this postscript belongs to this
letter. Compare the following number.

2\) Compare the previous number.

Spirit, dear good friend Paule Sperate! Now at this time I am burdened
with so much other and great business that I cannot answer you on all
matters. But your booklet of the sermon held in Vienna has come under
our judgment and verdict, and pleases us almost well, so we would not be
displeased if you had it printed. 3) Also, in Wittenberg, we have
sufficiently recognized the pride and arrogance of the Vienna sophists
from their letter, which they sent to you. For I have investigated all
things from them myself, but have not found that they consider the bread
in the sacrament of the altar to be a mere signification of the body of
Christ, and the wine alone to be a signification of the blood of Christ,
but that they believe the bread to be truly and actually the body, and
the wine to be truly and actually the blood of Christ, even though the
same body and blood of Christ are in another form than they are in
heaven, and in another form than Christ is in the spirits. So their
opinion is not almost dissimilar to the truth, although I would like to
see that people are not almost concerned about these things, but badly
and simple-mindedly believe that the body and blood of Christ are truly
present in the sacrament of the altar, and that we do not inquire
further about how or in what form they are present, since Christ has not
particularly told us about them. But you will be safest with them if you
do not judge them until you have learned all things well. But the
Bohemian articles, which you sent me along with the previous ones, are
not at all to my liking, for they penetrate and bend the 6th chapter of
St. John\'s on the sacrament. Johannis on the sacrament, since there
only faith is dealt with. Neither the material nor the time will bear me
writing more of it to you this time, so I will save it for another time.
Greetings

3\) This did not happen until 1524, when Speratus was already in
Prussia. When he was imprisoned in Iglau in the summer of 1523, all his
letters and the concept of his sermon had been taken away. Therefore, he
wrote them down again in his dungeon, \"hoping not in a different form
or opinion than he had held in Vienna.

**410 \'** Letters from 1522. no. 494 to 497. 411

D. Carlstadt and Philip. I am sending you here the booklet of the
vows; 1) the one of the mass, I think you saw earlier. Fare well and
entrust me to the prayers of your igles, whom you will also greet kindly
in my stead. \[Given at Wittenberg, on Friday after Jubilate \[May 16\]
in the 22nd year.

**No. 495.**

(Wittenberg.) (After May 16) 2) 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of the petition of the priest to Segren.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod*.
*Dessav*. No. 131 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 158. Printed by *Buddeus*,
p. 20; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 273 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p.
365. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 815.

To his \[friend\] in the Lord, Magister Georg Spalatin, the faithful
preacher at court.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Since I have nothing to write now, my dear
Spalatin, I send and commend to you this petition of the poor pastor of
Segren. Pfaffenbeck has again petitioned me with lamentable complaints
that I should write to the prince on his behalf because of a certain
fief that recently reverted to the prince through the death of a certain
woman, which he wishes to obtain and is confident that he can also be
helped with it. But I see that the wind at court is not favorable to
him, and I refrain from making further noise and striving in vain.
Farewell and pray for me. 1522. Mart. Luther.

**No. 496.**

(Wittenberg.) (After May 16, 1522.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2560, annex, no. 86.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1500.-Luther\'s writing \"Vom Mißbrauch
der Messe\" ibidaselbst, Col. 1068.

2\) De Wette places this letter too late: \"Probably at the end of the
year\", because, as results from the petition of the priest at Segren
mentioned in the following letter, it is to be placed before No. 496,
which the Erl. Briefw. has done, which we have followed.

**No. 497.**

Wittenberg. May 19, 1522.

**To Nic. Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther wants a testamentary matter to be decided by the Council of
Zwickau or Hausmann and not brought to the Elector.

The original is in the Anhaltische Gesammtarchiv, No. 3iij, the
postscript on a special slip of paper. Handwritten in the Franciscaneum
in Zerbst, Ms. 26, fol. 9. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 64 b; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 197 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 368. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 783.

To the worthy man and preacher of the pure faith, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
the superior of the church at Zwickau in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! My Nicolaus, who is highly esteemed in the
Lord, to write to you among my many affairs in a few words about the
matter you desire: It seems to me in no way advisable that the most
noble prince be written about this matter, since I am certain that he
will not accept it, but that he will push it away from himself and back
to you anew. I know the kind of man who can suffer that whatever is done
is done before others, but does not command or advise it. Therefore you,
that is the council and you, must settle this matter, and for this you
may, I ask, persuade the council in my name and by my request. But if
the council does not want to get involved, then it is up to you alone,
according to your office, to give the will either completely or as much
as possible to the poverty of this person, your: that you do this and
dare to do it, both necessity and love give you the right and power to
do so. For it was not valid, nor is it valid now, that he bequeathed
this for stones, since his brother exists, who must be fed from this
money. Therefore, in God\'s name, go through it simply and without
hesitation, and do not ask long or turn this matter here or there;
finally, by some example, this ungodly custom of making wills must be
broken. The other you will hear from him yourself, and greet the mayors
in my name, and so

**412**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 497. 498. 499.

413

then be well with your preacher, 1) dear brother. Wittenberg, on Monday
after Cantate \[May 19\] 1522. Mart. Luther.

I ask you to work in your and my name with Mühlpfort, or whoever else it
must be, so that they assist this man, so that he receives some part of
the will, which he has communicated to me orally, for his needs, since
it is certain that everything, whatever is bequeathed, must be given
more to a living person than to a dead house, and that no one is allowed
to bequeath anything contrary to this rule of love, or to keep what has
been bequeathed; so he has asked me to ask.

**No. 498.**

(Wittenberg.) May 20, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks for a game preacher for the wedding of Aurogallus.
Postscript: There is no suitable teacher available for an external
teaching position.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv (without the
postscript, which is also not to be found on any special slip of paper).
Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 236. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 23; by
De Wette, vol. II, p. 198 and in Erl. Briefw,, vol. Ill, p. 369. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 819.

To Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ, his brother in the
Lord.

Grace and peace! Aurogallus asks, if it can happen, my dear Spalatin,
that his wedding 2) be honored with some venison. He is worth it, as you
know, and a not to be despised part of our high school; do what you can.
But the wedding will be next Monday \[May 26\], that is, after Vocem
Jucunditatis. Now I am in the process of writing what I promised, as you
know; tomorrow I will send it to you. So far letters and printed matter
have prevented me. Farewell. Tuesday after Cantate \[May 20\]. Martin
Luther.

But among the masters of the liberal arts who are now available, we
cannot find one.

1\) Johann Zeidler.

2\) He married Anna Döring.

whom we would like to recommend, because they are either too old to want
to wander there, or not fit to take upon themselves such an office.

**No. 499.**

(Altenburg.) May 22, 1522.

**The Altenburg City Council to Luther.**

Report that the matter of the Altenburgs had been settled with their
provost at Eilenburg. The Elector did not want to leave M. Gabriel
there, so the council asked Luthern to help them find an external
faithful preacher, whom he might indicate to the Elector in a letter. -
Enclosed: Request to the Elector to immediately send them the preacher
suggested by Luther.

From the Mittheilungen der Geschichtforschenden Gesellschaft des
Osterlandes, VI, 57, No. 47, reprinted in Erl. Briefw., Vol. III. p.
370.

2c. 2c. As our matter with the provost has reached its conclusion on the
day now held in Eilenburg 3) before the judges, we do not want to
deprive E.A. W., as our magnanimous patron, not to save this matter, as
the provost, now reported, together with his brothers, has resigned from
the preacher\'s chair, which is to be appointed, and the interest, which
is dedicated to it, is to follow, and we, with the knowledge and will of
a magistrate, have to appoint the same preacher\'s chair from now on,
however, that now and for the first time our most gracious lord, the
elector, or his elector\'s grace, will appoint a preacher, who is to be
appointed by the elector. Councillors, will order and appoint a
preacher, whom we shall indicate and propose, to avoid suspicion of both
parties; thereupon we are ordered to do and take care with E. A. W., so
that we may obtain a pious, learned, evangelical preacher and announce
the same to our most gracious Lord. And even though Msgr. Gabriel had
previously suggested and faithfully advised us to do so, which we and
the entire congregation were well satisfied with, and, if it were
possible, would still like to keep, the councilors, perhaps at the
request of the provost, have once again instructed us not to allow him
to preach any more, which we, even though not gladly, must therefore
allow to happen. God then wants to give other grace than we believe and
hope for, and our sin, so that we can

3\) Since no settlement was reached on April 29 between the Nach of
Altenburg and the provost regarding the sermon seat (see No. 488), the
Elector summoned both parties to Eilenburg on May 19 for a decision.

4\) \"him\" put by us instead of: \"him\".

**414** Letters from the year 1522. no. 499. 500. **415**

without doubt deserves to be graciously forgiven; therefore 1) to E. A.
W. our official and diligent request: if Mgr. Gabriel should not remain
with us, would you, as E. A. W. as E. A. W. has previously stated in a
letter 2) to us, would you once again investigate and appoint another
learned, Christian and evangelical preacher, who would also preach the
Word of God for the strengthening and increase of faith and love towards
God and neighbor, for the comfort of us poor people, and inform our most
gracious Lord of the same in a letter, in addition to our letter
herewith, a copy of which is to be found here, 3) to our most gracious
Lord, with the request that the same, by his princely grace, be
graciously ordered and sent to us for the first time according to the
terms of the treaty, so that we poor people in the same, where our
salvation and blessedness are at hand, would not be delayed, and let the
matter be carried out with this messenger of ours everywhere, and what
is to be done here everywhere, give him 4) further orders 2c. We also
request a written reply from all parties. Date Thursday after Cantate
\[May 22\] Anno 1522.

The Altenburg City Council.

**Enclosure.**

The Altenburg City Council to the Elector.

Most Serene 2c. According to the preliminary decision of your Lordship,
on Monday after Cantate \[May 19\], before your Lordship\'s Councilors
in Eilenburg, I expected to take action with the provost for the sake of
the preaching chair, and there, praise God, the matter was resolved in
such a way that we now have to appoint the preaching chair here with the
help and assistance of a magistrate, as the established arbitrator
reports, but in such a way that your Lordship or the same Lordship\'s
Councilors must now for the first time graciously appoint a preacher for
us. churf. G. or the same E. churf. G. Councillors have now and for the
first time to graciously appoint a preacher for us, and yet we have been
ordered by the Councillors to research for a preacher, and to indicate
the same to your churf. G.. Accordingly, we have written to Doctor
Martino to inquire about a learned, pious, evangelical preacher who
would like to come to us, so that he could report him in writing to your
lordship, as there is no doubt that his dignity will do with the writing
he has done 5).

1\) \"derhalben\" put by us instead of the senseless: \"denselben\".

2\) No.480.

3\) namely the following supplement.

4\) \"him\" put by us instead of: \"in\".

5\) In the text, instead of \"writing,\" which is a conjecture of the
Erl. Briefw., \"schriftlich\".

be. Accordingly, we humbly request that \"Your Electorate\" send us the
same. G. would graciously arrange the same for us, as reported in D.
Martin\'s letter, and send it to us in the most conducive manner, so
that we poor people would not be delayed in the same, since our
salvation and bliss are at stake. This is what E. churf. G. wanted to
graciously show to us poor people 2c. 2c.

**No. 500 .**

Zerbst. (May 26, 1522?) 6)

To Heinrich Oldenburg in Magdeburg.

Concerns the introduction of Luther\'s banned writings in Magdeburg.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, Ms. 221. 13. *extravag.* 40. Printed in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. LXV (without year) and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 34.

To the honorable and wise *Henrico Oldenburg* at Magdeburg on the
Löscher Hofe, 7) my special, favorable, good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ! That I have not answered you, my dear
Heinrich, to the previous letters, is the reason: I did not know where
from or where to, because there was no date in it; so I did not know
you. But now that I have read in this last letter that it happened in
Magdeburg, I give my answer. If the journeyman knew that the imperial
mandate existed, he cannot swear that he did not know it. Likewise, if
he recognizes and considers my teachings and books to be Christian and
right, he cannot swear in any way to have or read them. But he can swear
to do so, indeed, there is no need to swear, but he should leave it to
himself to bring the books to those who do not want to have them.

6\) This letter has no year. Seidemann places it in the year 1522,
because Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth*. *lib.* I, p. 240 b, reports that
Luther preached a sermon in the Augustinian monastery at Zerbst in that
year; likewise Lingke in D. Martin Luthers merkwürdiger Reisegeschichte,
p. 138. Furthermore, there is a report from the archbishop\'s councilors
to the Cardinal, dated Halberstadt, May 17, 1522, in which it is
reported that the magistrate had imprisoned a cleric who had been
selling Martin\'s books and had delivered him to the archbishop\'s
official for punishment.

7\) Löscher (Löscher) Hof == Lödischer Hof. The printer Hans Walther
also had his workshop there.

**416**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 500 to 505.

417

and persecute them. Just as Christ did not go into the city of Samaria,
because they did not want to be there, and ordered the disciples to flee
from the cities that would not receive them, even to throw the dust from
their feet on them; just as the apostles left the Jews and went to the
Gentiles. But that he should swear not to bring them into Christ\'s
kingdom, that is, to those who want and desire them at Magdeburg, he
cannot do, for \[that would mean\] 1) swearing Christian love,
faithfulness and service. But if they chase him away and prevent him
from entering, he shall suffer and remain outside without all
conspiring: so that he will not let the Christians in, unless he is
forced to do so, and the doors will be closed in front of him, and so he
will keep the power free to serve them with such little books as and
when he can. And comfort him, that he may give thanks to God, who has
made him worthy to be persecuted for the gospel, and be merry with the
apostle *Actor*. 5 For my sin and ingratitude make it unfortunate that I
cannot come to such worthiness. Christ strengthen him and all who are in
like persecution. Date at Zerbst, on Monday *post Vocem Jucunditatis*
\[May 26, 1522\].

Martinus Luther.

**No. 501 .**

Wittenberg. May 27, 1522.

**To Gabriel Zwilling in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2025, no. 671.

**No. 502 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 27, 1522.

**To the Altenburg City Council.**

Luther admonishes the Altenburgers to \"accept it as God\'s will\" if
they cannot keep M. Gabriel. He therefore wanted to write again to the
Elector, and Gabriel should continue to preach until someone else came.

From a copy in the town council archives at Altenburg, printed in the
Mittheilungen der Geschichtforschenden Gesellschaft des Osterlandes, VI,
59, No. 19 (the original was attached to a report of the town council to
the Elector) and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. Ill, p. 374.

1\) Added by us.

God\'s grace and peace, amen. Honorable, wise sirs and dear friends! I
have received Eur Scripture and have heard it everywhere, and my answer
is that you submit your mind to God and do not worry about this offense;
God wants to try you. Therefore, nothing has been spoiled yet, be it
Gabriel or not. But I will write to my lord again. However, I will write
to my lord once again; meanwhile you are satisfied and let the matter
rest, so that Gabriel will stay with you in the meantime and preach, so
that you are not without a preacher until I give you another one, and
refer to me and this my writing, so that you have acted according to my
lord\'s command and sought another preacher, and waited for an answer
and advice from me. But will my lord appoint one of his own? Lord will
appoint one himself, before I can tell you, let God decide, and ask God
that His will be done in this and all matters. What I will say, you
shall hear in another message. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. On Tuesday
post *Urbani* \[27 May\] 1522. Mart. Luther.

**No. 503 .**

Wittenberg. May 28, 1522.

**To Caspar Börner, 2) Professor in Leipzig.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1978.

**No. 5 04.**

(Wittenberg.) May 29, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2612, annex, no. 109.

**No. 504 .**

Wittenberg. May 29, 1522.

**To Joh. Lang in Erfurt.**

Luther sends back a Hebrew dictionary. He exhorts to abolish the worship
of the saints by calm instruction, not by violent condemnation. He wants
to send a letter about this to the people of Erfurt.

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 68d; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 203 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 379. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 788.

2\) The Erl. Briefw., Vol. Ill, p. 376 notes that the name: \"Borner\"
is not to be written: \"Börner\".

**418** Letters from the year 1522. no. 505 to 508. 419

Grace and peace in Christ! I send back the Hebrew dictionary, but the
first one, which I once bought in Erfurt at the beginning, because I
keep yours in my memory because of the many notes, although this one
also contains some, which I do not like to miss; and you do not believe
all of them, because sometimes I have guessed.

I am about to write a letter to your church, but, held back by the
amount of business, I have not yet gotten around to it, but finally want
to put it into action. About the veneration of the saints (I wonder
about this) the whole world asks in such a way that I am forced to
expose my judgment about it. For I would that this question were put out
of the way, for no other reason than that it is not necessary, and, as
Paul says \[1 Tim. 1:4\], will raise so many questions that have no end.
And Satan deals with it, that he turns us away from faith and love by
superfluous and unnecessary questions, and secretly sets up new sects
and heresies, if one is not careful. Therefore, urge only what is
useful, and call all to Christ, so that in the meantime they may learn
that the veneration of the saints is not necessary, if we slacken, it is
permitted and good. But it is foolish to take great pains in unnecessary
things and neglect the necessary ones. The worship of the saints will
fall away by itself when it is certain that it is not necessary and that
Christ alone will be on Mount Tabor \[Matth. 17,8\]. For in this way 1)
this service has fallen away from me, so that I do not know how and when
I stopped calling on the saints in prayer, since I was satisfied with
Christ and God the Father alone. Therefore, I cannot praise those who
condemn with us the worshippers of the saints par excellence. For I
should lead the weak slowly, and not suddenly turn them away from it, by
first giving them an account of the fact that the service is not
necessary, then also maintaining a reverent attitude towards the saints,
of which my booklet will speak. It pleases me that also

1\) Erl. Briefw.: *oratione* instead of: *ratione*.

Usiugeu 2) will step onto the battlefield and lose his very little
prestige. Farewell and pray for me. Greet all of us in Christ.
Wittenberg, on the day of the Ascension \[May 29\] 1522.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 506 .**

(Wittenberg.) (After May 29, 1522.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2565, annex, no. 88.

**No. 507.**

(Wittenberg.) (About the beginning of June 1522.)

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2563, annex, no. 87.

**No. 5 08.**

Wittenberg. June 2, 1522.

**To Volkmar Stolz.**

Answer to the question of whether it is possible to queue the fair and
yet keep the income donated for it.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 69 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 204 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 393. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 789.

Hail! I am so busy that I have misplaced your letter, I don\'t know
where, and was forced to forget yours, my dear Volkmar. But you write
the same thing again: whether you should give up the Mass or the
interest? I answer: The best thing would be if you could persuade the
people that you should keep the interest and completely abstain from the
masses, as our priests do. But if they cannot yet be persuaded, it is
safer to give up the interest as well. This would be a way out, of
course, if you said mass as a communion, not as a sacrifice or good
work, until the weak were taught; but to do this for the sake of
interest, and not out of pure freedom, is not advisable. For who could
resist if someone wanted to communicate himself every day, when

2\) Usingen sat down against the Lutheran preaching Johann Culsamer.

**420** Letters from the year 1522. no. 508 to 511. 421

He would do this only freely, not for the sake of interest, or at the
most, if he would do this out of love of service, with which he would
give way to the weak for a time, as I have advised our chaplains? But I
do not see that this case of servitude is with you; therefore either
communicate freely, or give the interest and the masses acf. So keep it
in the Lord. Fare well. Wittenberg, 1522, Monday after Exaudi \[June
2\].

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 509 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 5, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Use for Hans Neuendorf. News.\'

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 116 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 145. Printed in Aurifaber,
Bb. II, p. 70; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 205 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 394. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 790.

To Georg Spalatin, the evangelist, his brother who is highly honored in
Christ.

Hail! This citizen Hans Neuendorf has asked, my dear Spalatin, that he,
\[recommended by me\] to you, could hand over a petition to the prince
through you. He has I don\'t know what kind of matter, which he fears
will be postponed by the authorities until the prince\'s passing, so
that they will thwart his intention; if it pleases you, you can hear it
from him yourself. He seems to be an eloquent and busy man, and worthy
of being promoted to a position among the citizens, since there are so
many sows and moles here who only serve their bellies.

Hartmann von Kronberg has a messenger here with me with letters. Philip
also has letters from Strasbourg and other places, which will be sent to
you if you want to read them. Fare well and pray for me. It is written
that Jacob, the prior of Antwerp, is again imprisoned by the emperor,
perhaps because he has revoked his recantation. And the emperor is
furious and has

forbade that our brothers should not go to the chapter of the vicar 1).
Thursday after Exaudi \[June 5\] 1522.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 510 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 7, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Intercession for a fisherman who has offended the churfürst fishery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Printed in the
Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 105; in the Altenburg, vol. II. p. 161; in
the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 546; in Walch, vol. XXI, 17; in the
Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 137 and in De Wette, vol. II, p. 206.

To the worthy Lord Magistro Spalatino, electoral: preacher and chaplain,
my special favorable lord and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ, amen. My dear Magister Spalatin! A poor
fisherman has committed a crime, and once he fished too close to my
gracious lord, I asked for him out of intercession against the
locksmith: now I hear that he has sent him away to my gracious lord. Now
I ask you to pray in my name to my merciful lord for him, so that the
punishment may be commuted. For I hear ten silver shocks demanded of
him. I do not want him to go unpunished, so that an example of fear and
regiment may remain, but that it may be a punishment that does not
deprive him of his food. I want to throw him into prison for several
days, or let him eat water and bread for eight days, so that it can be
seen that only correction and not corruption is sought. And that seems
to me to be a right punishment for the poor; the rich should be rounded
up in a bag. I hope you will do this. Hereby commanded by God. On the
evening of Pentecost \[June 7\] Anno 1522. Martin Luther.

**No. 511 .**

Wittenberg. June 11, 1522.

**To Joh. Lang in Erfurt.**

News of the persecution of the Protestants in the Netherlands.

1\) Link had announced a chapter to Grimma for Pentecost 1522; \"our
brothers\" are the Augustinians in the Netherlands.

**422**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 511. 512.

423

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 70 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 207 and
in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. Ill, p. 396. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 791.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I had nothing to write, this
Schott 1) demanded a letter and forced it on me so that it would not
come to you empty. But I ask for what I also asked for before, that you
help the Gospel with fervent and faithful prayers. For Satan is angry
beyond measure everywhere, especially in the Netherlands, where the
Sophists have been given dominion over us. Jacob full of Ypres 2) has
been caught anew and led away because he spoke and wrote against his
retraction; may the Lord strengthen him! Very many from the Hague 3) are
written out to be punished and condemned. It is said that Ferdinand said
he would stake his two dukedoms on suppressing this heresy. Farewell and
greet all our people. Wittenberg, Wednesday after Pentecost sll. June
1522.

Melchior Mirisch 4) is the executioner of the emperor against ours of
the order of Augustine, this holy theologian! Martin Luther.

**No. 512 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 13, 1522.

**To Paul Speratus5) in Iglau.**

News from the Netherlands. On the disputes of the Waldenses and on the
worship of God in the Lord\'s Supper and in the saints.

Handwritten in Dresden in *Cod. Solger*. C 351, sheet 74b. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 71; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 208 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. Ill, p, 397. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 79ä.

To the Lord D. Paul Speratus, who stands in the right hope and faith,
the servant of Christ, who preaches the word of the Gospel in Moravia,
his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! I received your letter with the little
questions,

1\) See No. 373 at the beginning.

2s All issues offer here: *Spreng* instead of *Iperensis*. See No. 475,
the second note. Compare about Probst also No. 509.

3\) *Haga Comitis* == s\' Graavenhaag, the Hague. There was the state
prison where those accused of heresy were brought.

4s Compare No. 475.

5\) For Speratus, see No. 493.

at the same time the letter of Mrs. Julie von Staufen,6) , in which I
read things that pleased me, namely that the Gospel is bearing fruit in
the country, which the imperial satellites, the Sophists, are
persecuting with incredible fury in the Netherlands. But God has given
them a fatal sign, whether they might want to turn around and repent.
For a sea monster has drifted ashore near Haarlem, 7) which is called a
whale, seventy feet long and thirty-five wide. According to old
examples, this monster is considered a certain sign of wrath. May the
Lord have mercy on them and on us!

But to the questions of the Waldenses, which you have asked me through
their messengers,8) I answer thus: First of all, that I wanted such
questions to be stopped and suppressed as much as possible, because they
are useless and dangerous among the common people, who through their
ignorance and carelessness easily fall away from the things that are
necessary, namely from faith and love, to these new and strange and
distant things. And this is the cunning of Satan, that by these
beginnings he may prepare the way to corrupt the simplicity of Christ,
and introduce questions which, as Paul \[1 Tim. 1:4.\] says, have no
end. This is what he did when he introduced philosophy and ceremonies
into the whole world, and no bishops resisted and stood up for the
freedom and purity of the faith. So he is doing now with us with the

6\) The *Cod. Solger*, offers *Herae [Juliae]{.underline} a Stauffen*.
It can hardly be doubted that Luther wrote so, because the name
[Julie]{.underline} returns towards the end of this letter. Here
Aurifaber and him after De Wette has corrigirt the name in, but in the
other place this improvement has omitted. Luther has made a mistake in
the name. Argula von Staufen, born probably in 1492 at Ehrensels Castle
in Bavaria, was married to Friedrich von Grumbach, but in the writings
which she published for the Protestant doctrine, she did not call
herself after the name of her husband, but Argula von
[Staufen.]{.underline} In 1530 she became a widow and died in 1554 in
Zeilitzheim near Schweinfurt.

7\) Aurifaber and De Wette: *Horlen*.

8\) The Waldensians are the Bohemian brothers or Pickards. The questions
had been presented to Speratus by Benedict Optatus, which Speratus,
along with his own judgment, presented to Luther for decision through
the envoys of the Brethren Unity, Joh. Roh and Michael Weiß.

**424** Letters from the year 1522. no. 512. 425

The saints\' service and what the saints perceive in heaven, his
mockery, which we intend to meet as much as the Lord will lend. This is
undoubtedly what happened to the Waldensian brothers. Therefore, do as
follows: urge, persist, demand what is necessary, namely faith and love;
if they do not take hold of these first, express your disgust at their
frivolity, which is occupied with other, external and non-necessary
things. For even the sacrament itself is not so necessary that faith and
love should be put aside for its sake. It is foolish to quarrel about
these minor things and at the same time neglect these precious and
wholesome things.

However, lest they think that no answer can be given to impudent and
foolish men, I would say thus: It is free to worship and call upon
Christ under the sacrament, 1) for he does not sin who does not worship,
nor does he sin who worships. Here must be the end of this controversy,
and you must not allow either of them to be forced and pressed, and let
no one cite foreskin or circumcision, nor let them judge one another
here. Therefore despise thou, and by despising reject such a dispute in
this matter. If faith and love are there, there can be no sin here,
either by worshipping or by not worshipping; but if faith and love are
not there, everyone will sin forever, whether he worships or not, yes,
he will sin forever throughout his life. For faith worships in such a
way that it imagines Him alone, of whom it has no doubt that His body
and blood are there. If those quarrelsome people do not want to call
this concomitance, let them call it something else, and stop quarreling,
since they agree on the matter itself. For no one denies, I mean, not
even the brothers themselves, that the body and blood are there.

1\) Here, the Erl. Briefw., which we have followed, according to the
*Cod. Solger: Tamen ne importunis et stultis*

*non posse responderi putent, sic dicerem: liberum*

*est, Christum adorare et* invocare *etc.* Against this offer

Aurifaber and De Wette: *Tamen ne importunum responsum* dem *stultis, ne
putent me non posse respondere, sic dico: liberum esse, Christum adorari
et invocari etc..*

The blood of Christ is there to be worshipped. It is enough that this is
called concomitance. But those who want to find out how the divinity is
grasped there in *concomitant,* punish them as those who in foolish
presumption and with carnal imaginations fall upon the mysteries of God,
so that you may keep them in simplicity of faith and the pure knowledge
of the sacrament. For where such foolish and unnecessary imaginations
are allowed, they will make rash people, and with the setting aside of
faith will bring back that whole mud pit of place, of the infinite, of
empty space, of greatness, of essence, and everything that has so far
fooled natural reason and philosophy, therefore one must be vigilant
here that simplicity be preserved. Again, faith and love does not
worship, because it knows that it is not commanded to worship, and that
one does not sin by not worshipping. Thus he passes freely through the
midst of them, and tolerates them all, letting each one have his own
way. He only forbids that they should not quarrel and that one should
judge the other, for he hates sects and divisions, but lets everything
be free.

So also this dispute is to be laid to rest, whether under the bread
alone the body is by the power of the words 2c. For what need is there,
as you yourself have judged, to involve the coarse people in these
quibbles, who meanwhile can be led by this sound and sure faith, namely,
that they believe that under the bread is the body of him who is true
God and true man. But as there are *concomitant* blood, humanity,
divinity, hair, bone and skin, what need is there that we should trouble
ourselves about these things, since it is not necessary that they should
be known? Faith is neither taught nor increased by these things, but
doubt and discord are sown. Faith does not want to know more than that
under the bread is the body of Christ, under the wine the blood of
Christ, who lives and reigns; in this simplicity it persists and
despises impertinent questions.

So I would also answer that of the worship and invocation of GOD, who is
in the

1522\. no. 512. 513. - **427**

**426** Letters from the year

He is free and neither of them is necessary. But it is not as certain
with most people that he dwells in them as it is certain that he is
under the sacrament. But we read in 1 Cor. 14:25 that the apostle says
that the unbeliever would fall on his face and worship God in the saints
if he had heard them prophesying. And Abraham saw three angels and
worshipped the One Lord. And what do we do when we precede one another
in reverence (this is the example you use), but to honor and worship God
in ourselves? Therefore it shall be free to call upon GOD, whether in a
man or apart from man, in the creature or apart from the creature, for,
\"I fill heaven and earth, saith the LORD\" \[Jer. 23:24\]. Here faith
walks quite securely, which in all alone honors GOD; but to the
unbelievers it cannot be sufficiently said, reproached, and proved that
they always worship themselves. Therefore, as I have said, teach only
that they should be sound in faith, and such questions will not be
necessary, and the anointing will instruct them by itself in all things,
without which we do nothing but fall into questions that have no end.

Greetings in my name to Martin Novilianus, 1) and wish him much
salvation in Christ. I have written to Mrs. Julie 2) but very briefly.
The booklets of the vows have long been out of print; we have ordered
that they be printed anew. We have arranged for the bearers to see to it
that what we have is sent to you. You are well in Christ and pray for
me. Friday after Pentecost \[June 13\] 1522.

As I was about to close this letter and was looking through yours again
to see whether I had satisfied all things, I came across a small note in
which you ask about the power of the words in the sacrament, of which
power you quite rightly judge that it comes from the promise, if it is
otherwise that I speak to you, in the words fei. But you also know that

1\) Martin Novilianus, native of Winterberg in Bohemia, teacher at the
school in Jglau, then member of the town council, died as mayor there in
1559.

2\) of Argula von Staufen. See above.

faith alone consecrates, and that priests are often without faith while
they consecrate, where necessarily the words are not only spoken in jest
and deceitfully, but also in impiety. Therefore, in order to be sure, we
must learn in every way that they also consecrate, and nevertheless such
an unbelieving priest must nevertheless consecrate as a minister in the
faith of the Church, since he consecrates by command and authority of
the Church. For it is not he who speaks the words, but the church; but
he is the minister of the words spoken by the church, as you can easily
gather from this. Again, be well. Martin Luther.

**No. 513**

Wittenberg. June 15, 1522.

**To Claus Sturm, mayor of Magdeburg.**

In a letter, Sturm reminded Luther of his earlier acquaintance with him
and expressed his surprise that he was so harsh in his criticism and
scolding of the great. Luther replied that he had long used patience and
humility, but in vain; now, following the example of Christ and the
prophets, he used severity.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 153d; in the Jena
edition (1585), vol. II, p. 127; in the Altenburg edition, vol. II, p.
158; in the Leipzig edition, vol. X VIII, p. 314 ; in Walch, vol. XXI,
18; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 137; and in De Wette, vol. II,
p. 211.

To the honorable and wise Claus Storm, mayor of Magdeburg, my special
favorable gentleman and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, dear Lord and friend! I have
received your writing, and it is certainly true that I recognized you at
D. Paulus Moßhauer4 ), not in your house, but when he was an official,
and you were his guest several times, since I went to school with Hans
Reinecke at that time to the Zero Brothers.

3\) We have agreed with the Erl. Briefw. *prolatorum* assumed instead of
*probatorum in* Aurifaber and De Wette.

4\) Luther lived with the same person when he went to school in
Magdeburg. - Hans Reinecke, son of Peter Reinecke, a mining bailiff in
Mansfeld, later a master smelter in Mansfeld. - The Nullbrüder,
Lollbrüder, Trolbrüder, Lollharden are the brothers of the common life.

**428** Letters from the year

1522\. no. 513. 514. **429**

But that you do not understand why I attack and rebuke the high chiefs
and prelates so harshly, calling them fools and asses, when Christ
teaches everywhere that one should be patient, I answer: I have shown my
patience and humility too much. I have pleaded and begged; I have now
followed them three times 1) and have always offered myself humbly, as
all the world knows. Now that some worldly wise men do not want to look
at my humble pleading and humility to improve themselves, but take only
that, because I am hard and serious, and are angry about it: They are
like the stubborn Pharisees, who abandoned all the kindness and mercy of
our Lord Christ, and did not improve themselves, but where he called
them vipers, blind fools, children of devils, adulterers, and the like,
they fasted and were angry. If you read the 24th \[23rd\] Cap. Matthew,
you will see how Christ calls them blind fools.

Until now, we have been accustomed to praise and flatter the prelates
while the gospel lay under the pew. But now it comes out, and punishes
the high heads as fools and blind men, it seems strange to us. Violence
and injustice should be suffered by everyone; this I have done, and
still do; but a preacher should not be silent about it, but as Isaiah
says in the 58th chapter, lift up his voice and tell the prelates their
sin, mischievousness, and malice 2c. This is what the prophets,
apostles, and Christ himself did, even though they willingly endured all
kinds of suffering. There is a great difference between being patient
and keeping silent about the wickedness of the prelates. Silence is no
good; one must suffer, punish and rebuke; but one must also love and do
good. A father scolds, punishes and chastises his child, and yet is not
hostile to him; but he is hostile to him who keeps silent about his
wickedness, and neither scolds nor chastises. Hereby I command you to
God. Given at Wittenberg, June 15, 1522.

Martinus Luther.

1\) \"three times\": to Cajetan, to Miltitz and to Worms.

**No. 514.**

Wittenberg. June 26, 1522.

**To Joh. Lang in Erfurt.**

About the opponents of the gospel in Erfurt, especially Usingen. From
King Henry VIII\'s. Book; on the persecutions in the Netherlands and the
dangers threatening the Protestants in Germany.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 74; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 213 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 403. German in Walch, vol. XXl, 797.

Grace and peace in Christ, amen. That there are people among you who
resist the gospel and tear people away from it by force and cunning, you
need not be surprised at this if you believe that the gospel is in truth
the gospel. For \"with wicked men it grows worse the longer, deceiving
and being deceived,\" says Paul \[2 Tim. 3:13.\]. You know that
Usingen\'s head is so hardened by ingrained obstinacy and the high
opinion he has of himself that it is harder than a demant. Therefore,
his nonsense must be taught against in such a way that his completely
unlearned and blind pomposity is despised. For so he is accustomed from
youth to soften no one. Therefore there is no hope that he will give way
to Christ, since he has already been trained and prepared for hardness
by long practice and art. Let him go, that he may confirm the proverb,
in which it is said: \"Age does not help any foolishness\", and he is
dependent on the violence of old age and childishness. By the way, my
opinion is that it is free to keep the judicial and ceremonial precepts
of Moses, as Philip also teaches in his *locis.* 2) It is not necessary
that adulterers be stoned, 2c. which can be punished with the sword or
in any other way. I have a letter ready for you 3) and, Christ willing,
it will come soon. The followers of Duke Georg (*Georgiani*) in Meissen
far surpass yours in toxicity, nonsense and rage. They praise the book

2\) *Corp. Ref.*, vol. XXI, 197 sf.

3\) \"Unterricht an die Kirche zu Erfurt,\" St. Louis edition, vol. XIX,
962.

**430**

Letters from the year 1522. no. 514. 515. 516.

431

of the King of England, 1) but I suspect that that Leus \[Lee\] is
hidden under the Hallt. The emperor has recommended the same according
to his wisdom, which was given to him by his devil Glapio, his Minorite
confessor, an exceedingly arrogant: and exceedingly minoritic monk, that
fool of Egmond 2) and other sophists in the Netherlands. And these rage
in an unbelievable way after they have received unlimited power
(*tyrannide*): they have imprisoned Jacob 3) again, and we believe that
he has already been burned with some others, or will certainly be
burned; others they drive out of the cities and do them extraordinary
dishonor. We expect the same with regard to us, especially since there
is a strong rumor that the emperor and the pope will have a meeting in
Nuremberg, so that these two idols will fulfill what Christ wants,
namely that they will put an end to their own kingdom and bring about
the Last Day. Therefore we want Christ to be bitter, so that he either
converts them, or that they may increase their rage, so that they will
perish immediately. I will not cease to challenge and provoke Satan and
Satan\'s scales to destroy themselves with their own teeth. Greet all of
ours and farewell. Wittenberg, 1522, Thursday, the eighth day after the
Feast of Corpus Christi \[June 26\]\....

Your Martin Luther.

We think differently of Hesse 4) than you write; for proof serve: his
two letters to us.

**No. 515 .**

Wittenberg. June 27, 1522.

**To Staupitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 607, no. 222.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 134. See also the introduction there,
p. 3 b.

2\) Nicolaus of Egmond, who was assigned by the emperor together with
Latomus to the heretic judge van der Hulft as an advisory council.

3\) Provost.

4\) It is not Joh. Hess in Breslau who is meant, but Eoban Hesse, the
poet from Erfurt, about whom Lang sent spiteful reports to Wittenberg
and accused him of collusion with the adversaries. The two letters
mentioned here are missing.

**No. 5 16.**

Oels Castle. June 29, 1522.

**Duke Carl von Münsterberg to Luther.**

He wants Luther to publish a scripture or scriptures in which it is
clearly stated that the Lord\'s Supper should be partaken of according
to Christ\'s order in both forms, so that the honor of his ancestor
George Podiebrad, King of Bohemia, who had been banished by the pope for
this reason, may be restored.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 154; in the Jena
edition (1585), vol. II, p. I27b (with the marginal note that Luther\'s
answer to it had been in the librarei of Caspar Güttel at Eisleben, but
was later removed); in the Altenburg edition, vol. II, p. 186; in the
Leipzig edition, vol. XVIII, p. 317; in Walch, vol. XXI, 123\* and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 408. All these editions are based on the
Wittenberg.

By the Grace of God Carl, Prince of the Holy Roman Empire, Duke of
Münsterberg in Silesia, zur Olsen, Count of Glatz, Lord of Kunstadt and
Podiebrad 2c., Governor of the Margraviate of Upper Lusatia.

Worthy and devout Father! Among other of your Christian writings and
doctrines, we have not considered one of the least, but the most
important pieces, according to the holy Gospel, to receive and eat the
holy testament of our Savior Christ in its entirety, as under both
forms, and although, according to our little understanding, even before
this time, we have always followed the word of Christ more faithfully
than the seduction of the papal see: Nevertheless, for the sake of the
high title, name and authority of papal holiness, we have been
fainthearted in this, and with others without light, until through you
the truth of our Savior Christ has been brought to light, his gospel has
been brought forth, and the papist pomp has been replaced with
evangelical doctrine, by which we have gained courage, consolation and
strength, and thus return to our intended opinion.

And that you, Christian father, may recognize and hear the grievance of
our hearts, we do not want to plead with you in a splendid manner or
after the exercise of princely status, but as with our brother, with
this avoidance: that the most illustrious prince, King George of
Bohemia, of laudable memory, our dear lord and ancestor, for this reason
alone, that according to the noble word of Christ he confessed to
receive his holy testament in its entirety, under both forms, and thus
also remained in the same custom until his mortal departure, from the
papal chair to the

**432** Letters from the year

1522\. no. 516. 517. **433**

The fourth generation is still being proclaimed a chief heretic by the
same one, who prides himself as a governor of Christ, with the Bulla
*Coenae Domini.* If we now come to the rightly recognized truth that
also the House of Münsterberg has had to endure such a calamity against
God, honor and right for such a long time, we want you, devout father,
to take it to heart.

And that is even more, the pope has taken away not the least part from
our highly thought lord and ancestor, King George, with banishment and
renunciation of their oaths and duties, and what misfortune has resulted
from this for many is evident and disgraceful; consider it well, worthy
father, that you, as you have experience of much such history that has
occurred, also have good knowledge of it.

Therefore, for the honor of Christ, for the preservation of His holy
word, for the comfort of our consciences, for the dampening of the evil
of the House of Münsterberg, and for the protection of our and our
heirs\' princely dignity, we have placed our eager desire on you, also
asking you to take this Christian, and on the other hand the papal
business, as it is briefly described here, to your Christian mind, to
clarify it and to deny it with your writings, and let it come to light,
if your oath and duty, with which you adhere to the holy Scriptures,
require and demand this in addition to the Gospel, 1) so that this evil
delusion of our Lord and ancestor may be set aside among the common
people by such evangelical guidance, and so that we and our heirs will
have to resist the papist malediction and proclamation in our hearts all
the more comfortingly and courageously, without biting consciences.

Only our opinion would be that our person would not be reported in your
writings, if you would let it go out as if it had happened from our
incitement, 2) for the sake of moving causes 3) which we would like to
tell afterwards, where the Almighty God wants to send our meeting, to
which we aspire, are inclined and hotly eager.

And how much we like your person, as now then

1\) \"erheischen\" is Conjectur des Erl. Briefw. for: \"promise\".

2\) \"would\" put by us instead of: \"would\".

3\) These moving causes are obviously the considerations imposed on him
by his position against King Louis of Bohemia, who a few months earlier,
on Christmas Eve 1521, had issued a strict mandate to the Silesian
estates not to let the Lutheran doctrine take root, but to eradicate it.

4\) but we are of the understanding and constant faith that you will
show and prove your Christian love, faithfulness, and dutiful service,
in honor of Christ and His Word, and for the refreshment of our
conscience, 5) in such a way that we may assume that this request of
ours, which is just and proper, has not sprouted unfruitfully, but has
actually taken place and been preserved.

With this we have faithfully committed ourselves to your prayers,
especially that the merciful God may give all authorities the right
understanding and sense to keep and use their temporal government in
peace and harmony for the blessedness of common Christendom. Given at
our castle at6) Olsen, on June 29, Anno Domini 1522.

**No. 517.**

Wittenberg. June 30, 1522.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

A short reply letter with some messages.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmann-Briefe No.
5. Handwritten in the Franciscaneum at Zerbst, Ms. 26, fol. 7 b. Printed
by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 79b; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 218 (according
to Aurifaber, dated: beginning of July). From the original in Theol.
Studien und Kritiken, 1835, p. 341, communicated by H. Lindner;
subsequently in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 36 and (from the
original) in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 411. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
805.

To the holy and godly man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the sincere and
faithful bishop of the church at Zwickau, his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! This man (as you know), a protector of the
Gospel, I did not want to return to you empty, dearest John, 7) so that
I might

4\) In the old editions \"gewenet\" instead of \"erwähnet\".

5\) In spite of these pious-sounding sayings, Duke Carl joined the
rebellion that began in Bohemia in 1524. He tried to resist the
penetration of Lutheranism into his country and took part in the
ceremonies of the Roman church, e.g. the processions, with a certain
ostentation. His main concern was to help the soul of his Hussite
grandfather, George Podiebrad, to bliss in heaven, and also to redeem it
from the Pope\'s curse, which is why he consulted not only Luther, but
also the papal legate in Ofen.

6\) Thus the Jenaer. Wittenbergers: \"too\".

7\) As the inscription shows, Luther is not mistaken in the first name,
but he wants to indicate Hausmann\'s character by this designation.

**434** Letters from the year 1522. no. 517 to 521. 435

I would again like to command your prayers, since I had nothing else to
write. They say, however, that the princes are taking counsel over my
head and that of ours.

Jacob, the prior of Antwerp, who had previously recanted, was again
imprisoned in Brussels because of the recantation he had condemned, and
many write to us that he has already been burned. The Sophists are
raging there with unbelievable tyranny, whom the emperor, a fool to
fools, has charged with the matter. 1) Many renounce, then come to terms
with it, and are imprisoned again. And the godless tyrants hasten to
their end by challenging Christ and his future.

Greet the servants of the word who are with you, and both mayors with
theirs and the castle. And you are well in Christ. Wittenberg, on the
day of the commemoration of Paul \[June 30\] 1522.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 51 8.**

Wittenberg. July 4, 1582.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2571, anh., no.91.

**No. 519 .**

Wittenberg. July 4, 1522.

**To Wenceslaus Link.**

Luther urges him to take up residence in Wittenberg.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 79; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 217 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 428. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 804.

Grace and peace in Christ! Either you, dearest father, invent some
unworthy cause of your delay, or you hate our fellowship. For what is
the use of your remaining there? The Upper and the Netherlands are
forbidden to you; nowhere can you stay safer and better than here with
lins. Unless, for the sake of the sacred splendor of our order, you
guard against us impure and maligned ones, so that those who are going
to the

1\) Compare No. 514.

The Lord has awakened your displeasure in Christ. 2) Return, I beseech
thee, and that soon, for it shall come to pass that we shall have need
of thee here in the Lord. We are waiting for you; see to it that you do
not deceive us; there are also necessary matters of faith in which we
would always like to have your presence and promote the common cause
with mutual counsel. 3) All of us greet you. Fare well in Christ.
Wittenberg, 1522, Friday after the Visitation of the Virgin Mary \[July
4\].

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 520.**

(Wittenberg.) July 10, 1522.

**To Gabriel Zwilling in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2615, annex, no. 110.

**No. 521 .**

Wittenberg. July 10, 1522.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

Luther sends him the missive for the congregation in Erfurt.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 80b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 210 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, 429. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 806.

Grace and peace! See, there you have the epistle, 4) which I drafted in
haste. Set the seal and read it, and if it seems to you that it should
be printed, let it be properly divided into paragraphs. If you want more
people to be greeted, add the names, but in such a way that you do not
do this in the pursuit of honor, either for them or for yourself; you
must keep this in mind for the sake of it, because we are all human
beings; also, you may not increase their number beyond ten. I had a more
learned and richer

2\) *excitati*, awakened, is to be understood according to 2 Mos. 9,
16. - The \"return\" refers to Link\'s presence in Wittenberg before
Pentecost, before the chapter in Grimma.

3\) One sees that Luther at this invitation did not know yet that the
Elector had already appointed Link on June 26 as a preacher in
Altenburg, and that he had already promised on July 2 from Neustadt an
der Orla his arrival in Altenburg for the next week.

4\) No. 522.

5\) At the end of the epistle we find only six names.

**436** Letters from 1522. no. 521. 522. 523. **437**

Epistle, but I did not find the time. As soon as I have time, however, I
will take up some passage of Scripture and write to you about it. In the
meantime, be well in the Lord and pray for me. Greetings to all of us.
Wittenberg, July 10, 1522.

Martin Luther.

**No. 522 .**

Wittenberg. July 10, 1522.

**To the congregation at Erfurt. See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 962.**

**No. 523 .**

Wittenberg. July 15, 1522.

**To the Bohemian Estates.**

Luther exhorts the Bohemians to stick to their faith and not to
reconcile with the papal see, hoping that the Germans and the Bohemians
will unite in doctrine.

This letter, as Seidemann says in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 475, Note 1 z.
E., was originally written in Latin, but the existing Latin texts differ
so much from each other that they seem to be back translations from
German. It is found in manuscript in the Dresden Archives, *Locat*
10,300, Bl. 54, in a copy sent to Duke George from Prague. It has many
abbreviations, and although some corrections indicate care, it is still
not very accurate. Printed in the Latin Wittenberg edition (1551), tom.
II, iol. 306 (wrong 630), datirt den 29. Juli; in Aurifaber, vol. II, p.
84b (datirt den 15. Juli, ter. 3. *divisionis Apostolorum*) and after
Aurifaber in De Wette, vol. II, p. 228, German (everywhere with the
date: 10. Juli) in the Wittenberg (1569), vol. IX, p. 154b; in the Jena
(1585), vol. II, p.128b; in the Altenburger, vol. II, p. 187; in the
Leipziger, vol. XVIII, p. 313; in Walch, vol. XXI, 21; in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 225; and in the Erlanger, vol.53, p.144. We have worked with the
Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 432, adopted the time determination which
Aurifaber and the Dresden manuscript offer. The indication of the
apostle\'s day in Aurifaber is undoubtedly based on an old model, and it
is probable that our writing has the same date with the next following
letter.

Grace and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, amen.
Sublime, high-born, venerable and worthy, well-born, honorable and
noble, dear lords and friends! Although I, as a despised human being,
consider myself too lowly to request and address such great and
excellent lords, nevertheless, the high

1\) not to make a fuss, neither to Your Lordship, Your Highness and Your
Respectability, nor to my unworthiness, so that I should not report it,
if I think so.

The rumor has spread among us, as if some of you should dare to be
concerned that the Bohemians should fall again to the harmful chair of
Roman tyranny, and that this reason should be put forward, as if the
Bohemians might otherwise have no lasting peace for eternity. It is true
that before this time I was almost disinclined to the Bohemians, before
I knew that the Pope is the true Antichrist; but now, in the meantime,
Christ, our dear Lord, has graciously and abundantly let his blessed
word shine again to us in this terrible last time, I well believe that
Your Grace and Esteem have heard that the Bohemians are at peace, Your
Reverence and Respectability have heard that I have praised your
disobedience to the Popes in such a way that none of you has ever borne
the hatred of your name with so much difficulty as I have. For how often
am I scolded, even today, as if I had been born a Bohemian, or had dared
to flee to Bohemia! And indeed, I would have come to Bohemia once 2) not
for the sake of escape, but out of eagerness to scare you and to learn
your faith; but I did not want to do this honor to my enemies, the
papists, against the divine word, so that they should boast and shout
that they had overcome me, and because of this I had become a fugitive
from the ensign. In addition, because now, praise God, your name is not
censured by the most distinguished gentlemen of the German nation, and
is also more honest and more praiseworthy among the common man than my
own reputation and name, I am of good hope that it will soon come to
pass that both Germans and Bohemians will acquire one mind and name
through the Gospel and the divine Word; only if we patiently await
God\'s mercy, and if one part lacks something, we will tolerate it in
the meantime. For it may

1\) \"the high great cause\". King Louis was dealing with reuniting the
Utraquists with Rome at the first Diet he held in June 1522. Luther
heard about this, and this prompted him to write this letter.

2\) \"once\" in Latin *aliquando* - long ago.

**439**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 523.

**438**

all things will not soon be changed in one hui, nor with painting. But
let us deal carefully with your people, faithfully preside over them
through godly, pious preachers, lead them only to the Lord Christ, and
forgive and pardon one another from the heart, and, as they say, do not
demand everything at once, nor seek it most carefully.

If there are still sects and cults among you, let it be so; we know well
that it cannot be as pure as it ought to be. Therefore St. Paul speaks
not without cause 1 Corinthians 11:19: \"There must be sects among you\"
2c. But if you think that you will come to the Roman See by such
acclamation, so that Bohemia may not be further divided into sects, 1)
that will certainly not happen by this means. Are there not discord and
sects among us Germans and everywhere else where the pope\'s tyranny
reigns? The mendicant monks alone are divided and torn into seven sects;
the barefooted are also divided into seven different barefoots. And over
all these sects the most holy father in Rome holds with all his might
and defends them, because he is afraid that they will become one. With
the same care he is also concerned that secular kings and princes be and
remain at odds with one another; for his rule can exist by no better
means than by discord between spiritual and secular prelates or great
lords. Therefore, the Bohemians\' discord in faith may not be compared
or united with the sects in the papacy by such a way or means (to go to
the pope).

Therefore, Your Grace, Reverence and respectability may well take care
that they do not get out of bad little sects, which can be helped, into
sects again, which St. Peter calls pernicious sects \[2 Petr. 2, 1.From
which the right of the Lord has graciously delivered you long ago, and
we are in daily work to work ourselves out of them also by His grace and
help; we have also, praise God, begun blessedly. Therefore the Sects

1\) \"may\" put by us instead of: \"like\", according to the Latin.

by no means can they be stopped, except, as I said, when godly pastors
and preachers purely teach and spread the gospel, which is a word of
peace and grace; this alone makes a people of one accord, and it is
Christ alone who by this makes people of one accord dwell in the house
of the Lord \[Ps. 133:1\].

If, however, the people may not be able to refrain from such a
coincidence with the Roman See, I ask that Your Grace and respectability
let me keep this with you, Your honor and respectability will let me
keep this with you, that you confidently sit down against the wretched
blasphemous chair at Rome, to keep both forms of the holy sacrament,
also that you do not condemn the innocent blood of your blessed John Hus
and Jerome of Praga together with their doctrine; for these two articles
the blasphemous chair, the drunken whore of the holy blood, will
earnestly require and want to keep from you. Neither will he accept you,
nor may he accept you, without the injury of his tyranny, for you swear
to the above two articles. But all those who will swear shall know, by
my testimony before God and the world, that they swear by the Lord
Christ, and are children of perdition and eternal damnation. Truly, I
and ours want to defend John Hus, the holy martyr of Christ, and even if
all of Bohemia, since God is for it, has denied his teachings, he shall
still be ours.

Therefore, I ask Your Grace, Reverend and Esteemed Sirs, briefly this
time (at another time I will, if God wills, write more and further),
that you will stand firm and persevere in the disobedience of the devil,
as you have so far remained steadfast through many tribulations that you
have endured over it, and that you will not do our Gospel, which, praise
God, is now flourishing again, any harm by your apostasy. Further, do
not be deceived by this, although not all things are as they should be
with you. If you are now Galatians, God can raise up some Paul who will
restore you and make well that which is now sick. But do not fall away,
that is, do not submit to the godless Roman tyranny.

**440** Letters from your year 1522.

No. 523 to 527.

441

Lastly, I beseech the Lord Jesus Christ that he may graciously continue
and prosper, that your hearts may be enlightened and led into all the
perfection of the grace and knowledge of Christ, who is blessed and
blessed for ever and ever, amen. Your Grace, Honorable and Respected
One, please accept my thoughtless letter in Christ. Given at Wittenberg,
on the 10th day of July in the year 22.

E. Gn., Reverend and Achtb.

willing servant in Christo

Martinus Luther.

**No. 524.**

Wittenberg. July 15, 1522.

**To Sebastian von Schlick, Count of Passun.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 280. .

**No. 525.**

Wittenberg. July 16, 1522.

**To Joh. Lang in Erfurt.**

About the death of the local preacher Georg Forchheim and the filling of
his position.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 866; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 234 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. Ill, p. 434. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 807.

Grace and peace in Christ! I begrudge and envy the Forchheim this
entrance, yes, I bear sorrow with you. But Christ gives him his own and
you a better one, if you only hope. I have obtained from Magister
Wolfgang 1) that, if he is chosen by you, he will accept the parish in
his name until you can arrange it better. He is a good man, he will be
ready to serve, to yield and to endure according to the will of God who
calls through us. Meanwhile, with Culsamer, see to it that you put down
the impetuosity of the people, 2) and keep the ministry of the Gospel
undefiled. If by poison

1\) Wolfgang Stein, court preacher in Weimar. - \"in his name,\" that
is, that he only gives the name to it. See No. 528.

2\) Rumors circulated that Forchheim had been killed by poison, which
was supposed to have been spread on the pulpit, because he had often
severely punished the fornication of the monastery people. Therefore one
feared probably violent acts of the people.

is killed, neither a plaintiff nor a scout is needed; Christ himself
will speak for his Abel, and in his time he will bring Cain to light in
a more just and suitable way than you can; let us suffer this. By the
way, I believe that my epistle 3) has been faithfully delivered to you.
I also sent a letter to the blasphemers who had an emissary with me.
Christ will do his miracles without us, let us only trust and tolerate.
Greetings to all brothers in Christ. Wittenberg, July 16, 1522. Martin
Luther.

**No. 526.**

Wittenberg. July 26, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2573, annex, no. 92.

**No. 527.**

Wittenberg. July 28, 1522.

**To Adam Kraft4) in Fulda.**

Luther exhorted him to faithfully administer the preaching position he
had taken up in Fulda.

The original is at the city library in Ulm. Printed in Veesenmeyer\'s
Beiträge zur Gesch. der Litt, 2c., p. 153; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 236
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. ill, p. 436.

To the learned and godly man, Mr. Adam, evangelist of the church at
Fulda, his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I received your greeting and your request,
that is, your kindness and love, with gratitude and joy, dear Adam, and
even though I had nothing to write, it seemed good to me to write just
this, as a testimony to my grateful spirit. I hear that you have
accepted the office of an evangelist.

3\) No. 522.

4\) Adam Kraft, *Crato,* born 1493 at Fulda as son of the mayor there,
studied since 1512 in Erfurt, was present 1519 as Magister at the
Leipzig Disputation, then preacher in Fulda, where he preached the
Gospel and had to give way 1524 to his enemies. Then at Hersfeld, where
Landgrave Philip heard him and appointed him his court preacher on
August 15, 1525; professor at Marburg in 1527; at the Marburg
Conversation in 1529; with the signers of the Schmalkaldic Articles 2c.
in 1537; died in 1558.

**442** Letters from 1522. no. 527 to 530. **443**

I pray that you will be more and more blessed with the praise of his
glory. So that this may continue happily, I pray 1) that Christ may
blessedly blossom more and more to the praise of His glory among you,
and that the fig tree of the Lord may grow green, even though it still
bears little fruit, perhaps because the time for figs has not yet come.
The Lord turn away the curse and give abundance of fruit among the
leaves, amen. That you are under the splendor of the relics, and stand
on the mulberry tree,2) you must endure for a while, until Christ comes
and looks and tells you to come down. In the meantime, do not cease to
want to see Jesus, who he is; even you are small in person in this city
of giants and nimrods. May the Lord Jesus multiply and preserve you in
the uttermost distresses, Amen. Wittenberg, 1522, July 28.

Martin Luther.

**No. 52 8.**

(Wittenberg.) July 29, 1522.

**To Joh. Riedtesel, Princely Saxon Director at Weimar.**

Luther asks him to intercede with Duke John of Saxony for the election
of Wolfgang Stein as preacher in Erfurt.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 108; in the Altenburger,
vol. II, p. 1O6; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 546; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 20. Alls the original in the Unsch. Nachr. 1716, p. 948; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 237 and in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 148.

To the strict and firm, Mr. Johanns Riedtesel, princely director at
Weimar, my especially favorable lord and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ, together with my service. Dear Sir and
Friend! M. Wolfgangus, now with us, has asked me, after he was concerned
that it might bring him suspicion from M. G. Lord, Duke John 2c., that
he has been chosen by those in Erfurt to be pastor of St. Michel, that I
write to E. G. and admonish him to be a good mediator and interpreter
before my most gracious lord; for the

1\) *te rogo*. It seems to us *te* too much.

2\) This and the following is said with reference to Zacchaeus, Luc. 19,
2. ff.

is ever true that he neither wanted nor pushed for it. Now, however, the
good people of Erfurt would have prevented rebellion and loss, and to
promote the Gospel, so that a wolf would not have entered after the
fallen shepherd, have mentioned his person in such a way that he would
only accept it and have the pastor\'s name, and yet be and work beside
it where he wants, until God sends the matter differently: it was not
due to him to refuse such service of Christian guilty love, and I have
also advised him to do so; since he himself and my G. H. have neither
failed nor been harmed, and the people of Erfurt have received a great
service and help. H., and the people of Erfurt will be greatly served
and helped. It is therefore my diligent request to E. G. that he will
make himself worthy of Christian love and service, and whether it will
please him in front of my Lord. Lord (of which I do not deny myself)
suspicion or disfavor, be kindly threatened that my G. Lord receive such
instruction and graciously grant him to prove such service and duty of
love to those at Erfurt in this necessary case, where E. G. has
requested such from my G. Lord, as a highly renowned lover. Lord, as a
highly renowned lover of the Gospel. I want to be found unsaved, if
possible, in order to earn His blessing. God\'s grace be with you, Amen.
On Tuesday after Jacobi \[July 29\] Anno 1522.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 529 .**

Wittenberg. July 29, 1522.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XI V, 172.

**No. 530 .**

(Wittenberg.) 3. August 1522.

**To Nic. Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Hausmann had written that the auxiliary bishop would come to Zwickau to
confirm the children. Luther advised him to oppose this undertaking and
to tell the bishop that he had reason to do so from Scripture.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Manuscript in the
Franciscaneum at Zerbst, *Cod.* 26, fol. 8b and in the
Rathsschulbibliothek at Zwickau, *Cod*. XXXIV. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 90b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 240 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
Ill, p. 439. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 808.

**444** Letters from the year 1522. no. 530 to 532. 445

To the worthy man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at
Zwickau, his superior who is to be highly honored in the Lord.

Grace and peace from God! I wish, my dear Nicolaus, if it were possible,
that you rather examine the coming bishop-god over the faith, since
these unfortunate people are twofold children in the faith and in the
knowledge of Christ. For I would like that this game and the lie of the
Sacrament of Confirmation should be completely talked out of the people,
because it is written \[Jer. 29, 31\]: \"They have made my people trust
in lies. Rather, they may say \[to us\]: Where are those promises and
marks proclaimed in the Scriptures, which the godless bishop 1) boasts
of in this wicked note? If they are not proclaimed, what is the use of
allowing the people to be mocked with lying promises and fictitious
marks? Surely it will behoove you to address the coming bishop about
these things, and to \"resist him to the face for the people of Christ,
as Paul resisted Peter,\" and to demand that he prove with Scripture
what he is about to do. If he will not or cannot do this, you will
exhort the people not to trust in the comedy of this confirmation.
Immediately after I saw your note, I had this other one 2) printed
against the degrees invented by these wicked monsters. Farewell and
greet all of us in the Lord. On the third of August 1522.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 530a .**

(Wittenberg.) (August 3) 1522.

**Meanings about forbidden marriage degrees and about firming.**

This writing appeared in several individual editions under the title:
\"WIlche Person verpoten sind zu eelichen in der hailigen schrifft bayde
der Freundschafft vn Mogschafft.

1\) The Bishop of Meissen, John VII von Schleinitz.

2\) De Wette asks, \"What scripture is this?\" as does the Erl. Briefw.,
but the latter assumes that it is the text about the forbidden degrees
of marriage, in which Luther deals with confirmation at the end. We have
no doubt that this assumption is correct, and have therefore placed this
concern in the next place.

Mar. Luther.\" At the end: \"Martini Luther. Anno M. D. XXij.\" No
location given. 2 leaves in 4. Then attached to the end of an edition of
the writing \"Von Menschen-Lehre zu meiden\" (1522); also to the sermon
\"Vom Eelichen Leben\". Also in Kapp, Reformation Documents, Th. Ill, p.
350, with the date:

1522\". From this in De Wette, vol. II, p. 277 and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 53, p. 156. Attached to the sermon on conjugal life and
without a date in Walch, vol. X, 743; in the Erlangen edition (I.), vol.
20, p. 87 and in the second edition, vol. 16, p. 542. - The date we have
set is based on the following consideration: That Luther had sent the
writing to Hausmann on August 3, we see from the preceding letter.
However, given the urgency of the matter, this will probably have
happened on the very day that the printing of the note was completed.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 628.

**No. 531 .**

Wittenberg. August 6, 1522.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther recommends a monk who has left the monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltische Gesammtarchiv. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 91; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 241 and in Erlanger Briefw.,
vol. Ill, p. 440. German in Walch, vol. XXl, 809.

To his superior in Christ and brother, Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the
church at Zwickau.

Grace and peace in Christ! I commend to you, my dear Nicolaus, this
brother who has left his Babylon and desires to be counseled by another
way of life. For he has demanded this of me and asked me for it, which I
could not refuse the man who says that he also knows you. Therefore, if
you can, see to it that he learns some trade from you. For there are
many such people with us, and several are added daily. I hope that
through such nobility the kingdom of abomination will fall gradually, if
we cooperate. Greet the mayors and your priests and all of ours, and
fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, the sixth of August , 1522. Luther.

**No. 532 .**

Wittenberg. August 11, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2568, annex, no. 89.

**450** Letters from the year 1522. no. 539 to 542. .. **451**

He must be a man with whom it is easy to do what is Christian and right,
and who is also fond of learned people. Now his Princely Grace cannot
resist this cause. It must also strive against God, who, through Saint
Paul in 1 Timothy 4, v. 3, has so publicly left the marriage state free
and condemned the prohibitionists. If it would not be too difficult for
Our Lady, I humbly ask her to do a Christian work in this matter and to
help that the abominable sin of unchastity among the priesthood will
become less. God sees that she is certainly doing a good work in this,
and without a doubt God also demands of her where she can do it. Who
knows why God would give E. G. such a high intellect, and put it in a
place where she can use and apply it with great benefit? Truly, it is
not to be despised such great miserable misery of the consciences of so
many priests, who are so miserably entangled and strangled daily with
this sin without their guilt by human law. For God\'s sake, let us take
this to heart, and help my gracious Lord to get it into our hearts; it
is necessary and delicious in the sight of God. To this end, help and
protect Our Lord Christ our Savior, Amen. At Wittenberg, on Sunday after
Lamperti \[Sept. 21\] Anno 1522.

Your Grace Servant

Martinus Luther.

**No. 5 40.**

Wittenberg. September 23, 1522.

**To Nic. Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther asks that Hausmann find a young person an apprenticeship with a
wool weaver or clothier.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in the
Franciscaneum at Zerbst, *Cod.* 26, fol. 4d. Printed by Schütze, vol.
II, p. 46; by *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 88 (with the wrong date: fer. 3.
post. Martini); by De Wette, vol. II, p. 251 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 6. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1361.

To his dearest \[friend\] in the Lord, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
extremely faithful pastor of the people at Zwickau.

Grace and peace in the Lord! This young man, to whom there is good hope
and who has good gifts, who has decided, according to the Gospel, to
earn his bread through his

I have asked you to recommend him to your weavers and clothiers. But
since I am unknown to these people, I ask that you let yourself be
charged with this service, if you can do it without complaint, that he
be handed over as an apprentice to any of the craftsmen at your request.
For I do not want you to be burdened if you cannot do it easily, just as
I could not refuse him the service of writing this letter. Everything
else is well in the Lord, as before. Greet the mayors and all of us, and
pray for me as you do. Fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, Tuesday after
Matthew \[Sept. 23\] 1522.

Your Martin Luther.

Leonhard Fing 1) is the name of the young man who comes from good
parents, but they preferred that he be brought into the godless
priesthood. 2)

**No. 5 41.**

(Wittenberg.) September 25, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2438, annex, no. 28.

**No. 5 42.**

Wittenberg. October 4, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther answers biblical questions, recommends someone, and asks for game
for Bugenhagen\'s wedding.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 123 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 152. Printed by
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 93; by De Wette,\' vol. II, p. 252 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 8. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 810.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Magister Georg Spalatin, the court
theologian in Christ.

Grace and peace! I found your letter, my dear Spalatin, when I returned
home,3) but a puppy

1\) On the outside of the original Hausmann wrote the name

2\) This postscript is missing in the Jena manuscript and in the
editions other than Erl. Briefw. and in Walch. However, the latter
translates the last words: *sed qui eum ad impia sacerdotia mallent
trahi*: \"but who prefer to see him led to ungodly unfaithfulness\".

3\) from Leisnig; see No. 541 z. E.

**452**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 542. 543. 544.

**453**

had bitten it on the table, so that I could not read the passage about
the inheritance of the Lord. But the other passage about the kingdom and
the righteousness of God is like this: The kingdom of God is the church
of Christ, which is ruled by the word of God. Rom. 14 \[v. 17\]: \"The
kingdom of God is peace, righteousness and joy in the Holy Spirit\";
Luc. 17 \[v. 21\]: \"The kingdom of God is within you.\" The
righteousness of GOD is faith, as you know from Rom. 1 \[v. 17.\]. 1)
For in the Greek it is read plainly: xxxxxxxx xxx xxxxxxxxx xxxxx, that
is, GOD. Therefore, first seek the kingdom of God, that is, first of
all, by teaching, by hearing, by considering the Gospel, see to it that
faith and the knowledge of God are spread much and far; then temporal
things will come to pass, because a laborer is worthy of his wages.

By the way, I commend this man to you, that if you can do anything, hear
him and help him, for he seems poor and helpless to me.

Johann Pomeranus will hold his wedding on Monday after Dionysii \[Oct.
13\]. Therefore we ask you with diligence, and you may use yourself with
diligence, so that he may be honored with some game, both for his own
sake, which is worth it for his person, and for our sake, who are his
guests; whether we are worth it is for you to judge. So then, go to it,
that we may know that we are able to do something at court with
petitions, for the future hope of others. For in regard to the lessons
soon more, in another time. For thou knowest that he is a stranger and
poor; therefore he must be honored with a richer gift,2) since he will
richly earn it in the future. Farewell. Wittenberg, on the Saturday
after Michaelmas \[Oct. 4\] 1522. Mart. Luther.

1\) Here the Erl. Briefw. notes: \"With the following, Luther returns to
the passage Rom. 14,17.\" We consider this remark to be erroneous,
because the cited Greek words do not correspond to Rom. 14,17, but are
rather taken from Match. 6,33., to which explanation Luther now goes.

2\) The Elector sent not only game, but also a gold piece, but as if it
came from Spalatin. See No. 543.

**No. 5 4 3.**

Wittmberg. 13 October 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther commends a needy follower of the gospel and thanks for the gifts
\"sent\" for Bugenhagen. [\']{.underline}

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 124 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 152. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 93d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 253 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 10. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 812.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, his superior
and brother.

Mercy and peace! I have not been able nor willing to refuse this man a
letter of recommendation to you, my dear Spalatin. He is a good man and
is in danger for the sake of the Gospel; therefore you will also hear
him and consider him worthy of your assistance, if you can; but you can
do it easily. Be at ease in the Lord. I am busy and in a hurry. I will
do enough for your letter about the 43rd 3) Psalm at another time, or
send the interpretation of Johann Pommer4) ; for you have the right
opinion about the inheritance of the Lord. I have received the golden
coin with thanksgiving and give thanks for the same, and also for the
game that was sent. It will remain secret; we already know the cause of
this silence; 5) you should have sent it, not the prince. Farewell.
Wittenberg, on Monday after Dionysii \[Oct. 13\] 1522. Mart. Luther.

**No. 5 44.**

Riga. 20 October 1522.

**Joh. Lohmüller, town clerk in Riga, to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Lohmüller expresses his esteem for Luther, reports about the beginning
of the Reformation in Liefland and especially in Riga, where they have a
capable preacher of the Gospel (Andreas Knopke or Knöpke or *Cnophius*),
and asks Luther to dedicate a writing to his compatriots or to write to
them.

3\) According to the Vulgate count; it is Ps. 44.

4\) Bugenhagen was reading on the Psalms at that time. His
interpretation of the Psalter was published in 1524, to which Luther
added a preface. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIV, 154.

5\) Namely, the Elector would be inconvenienced if it became known that
he had sent gifts to the wedding of a priest.

**454** Letters from 1522. no. 544. 545. 546. **455**

Handwritten in the archive at Königsberg, volume \"Rigische Kirche\".
Printed in Kapp, kleine Nachlese, vol. II, 545 (with deviations and the
date: August 20); in G. R. Taubenheim, Einiges aus dem Leben M. Joh.
Lohmüller, program, Riga 1830, p. 6; in Kolde, *Analecta, p.* 46 and in
Erl. The Epistle of Luther to the Christians in Liefland is to be
regarded as a response to this letter, although it did not come out
until August 1523. (See St. Louis edition,

Vol. X, 1760.)

**No. 5 45.**

Wittenberg. November 2, 1522.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Intercession for M. Stagmann, to the same the place of I). Stephan Wild
to him,

The original is in the archives at Weimar, Reg. O, p. 124 22. 3e (only
the signatures are original). Printed in Burkhardt, Luthers
Briefwechsel, p. 50 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 19.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! Ew. Ch. Gn. are our obligated,
guilty, obedient services always with diligence before. Most gracious
Lord! We humbly request Your Lordship to know that the highly learned
Heinricus Stackmann, 1) licentiate in medicine, informs us, as otherwise
seems credible to us, how D. Stephanus is planning to turn away from
here in a short time and to apply to Your Lordship for a leave of
absence, to obtain a gracious leave of absence, with the request that we
would prescribe him favorably to E. churf. G., so that he may receive
Doctor Stephan\'s lection in medicine. Since the mentioned licentiate
has now spent some time in the doctor\'s office for himself, and also
for the mentioned Doctor Stephan in his absence with reading, he has
shown himself to be not a little praised and commended by the students
of the same faculty, also to have had special diligence and skill with
the sick, to have kept himself respectable for a long time, and also to
have read well outside of the touched faculty, and presumably (after he
has been granted honest and useful *conditions* from elsewhere, which he
has handed over, and bears special affection for this city and
university), that he may remain with us, we are not only to grant him in
this request, but, for the sake of his teaching, skill and diligence, to
serve it as much as we can, and his care, as much as possible.

1\) Also Stagmann and Stachmann, from Braunschweig.

as eagerly as he himself to learn. Therefore, our humble request to Your
Lordship: Your Lordship will graciously grant him such a lecture (where
it will be taught). 2) This will undoubtedly benefit the students, the
university and the city in times of illness. For the sake of Your
Lordship, we want to deserve this with dutiful, obliging, obedient
service at all times. We ask for a gracious and comforting answer. Date
Wittenberg, Sunday after *Omnium Sanctorum* \[Nov. 2\] 1522.

E. churf. G. unterthänige Diener Martinus Luther.

Rector 3) sspst. etc. etc..

We humbly request, most gracious sir, that E. churf. G. not note our
diligent request with an ungracious will, for we consider it necessary
that this lesson be ordered again, so that in the same faculty two
readers may read, as has recently been usefully and fruitfully arranged,
one in *Practica,* the other in *Theoria,* as E. churf. churf. G. hohers
4) understanding sonder Zweifel wohl ermessen können, dass 2c. *Dat.
uts*.

**No. 5 46.**

(Wittenberg.) (November 2, 1522.)\")

**To Spalatin.**

Luther briefly informs him of the contents of the previous letter and
asks for Spalatin\'s intercession.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen. a*, fol. 241. Printed by *Buddeus, p.* 20; by
De Wette, vol. II, p. 275 (without date) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV,
p. 21. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 816.

His \[friend\] in the HErrn, the cleaver Georg,6) Evangelist at the
court of Saxony.

Grace and peace! Other things at another time; now I write in haste,
hurried. Hurried. The

2\) In the original: \"omit\".

3\) Rector in the winter semester 1522 was Joh. Schwertfeger, jurist. As
Burkhardt 1. o. p. 50 states, the original signatures of Carlstadt,
Veltkirch (Joh. Dolz), Esticampius (Aurogallus), Amsdorf, Melanchthon,
Beckmann and A. follow.

4\) In the original and in Burkhardt: \"hoers\".

5\) This time determination results from comparison with the previous
letter.

6\) *Spalatino Georgio* == the Georg from Spalt. See the first note to
No. 5.

**456** Letters from the year 1522. No. 546 to 550. **45.7**

The matter is this: the doctor D. Stephani will leave (as I hear).
Magister Stagmann asks that he (if it can happen) take his place. I
consider this man worthy, learned and skilled enough to be given this
position. Therefore, you will work for the common good, since he is also
a good and humble man, if you use yourself for him. Fare well in the
Lord. Evening, 1522, Sunday.

Martin Luther.

**No. 547.**

Wittenberg. November 3, 1522.

To Spalatin.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2577, annex, no. 94.

**No. 548.**

Torgau. November 5, 1522.

Prince Frederick to Luther and Others.

The Elector grants the request addressed to ihu in letter No. 545 and
awards the position to M. Stagmann.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. O, p. l 24. Printed
by Burkhardt, p. 51 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 24.

By the Grace of God. Our greetings first, venerable, worthy, highly
respected and honorable, dear devotees and faithful! Your letter, which
has now been sent to us concerning Heinrich Stackmann, the licentiate in
medicine, that we would have him come in Doctor Stephanus\' place, we
have read its further contents. Since you indicate in your letter that
the named licentiate is skilful and diligent, and that he is sufficient
to decay with the lection and other things in Doctor Stephanus\' place,
we are pleased that he is accepted and appointed by you for this
purpose. In your gracious opinion, we did not want to restrain you from
doing so in response to your letter. Date Torgau, Wednesday after All
Saints\' Day \[Nov. 5\], *Anno Dmi* 1522.

1). In the editions: *Augustine*. This would be the Mediciner Schurf,
but there is certainly, here a reading error for *Stephanus* (Wild)
(Erl. Briefw.). After that St. Louiser Ausg., Bd. XV, 2578, Note 2 is to
be improved.

**No. 5 49.**

Altenburg. (Around November 9, 1522.)

**The Council of Altenburg to Luther.**

(Regest.)

The Canonicus of the Abbey of Altenburg, M. Mauritius Pfleumer, was
forbidden by the Provost of the Monastery of Our Lady on the Mountain
(Benedict Bischofs; see No. 478) and the Chapter to hear and teach
God\'s word; indeed, he was beaten by his Chapter brothers for this
reason. Now he turned to the council of Altenburg for protection, and
they promised him safe conduct. The provost refused to negotiate with
and before the council and also refused to hand over Pfelmer\'s effects.
Duke Johann Friedrich, who had called for help, did not provide any
through his bailiff Jan von Wernstorf. Now Pfleumer wanted to go to
Wittenberg \"to find out about the evangelical truth\", and therefore
the council recommended him to Luther in the most appropriate manner,
and also asked him to be helpful for a supplication to the Elector, so
that he could restore his equipment. For this reason, Luther wrote the
following letter to Spalatin, from which the approximate timing of this
letter emerges.

Printed in Mittheilungen der Geschichtforschenden Gesellschaft des
Osterlandes, VI, p. 71, No. 32 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. IV, p. 24.

**No. 550.**

Wittenberg. II. November 1522.

To Spalatin.

Luther recommends N. Moritz Pfleumer of Altenburg to him for the
promotion of his petition to the Elector.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. u, fol. 242. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 19; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
255 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 26. German, in Walch, vol. XXI,
813.

To his \[friend\] in the Lord, M. Georg Spalatin, the faithful servant
of the evangelical truth.

Mercy and peace! This Moritz Pfleumer, who was extraordinarily
recommended to me by the council of Altenburg, asked me to recommend him
to you, so that his petition could reach the prince through you. I could
not refuse this to the man, who seems to me to be of a good mind and
good nature without that. You may therefore (I ask) help him as you can.
He is addicted to monkish ungodliness and seeks the Gospel. Fare well in
the Lord. Wittenberg, St. Martin\'s Day \[Nov. 11\] 1522.

Mart. Luther..

**458** Letters from the year 1522. No. 551 to 555. **459**

**No. 551.**

(Wittenberg.) (First half of November) 1522.

**To Joh. Lang.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1772, annex, no. 1.

**No. 552 .**

(Wittenberg.) 15. November 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther approves the delivery of two petitions to the Elector and asks
for books to be sent to Wartburg Castle.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 126 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 153. Printed by Buddeus,
v. 19; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 256 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p.
27. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 813.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, George Spalatin, the servant of God in
Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! See to it that these two petitions are handed
over to the most noble prince, my dear Spalatin, and, as much as you
can, do that the execution is accelerated. The woman is poor and
miserable, except for this tremendous deception.

I ask that you also send these books of vows to my host in my name, if
you can. Be well and pray for me. On the Saturday after Martinmas \[Nov.
15\] 1522, Mart. Luther.

**No. 553 .**

Wittenberg. November 21, 1522.

**To Henning Teppen (Degen?), 1) clergyman in Goslar.**

Teppen had turned to Luther for comfort; Luther referred him to the Holy
Scriptures.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 94 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 256 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 28. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 814.

1\) A Henning Teppen does not occur among the clergy of Goslar, but a
Henning [Degen]{.underline} does. The name may have been read from
Aurifaber. The first preacher of the Gospel there was Johann Kleppen,
vicar at St. Jacob\'s Church.

To Henning Teppen, priest at Goslar.

Grace and peace! You are stronger by the grace of God, my dear Henning,
than that you should need my comfort, as much as I recognize from your
letter your erudition in the holy scriptures, and I am too busy to deal
with you long and much. Thou hast the apostle to show thee the garden or
paradise, which is full of consolation, as he saith \[Rom. 15:4.\] \"But
those things which were written aforetime are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have
hope.\" Here he attaches to the sacred Scriptures the office of
comforting, and who should presume to desire comfort elsewhere, or to
seek it elsewhere? Further, that you desire my prayer, I will gladly do
as much as I can; but I myself am a sinner in need of many things, and
should be helped more by the prayer of others than by any other. May the
Lord Jesus strengthen you and make you perfect, or if it so pleases Him,
deliver you from this evil, but in such a way that He will not lead you
into the former temptation, so that His blessed name may be hallowed
forever, amen. Fare well in Christ and pray also for me. Wittenberg,
November 21, 1522. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 55 4.**

Wittenberg. December 11, 1522.

**To Wolfgang Stein, court preacher in Weimar.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1428.

**No. 555 .**

Wittenberg (Around December 11, 1522.) 3)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther interprets a passage in Hosea, gives news about Melchior Mirisch,
and asks for good German expressions for passages in the books of Moses.

2\) Instead of *priorem*, Walch assumes *pejorem.*

3\) The inscription in Spalatin\'s hand shows that this letter belongs
to the year 1522. The date can be determined by comparing this letter
with the previous ones: \"This week I will finish the translation of the
books of Moses\" (Vol. XVIII, 1434).

**466** Letters from the year

1522\. no. 555. 556. **461**

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 129 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 157. Printed by
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 137 (from 1523); by De Wette, vol. II, p.338 (in
May 1523) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 35. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 847.

Semem \[friends\] in the Lord, Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant.

Mercy and peace! The passage of Hosea \[Cap. 4, 2. Vulg.\]: \"One blood
touches the other\", I understand in such a way that the murderous deeds
have become frequent and have followed each other continuously, so that
if one is not yet out of sight, others are added. \"One murder after
another.\" For one says literally: a flood of murders, with emphatic
speech.

Melchior Mirisch is a preacher with the Augustinians in Magdeburg, or
prior, as I hear; God dampens these monsters, 1) Amen.

Again, you also serve us with German expressions. Gen. 1,27. \[Vulg.\]:
\"Created man in the image and likeness of God\", means according to the
Hebrew: \"He created him in the image according to the likeness of
God\"; but the meaning is more actual, man was made in an image similar
to God. Give us that in German. Again, Cap. 5,3 \[Vulg.\] says with
transposed words: \"Adam begat in likeness after his image\"; but the
sense is the same.

Gen. 3:16 \[Vulg.\]: \"I will make your pains and your conceptions
much\" (*conceptus*); the meaning is, that the woman is put to many
troubles in the pregnancy and the bearing of the fruit, as it happens.
For he does not speak of the perils and troubles of conceiving, but of
those of bearing the conceived fruit; now say what *conceptus* is here
in German, for *aerumnas* \[\"pains\"\] we have.

Cap. 2,18: \"Let us make him a helpmate before (*coram*) him.\" The
meaning is that he wants the woman to be associated with the man in such
a way that she has her face turned toward the man and the man has his
face turned toward the woman.

1\) Walch (perhaps correctly, according to the sense): \"God give better
newspaper!\"

He says that the woman is at his pleasure. At the same time, he
indicates that man\'s attendance is with his face turned toward him, in
order to produce fruit, by which he distinguishes the woman from the
animals, among which Adam did not find such a helpmate for procreation
2c. We have tried \"beside him, before him, around him,\" and none of
them is enough for us.

I will finish the fifth book of Moses this week, and we are already
reviewing it so that it can be submitted for printing. Farewell and help
us. Wittenberg.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 556 .**

Wittenberg. December 12, 1522.

**To Johann Heinrich, Count of Schwarzburg.**

Expert opinion on whether and how to take the parishes from the monks
and fill them with Protestant preachers.

From a copy in the Weimar Archives in the supplement to the Leipzig
edition, p. 31; in Walch, vol. XXI, 29; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 257 and
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 154.

To the noble and well-born lord, Mr. Johanns Heinrich, *Comes de*
Grubzrawhs (Schwarzburg) 2c., my gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! E. G. Scripture, Gn. Herr, sammt E. G. Vaters
2) mit eingelegten Briefen habe ich unterthäniglich durch Herrn Anshelm
von Tettau, Ritter empfangen, und vernommen. Now E. G. knows that God
has commanded many times that no judgement shall be made nor concluded
on one part of the accusation, the other part shall then also be
interrogated, however just or unjust a part may be. For this reason I
cannot finally advise or conclude on behalf of the monks. For the fact
that they should be driven out without being called and interrogated is
not acceptable, as the Lord did not want to judge Adam, Cain and the
Babylonians, because he called them first and heard them. My advice,
however, is that since the Lord\'s father has given the parish to the
monks on the condition that they keep their observance and first of all
preach the gospel, that the Lord may appoint and order them before him.

2\) \"Fathers\" put by us instead of: \"Father\".

**463**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 556 to 559.

**462**

and, in the presence of some reasonable people, reproach them and accuse
them, and then hear their answer. If it is publicly found that it is as
they are accused, then the church has the power and the right, and is
also obligated to take the parish from them and to appoint a pious,
learned man to teach the people rightly; for it is not wrong, indeed the
highest right, to chase the wolf out of the sheepfold and not to
consider whether its belly is thereby harmed. It is not given to any
preacher to do harm, but to do good. If he does not create piety, then
the goods are already no longer his. That is my short answer to this
question; if the matter continues after this beginning, I will gladly
continue to serve as best I can. I hereby entrust E. G. to God\'s mercy,
who will give E. G. spirit and strength to proceed divinely in this
matter, amen. On the Friday after St. Nicolai (Dec. 12), in Wittenberg,
1522.

E. G.

Servant

Mart. Luther.

**No. 55 7**

(Wittenberg.) (12. ? December) 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2581, annex, no. 96.

**No. 558.**

Wittenberg. December 19, 1522.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2578, annex, no. 95.

**No. 559.**

(Wittenberg.) December 20, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther thanks for received instruction on the names of animals. Answer
to three exegetical questions.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod*.
*Dessav*. V, No. 127 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 153. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 171 d (from 1523); in De Wette, vol. II, p. 267
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 43. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 876.

To Georg Spalatin, ducal ecclesiastical and evangelist in Lochau, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I thank thee for the names of the beasts. That you now
ask, first of all, why \[Matth. 14,20.\] of the five loaves so many
baskets of fragments remained, and of the fishes nothing: I, who have
long since begun not to care about secret interpretations, pay little
attention to this, because they, even if they are found, must be
uncertain 1) since they cannot be proven with any clear scriptural
passages. However, at this point I follow the simplicity of the story,
because one does not collect lumps from the food, but only from the
loaves. For bones, bones (*costulae*), scales and raft feathers are
generally thrown away by the eaters of fish and meat dishes; but with
loaves there is a use for the remaining lumps. But the five loaves
signify to me Moses (that is, the whole teaching of the Law), and the
fishes the examples of the Law, namely of the fathers and prophets, as a
sign of the twofold love (which fulfills the whole Law), by which we are
shepherded according to the teaching of the Law. Here you can, if you
wish, catch a secret interpretation (*mysterium*): that the word of God
is superfluous for all, that the more it is acted upon, the more it
overflows, but that the examples of the fathers communicate nothing
beyond faith, because each one serves God with his works; but God
\[serves\] through the word, through the teaching, through faith to them
and to all in general. But I like the aforementioned simple view more.

Secondly. From Marcus (Cap. 1, 44. 45. 7, 36.) it is clear before others
that Christ always sought to be hidden and yet could not, so that he
also instructs us by his example that we should want the works of God in
us to be hidden and manifest; hidden to avoid our honor, which the
foolish people always offer us.

1\) Indistinct in the original; Aurifaber and De Wette read: *incertos*;
the Erl. Briefwechsel: *incertus* and notes: \"keinenfalls *incertos*\";
the Dessau manuscript reads: *incertas*. . The latter have assumed wix,
referring to *aIlegoriarum*.

**464**

Letters from the year 1522. no. 559. 560. 561.

465

is inclined; apparently to enhance the glory of God, which they rarely
give Him.

Third. Apost. 9 \[v. 7.\] Lucas speaks of the voice of Paul, which was
heard, but in the other chapter \[Cap. 22, 9.\] 1) of the voice of him
that talked with Paul, as the text clearly gives, for these they heard
not, but Paul\'s; but Paul heard both. Fare well and pray for me. 1522,
the day before Thomas \[Dec. 20\].

Mart. Luther.

Amsdorf has the booklet.

**No. 560 .**

Wittenberg. December 20, 1522.

**To Wolfgang Stein in Weimar.**

Luther praises one of Stein\'s writings (probably against the
Franciscans in Weimar), but discourages him from answering them further.
He goes on to write \"Von weltlicher Obrigkeit\" (\"On Secular
Authority\").

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 99b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 268 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 45. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 817.

The Magister Wolfgang Stein, court theologian and ducal preacher at
Weimar.

Mercy and peace! I do not dislike your booklet, my Ulpian, 2) but it is
not necessary that it be published; however, we will not refuse it if
you publish it. For that you have in mind what your friends want, to
answer them in such a way that they do not laugh at it, is vain hope.
There is nothing more gossiping than vanity. For these people are not
such that they can keep silent or rest, even if they are obviously
defeated, yes, even if they are dead, they will not keep silent. Did the
Pharisees, when they were conquered, rest? did the Jews, when they were
conquered, stand down from Stephen? So must you do here also, that,
having once given them this account, you let them bark and blaspheme
henceforth; you must despise these frogs and go forward in your way. For
I, too, can defeat my adversaries, who have so often been defeated in
the most ignominious way.

1\) Not Apost. 26, 14, which the Erl. Briefw.

2\) Ulpian, a famous Roman jurist, c. 200 AD.

Do not make them desist from the things that have been said. Therefore,
tell your friends not to expect such things from these vain people, who
are nothing but bags of words, but all mouth. Be well and pray for me.
After I have finished the Moses and now stop, I will take the sermon of
the twofold power 3) before my hand, but at the same time I will fulfill
your wish. Wittenberg, 1522, the day before St. Thomas \[Dec. 20\].

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 561 .**

(Wittenberg.) December 20, 1522.

**To Johann von Dolzig, churf. sächsische Marschall.**

Luther wishes that an ecclesiastical endowment be abolished and used for
the benefit of the founder\'s relatives.

Printed in the supplement to the Leipzig edition, p. 32; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 30; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 269 and in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p.
155.

To the strict and firm Herr Johanns Dolzig, churfürstlicher Marschalk zu
Sachsen, my special favorable lord and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Strict, firm, dear Mr. Marschalk! You are
undoubtedly aware of how the foundation of Herr Heinrich von Guben here
in Wittenberg has deteriorated; how it was an ungodly whispering,
displeasing to God. Because you are the highest testator, I have
undertaken to ask for the nun at Mölburg,4) Anna Prychen, that she may
be granted such property as the next heiress, whether she might come out
of the monastery and take up a secure position. Mr. Amsdorfen I will
easily be able to; but D. Hieronymus, 5) is hindered by his conscience
and too great holiness. Perhaps he thinks that Piche is seeking his own,
so that he may also get a share, and he gives in so much that the same

3\) The writing \"Von weltlicher Obrigkeit\" 2c., St. Louis edition,
vol. X, 374.

4\) This is Mühlberg. - Either the name \"Prychen\" is misread here or
\"Piche\" several times in the following.

5\) Prospecting.

**466**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 561. 562. 563.

**467**

Nun two or three hundred guilders would like to be given, so that she
was exposed honestly enough. Now I am not arguing here according to your
right and its severity, but according to equity; for I do not consider
it unreasonable, if one wanted to give the rest to poor people, that
Piche, as a close friend, should also obtain something of it, be it
through the nun\'s departure or otherwise; for he, too, now deprived of
his fief to feed his wife and child, is not so rich as the King of
England: that D. Jerome\'s move moves me nothing on account of the poor
people; for I am more concerned about you than about me, as he knows
this matter, person and all opportunities best. Now my request is that
you help to turn such a foundation to better use, where you can think
for yourselves that Mr. Heinrich Guben would have turned where he would
have understood it best. For such a will must not be kept, which was
made for an unchristian reason and abuse 1). Do not be narrow nor timid
in your conscience, but let Christian, free and fresh judgment follow
and take its place. Where you like to see the lessons that the Piche has
done to me, I will do it for you. Hiemit GOtt befehlt. On the evening of
St. Thomas \[20 Dec.\] 1522. Martin Luther.

**No. 562 .**

(Wittenberg.) (Before December 25) 1522. 2)

**All Spalatin.**

From Serranus. Order of a letter. Complaints about the administration in
Wittenberg and the wish that the Elector put an end to the lewd and
idolatrous behavior in the monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 130 and in Ood. a, fol. 158. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 109k; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 270 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p.
46. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 818.

To the Magister Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, at Lochau.

Mercy! I have neither seen nor heard of a letter addressed to me by
Serra

1\) In our original: \"Mißhen\"; De Wette vermuthet: \"knowledge\".
\"Mißgehen\" - misstep.

2\) This approximate timing results from the fact that Luther had not
yet received a letter from Franz Lambert (Serranus), but already on Dec.
26 he sent the letter to Spalatin that he had received in the meantime.

nus, so you must demand it from somewhere other than me.

But I ask you to have this letter handed over to the mountain bailiff in
Buchholz, Matthes Busch (*Posch*), since he cannot get to it any other
way than through you and it is necessary that it comes to him shortly.

For Sibutus 3) I will do what I can, although the Wittenberg
administration disgusts and annoys me; so nothing at all is what they do
and see, if they do not perhaps pretend everything. The whores are free,
and of other things there is nothing to be concerned about, and the
BethAven of All Saints, what is it but a whorehouse? And if God wanted
it to be only a whorehouse, but it is sin, or, as Amaziah says in Amos
\[Cap. 7, 13.\], \"the king\'s pen\"; surely God wanted the prince to
lay hands on it as well. Certainly, these sins will weigh him down,
because they are founded and nurtured at his expense, especially after
the truth has made the matter known. I will write to him about this at
another time. Farewell and pray for me.

Staupitz wrote to all Wenceslaus that he would henceforth lament his
foolishness, and that he had left the Order of St. Augustine more naked
than he had entered it; that he had taken upon himself hardships, even
though he had been canonically chosen and called. I do not understand
what it means.

Mart. Luth.

**No. 563 .**

(Wittenberg.) December 25, 1522.

**All Spalatin.**

Luther sends the monks who have left the monastery at Herzberg back to
Spalatin with the advice he gave them.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 156 and in *Cod. Jen.*

a, fol. 178. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 110; in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 271 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 47. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 820.

3\) Georg Sibutus, from Tannrode (hence *Daripinus*) in Thuringia, was
formerly in Cologne (around 1504) and appears in a Wittenberg lectionary
of 1507 as professor artium. His main work was an Ars *memorabtiva*. It
seems that he was still living in Vienna in 1528 as a physician at the
court.

**468**

Letters from the year 1522. No. 563 to 567.

**469**

To your learned and godly man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, court preacher, his
\[friend\] in Christo.

Mercy and peace! I am sending these demonetized Herzbergs back to you
with my advice, which they have requested from me at your behest. I am
certain that the prince will not accept any of the goods, but when they
have left \[the monastery\], the prince will certainly be obliged to
order them to his castle. Therefore, I have advised that they take two
good, faithful men and distribute the treasury\'s jewels, to each an
appropriate portion, with which, if he wishes, he can start marriage or
a trade. 1) For in this way those things which are brought about by
ungodliness will be brought into godly use, and it seems to me that they
cannot be better used. To the other things I have answered thee, and
believe that it hath come unto thee. Fare well in the Lord. On the day
of the birth \[of the Lord\] 1523 \[Dec. 25, 1522\] Martin Luther.

**No. 5 64.**

(Wittenberg.) December 26, 1522.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the letter of Serranus and others, and expresses his
misgivings about Serranus.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 178. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 1106; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 272 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 48. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 820.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, preacher of the

Elector of Saxony, his brother.

Grace and peace! Here you have the letter of Serranus and others from
Eisenach. I will certainly allow the man, when he comes to me, to speak
to me verbally, but, as love commands that one should be provided with
all the best of all, 1 Cor. 13, 7, so faith commands that one should
fear the worst of all, Joh. 2, 24. 2) and Matth. 10, 17:

1\) The predicate of this sentence is missing in the original. Aurifaber
and De Wette have added *utatur ad.*

2\) This passage will be meant; in the original: *Johan*. 3; Erl.
Briefw.: \"Joh. 3, 6 (?).\"

\"Beware of men.\" There are people there who would like to recommend
the man to me; there are things there which, if they do not arouse
suspicion, certainly do not quench it. The best thing would be for the
prince to lose some food on him and let him stay there 3) or offer him
such, so that we can see what kind of man he will be. It is probable
that Satan will try everything, tempt everything, do everything,
therefore, until the matter is certain, no one must be trusted. If
Christ wanted to send an evangelist to us, he will make us certain
either by previous signs or by subsequent ones. This is enough. Farewell
and pray for me. 1523, on the day of St. Stephen \[26 Dec. 1522\]. Mart.
Luther.

**No. 5 65.**

Dresden. December 30, 1522.

**Duke George of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 490.

**No. 5 66.**

Wittenberg. (Towards the end of 1522.)

**To Christoph Hofmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2620, annex, no. 114.

**No. 5 67.**

(Between 1522 and 1524.)

**To Joh. von Dolzig, Electoral Marshal.**

Exhortation to order certain religious services without special
ostentation.

The original is in the Paulus-Museum at Worms. Printed in the Luther
Library of the Paulus Museum of the city of Worms (Köstlin), p. 1 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 52.

To hand the marshal Mr. Jo. Dolsken. JEsus.

Don\'t, don\'t, dear Lord and friend! I ask, among many others, that the
mass and public thanksgiving remain. For without that the splendid
services would be unapproved.

3\) Aurifaber and De Wette read *illic*, which we have assumed. The
original should read *illis*.

**470** Letters from the year 1523. no. 567 to 573. **471**

are, then this is annual beforehand, that little prayer, much murmuring
will happen there; the fewer and slower the bunch together, the better.
The thing is better not stirred any more, it is already stirred too
much. Has my sermon, which I put in the most moderate way, annoyed the
matter? It is also to be feared here. Let us thank God secretly, that is
better. Do not want to hear such my opinion in the worst way. D. M.
Luther.

**No. 568**

Wittenberg. January 1, 1523.

**To Duke John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 374.

**No. 569.**

Wittenberg. January 2, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2616, annex, no. 112.

**No. 570.**

Wittenberg. January 3, 1523.

**To Duke George of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 492.

**No. 571.**

Prague.. . January 5, 1523.

**Margrave George of Brandenburg\" to Luther.**

(Regest.)

He reports to Luther that after the monk\'s calf was born at Freiberg
2), the \"form of the monster\" was sent to Prague. In addition to him
and other gentlemen, a doctor of astronomy had also inspected it, and
against Luther had made an interpretation in verse and had it printed,
with the pretense that the margrave had ordered him to do so. Now the
Margrave informs us that this was done against his knowledge and will;
he had the entire edition taken away from the printer and burned. If,
however, a copy should still reach Luther, then he is to consider him
unworthy.

1\) Margrave George of Brandenburg-Ansbach, the later reformer of his
country, led the government together with his brother Casimir since
1515, but mostly stayed at the court of King Louis II of Bohemia and
Hungary, whose educator he was.

2\) See Luther\'s \"Interpretation of the Monk\'s Calf at Freiberg\",
St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, 1940 and Seidemann\'s Beiträge zur
Ref.-Gesch., p.- 200. - The \"form of the monster\" is perhaps the
stuffed skin,

He says that he is guilty of the whole matter, which is imposed on him
by his detractors. - In the postscript he asks for instruction on the
worship of the sacrament, on praying from prayer books and veneration of
the relics of the saints, and assures Luther of his gracious will
towards him.

The original is in the Leipzig City Library, *Rep.* Ill, 20 (a), fol. 8
(without the enclosed note). The original concept in the royal district
archive at Bämberg, *Sign.* 1493, No. 13 (with the \"Cedula\"). Printed
in Richter, *Genealogia Lutherorurn etc.* 1733, p. 16 (without the
postscript and with the wrong year 1521); in the Zeitschrift für
Kirchengeschichte, VIII (1886, 460 (after the Concepte) and in the Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 57.

**No. 572.**

Wittenberg. January 7, 1523.

**To Wenc. Link.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1780.

**No. 573.**

Wittenberg. II January 1523.

**To the City Council of Stettin.**

Luther answers the question in the affirmative: whether the canons also
owe the same burdens as the citizens of the city.

This letter first appeared in a single print under the title:
\"Unterricht dem Rath zu alten Stettin zugeschickt der geistlichen
Freiheit betreffen. Doctor Martin Luther. Wittenberg. 1523.\" Then in
the Wittenberg edition (1559), vol. XII, p. 212b; in the Jena edition
(1562), vol. VIII, p. 377; in the Altenburg edition, vol. VIII, p. 590;
in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 304; in Walch, vol. XXI, 34; in
the Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 159 and in De Wette, vol. II, p. 297. We have
used the variants which the Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. IV, p. 61 from
Crämer\'s great Pomeranian Church Chronicle 1628, III, 35.

To the honorable and wise gentlemen, mayors and council of the city of
Alten-Stettin, my special favorable gentlemen.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear lords and friends! I
have received and heard your wisdom writing, together with the
information about the trade between you and the canons, and because you
desire my discretion and opinion, I do not know how to deny you my
service.

First of all, I let the treaty, which was drawn up between you, stand in
its dignity, because I am sure that the law (according to the treaty)
will help you in this. But the matter itself, and although no treaty has
ever been made, is such that if the canons wanted to act Christianly and
divinely, they should (regardless of all their imperial or papal powers)
have to act in accordance with the law.

472Letters from the year

1523\. no. 573. 574, 473

The term \"city\" is used to describe a city in which the citizens of
the city are free, contract, law, and custom, and willingly submit to
the common burdens of the city like other citizens.

They owe it to do this from the gospel, since Christ Matth. 17, 27.
gives interest to the emperor, and Matth. 22, 21. says: \"Give to Caesar
what is Caesar\'s\", and Paul Rom. 13, 1-7. says: \"Let every soul be
subject to authority\", and: \"Prayer to the womb, to the womb belongs
2c., duty to whom the duty belongs\", likewise also St. Peter sl. Ep. 2,
13\] teaches. From these: Commandment he has drawn no one, he be priest
or layman, he wants to be otherwise Christians.

And even if they want to pretend that the emperor and the temporal
authorities have granted and approved such a thing themselves, it is
obvious that the emperor cannot forgive what is not his, or what is
against God. In addition, even if it were true that such actions had
been taken, since such freedom has now become too difficult for all the
world and has come into unmistakable abuse, it is against God,
conscience, love, and also against reason and right to tolerate them any
longer, but they are obliged to forgive themselves for all that, in
order to avoid the common burden. But this is a people who do not think
of living in a brotherly or Christian way, but defy with their heads
until they incur too much hatred. Therefore I know no further advice
here, except that E. W. kindly reminds them of such Christian duty; if
that does not help, to add by common order that they are subject to the
authority according to the Gospel. For it is unchristian, even
unnatural, to enjoy common benefits and protection, and yet not also to
bear common burdens and abortions, to let other people work, and to
harvest them, especially since it has now become evident that nothing is
needed of their being, and they do nothing for it, but have so far
seduced us with their spiritual fairs. Herewith I command E. W. God, who
gives E. W. his grace, to carry out such and all other things in a
Christian and blessed manner, Amen. Given at Wittenberg on Sunday after
Epiphany \[Jan. 11\]. 1)

Martinus Luther, D.

1\) The year results from the publication of the first single issue. De
Wette erroneously has January 12. The Wittenberg edition has neither
year nor date, the Jena edition the letter under the year 1546.

**No. 5 74.**

(Wittenberg.) January 12, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Request for news because of letters sent. Return of the sentences of
\'Serranus and recommendation of the petition of two monks.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 134 unvim *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 162. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 120 k; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 299 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. IV, p. 62. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 822.

Mr. Georg Spalatin, Evangelist of the Court of Saxony, his \[friend\] in
Christ.

Grace and peace! I have sent a letter to you, which should be handed
over to Matthew Busch (*Pusch*). Yesterday, he demanded an answer from
me both in writing and verbally, so I assume that the letter has not yet
been delivered by you or at least caught 2); therefore, if you have
something certain, please inform me as well.

I am sending back the theses 3) of Serranus. You will soon see Duke
George\'s letter to me and mine to him, for I would rather that they be
published first.

Do not take it into your mind that I will return to the corner anew,
however much Behemoth or his scales may rage. Many monstrous things
occur daily, for I believe that you have heard of the earthquake in
Spain 4).

These two petitioners have forced upon me that I would like to bring
their petition to the prince through you. Although I have no hope of
obtaining it, since they were monks to whom the prince does not yet wish
to show public favor, I have nevertheless sent them so that I might have
something to answer them through you, so that they may not

2\) Compare No. 562 - Matthes Busch was a zealous promoter of the
Reformation, therefore in Buchholz, which was under princely rule,
Protestant preaching took place. Duke Georg, whose lands surrounded
Bnchholz, forbade the inhabitants of nearby Annaberg to attend the
sermons there.

3\) Lambert published 139 theses in Eisenach on priestly celibacy,
auricular confession, baptism, repentance and justification, and offered
to debate them on December 21, 1522, but no opponent appeared.

4\) in Granada, September 1522.

**474** Letters from 1523. ns. 574 to 577. **475**

think that I could have prevented them in this matter and would not have
wanted to. You therefore do what you know how to do and answer. I
believe you have received the other letters. Farewell. January 12, 1523,
Martin Luther.

**No. 575.**

Wittenberg. January 14, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See.St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1782. .

**No. 576.**

(Wittenberg.) January 16, 1523.

**To Wenc. Link in Altenburg.**

Luther reports to him that he had taken over the interpretation of the
second monstrosity during the publication of the work: \"Deutung der zwo
greulichen Figuren Bapstesels zu Rom und Münchkalbs zu Freyberg in
Meisten funden\" (Vol. XIX, 1934). From Melchior Mirisch, from the
promotion of the two monks and the imminent marriage of Links.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 113; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 301 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 64. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 821 f.

Grace and peace! One of the monsters I interpret by omitting now the
general interpretation of the horrible things which surely mean a change
of the communities, mainly by wars. Therefore, it is also not doubtful
to me that either a very great war disaster or the last day is foretold
for the German country. I go only to the special interpretation which
refers to the monks.

With regard to Melchior Mirisch, I am satisfied; he has also purified
himself to some extent. 1) Father Johann von Lippstadt 2) and Gottselig
will have their graduation; on the day after Candlemas \[Feb. 3\] they
will have their festivities, in which we want you present, if you can
before your wedding. For we will put everything behind your wedding 3)
and will all be present at this in

1\) *expurgavit* is a good conjecture of De Wette\'s instead of:
*expugnavit*.

2\) In Latin: *Lip*, probably an abbreviation for *Lippensis,* because
Westermann belonged to the monastery at Lippstadt.

3\) The Erl. Briefw. offers after Löbe\'s conjecture: *postponemus*
instead of: *praeferemus*. So already Walch.

The things that are horrible in the eyes of the papists must be present.
This is one way in which you can become free from the vicariate. Fare
well and pray for me. On the day of Marcellus \[Jan. 16\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

**No. 577.**

(Wittenberg.) January 22, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports that Serranus (Franz Lambert) has come to Wittenberg and
asks for support on his behalf. Postscript: of letters and requests from
the princes to him.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 135 and in: *Cod. Jen*. a, koi. 163. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 121; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 301 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 65. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 824.

To Herru Georg Spalatin, ecclesiastical courtier, servant of Christ, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! That John Serranus is here, but under the name of
Francis Lambert, also of noble origin. He had his being among the
Minorites for twenty years and administered the general service 4) of
the Word; through persecution he was expelled and became poor. There is
no doubt about the legitimacy of the man; there are witnesses with us
who have heard him both in France and in Basel, then the auxiliary
bishop of Basel, the one of Tripoli, 5) together with Pellican gives him
a beautiful testimony. And although we are abundantly provided with very
good lecturers, if he is able to do something, we will not reject him; I
like the man in all respects, and I have seen him through enough, as
much as a man can be seen through, that he is worthy of our carrying him
a little in his exile and helping him. But you know my financial
circumstances, that it is not in my power to feed him, since I myself
live on other people\'s property. It would

4\) *generali verbi officio functus*, that is, he was a traveling
penitential preacher. These were called *apostolici sive generales
praedicatores*.

5\) Dilman (Telamonius) Limpurger, auxiliary bishop in Basel and titular
bishop of Tripoli since 1498. At Oecolampad\'s appearance in Basel in
1523, he spoke out in favor of his doctrine and sacrificed his position
to his convictions.

**476**

Letters from the year 1523. no. 577. 578. 579. **477**

It seems good to me to persuade the prince not to lose 20 or 30 florins
that were to be used on him, but to lend them to Christ in love on
usury, until he can maintain himself either through his guild mates 1)
or through his own pay from his work. \"He will not stay here long, I
think, because he will find his equal or master here\". Only that we may
have mercy on the exiled. Fare well in the Lord.

Margrave George has written to me from Prague 2) and apologizes for a
certain dishonor that has been inflicted on me under his name, adding
that he has also written about it to our prince. Also, the army
commander 3) of Liefland, through an envoy and through the chancellor,
4) a learned man, has requested of me that I write a booklet of
Christian content to his people, and they maintain a preacher of the
Word there, and rejoice that they have the gospel. Thus Christ turns
from the Jews to the Gentiles, and from the stones become the children
of Abraham, whom his descendants also persecute. The Count of Anhalt,
John, has admonished me through Doctor Jerome and a certain Francis 5)
that I should cleanse myself of the disgrace that Ferdinand publicly
accused me at Nuremberg of your new article, namely, that I teach that
Christ is the seed of Abraham. 6) I first took this folly for a joke,
but since they thus assert it as true, I am forced to believe it as
true. Behold the monstrosities and worthy protectors of Christian
doctrine. Wittenberg, 1523, Thursday after Agnes \[Jan. 22\].

Martin Luther.

1\) This probably refers to the Franciscans of Wittenberg.

2\) No. 571.

3\) This is how Magister is to be translated here. It is Wolther von
Plettenberg, who ruled from 1494-1535.

4\) Johann Lohmüller. See No. 544.

5\) \"Hieronymus\" is Schurf. - \"Franz\", according to Seidemann in De
Wette, Vol. VI, p.653, perhaps Franz Burkard von Weimar, the later
Electoral Vice-Chancellor.

6\) This was the reason for his writing: \"That Jesus Christ was born a
Jew. St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1792.

**No. 5 78.**

(Wittenberg.) January 22, 1323.

**To Nic. Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

Luther exhorts him to remain steadfast in the confession of the pure
doctrine and sends him his translation of the New Testament.

Testament.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 122 ; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 304
(with the wrong date: January 23) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 68.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 825.

Grace and peace! Since I had nothing to write, dearest Gerbel, it
occurred to me what I should write to you above all things, namely that
I should admonish you again, so that you may not become unlike yourself
in the midst of so much noise of aggravations. For this purpose, I am
returning to you that bride 7) which you once offered me, but certainly
still pure and unharmed. Then, what is wonderful and new about this
woman, she desires highly and tolerates innumerable rivals, and is all
the more chaste, the more she is engaged. Since the shy rival 8) does
not torment either, but unites to the highest degree, I ask that you
also have this in common with us. Greetings from our rival 9) Philippus
Schwarzerd (*Nigra terra*). Be well with the wife of your youth. 1523,
Thursday after Agnes \[22 Jan\]. Martin Luther.

**No. 5 79.**

(Leisnig.) January 25, 1523.

**Council and congregation of Leisnig to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Credentials for their emissaries, Sebastian von Kötteritz and Franz
Salbach, with the request that Luther give them advice and instruction
on three things: namely, the order of the common chest; that he
\"fortify the parish office with writings,\" that is, defend their claim
to the election of parish priests in public writing; and that he give
them \"an order to sing and pray and read,\" that is, an evangelical
order of worship.

From a copy in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. Ji,* fol. 33a, A. 1. 1523.
5c printed by Burkhardt, p. 53 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 69.

7\) namely the New Testament in Luther\'s translation, as a counter-gift
for Gerbel\'s New Testament. See No. 431, in our edition, Vol. XV,
Annex, No. 71, Col. 2519, Note 10.

8\) namely Luther\'s work.

9\) as a helper in the translation of the New Testament.

**478** Letters from the year 1523. 580. 581. 582. **479**

**No. 5 80.**

Wittenberg. January 29, 1523.

**To the City Council of Leisnig.**

Luther\'s approving response to the Leisnig residents\' appeal through
their emissaries.

This letter can be found at the locations indicated in the previous
number immediately after it.

Grace and peace in Christ. Gentlemen, honorable, dear lords and friends!
I have heard your Christian writing and opinion through Bastian von
Kotteritzsch and Franzen Salbach with pleasure and joy, and I like your
order and order of the common chest 1) almost well; I also hope that
both shall appear to God\'s honor and to many people as good examples of
Christian faith and love; I wish and pray that God may bless, strengthen
and complete such your mind and conduct through the riches of His grace,
amen.

I will gladly offer my fortune for the other two pieces, to fortify the
parish office with Scripture, and to put it in order, to sing and pray
and read, as E. L. has asked,2) although you, by God\'s grace, are
gifted by God with yourselves, do not need my small fortune. However,
God wants to humble and serve all of us in relation to and among each
other; we want to do right by His grace. I hereby entrust you all to the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who will carry out the good work begun
in you until his day, amen. At Wittenberg, Thursday after *Conversionis
Pauli* \[29 Jan\] 1523, Martin Luther.

**No. 581 .**

(Wittenberg.) (Soon after January 29, 1523.) 3) To the congregation at
Leisnig.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 954.

1\) It was probably mainly edited by the pastor Heinrich Kind (formerly
monk in the monastery Buch) and LI. Joh. Grüner, Diaconus, who were
employed by the congregation as preachers of the gospel.

2\) This Luther did through the writings: \"That a Christian assembly or
congregation has the right and power to judge all doctrine and to
appoint teachers\" 2c., St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1538, and \"On the
Order of Worship in the Congregation\", ibid. col. 220.

3\) This preface of Luther\'s to the \"Ordnung eines gemeinen Kastens\"
will probably be published soon after the approving

**No. 582.**

(Wittenberg.) (Second half of January 1523.)4 )

**To Spalatin.**

Repeated request for Pfaffenbeck. Miscellaneous news.

Handwritten in *Cod. Dessav*. No. 157 (without address) and in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 178. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 140; in De Wette,
vol. II, p.\'41O. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 73. German in
Walch,\' vol. XXI, 851.

Grace and peace! I will not stop complaining to you, because you are
worthy of many complaints, after you have become an honest evangelist.
Pfaffenbeck is again attacking me with letters, before he had verbally
attacked me with words; I have swallowed that to make yours more
beautiful. Now, I ask you to intercede on my behalf for the poor man
with the prince, or if you want me to write a petition, let me know so
that I can do it. He is oppressed by hard want, and I see that the
prince is accustomed to hear his cries, and he to knock in vain at the
prince\'s door.

Read the news from Eisenach. In addition, my host writes on the watch,
5) that the abbot at Hirschfeld allows some free exit, both monks and
nuns, and that the priest at Hirschfeld, after his first wife died, has
taken a second.

In Zurich, Switzerland, Zwingli scheduled a public disputation, which
the Swiss managed. The bishop of Constance 6) has given the gospel a
great deal of support.

The order must have been written in Luther\'s letter (No. 580) and then
put into print. De Wette places it too late, namely in August, tempted
by Luther\'s letters to the Elector of August 11 and 19. These letters
were written because the council was reluctant to introduce the order
because it refused to cede its right of disposal over endowments, wills
2c. to the lords of the castes.

4\) De Wette erroneously places this letter in September because the
discussion in Zurich was held in this month. However, the second
discussion in Zurich took place only on October 26, and the Bishop of
Constance did not participate in it, but had answered the invitation to
it with a refusal on October 21. The relevant passage of our letter
refers to the first religious discussion at Zurich, which was held on
January 29, for which the invitation was issued on January 3.

5\) *hospes meus speculativus*, the Wartburg host, Hans von Berlepsch.
Walch offers: \"my curious host\". - The abbot at Hirschfeld is Crato
Miles.

6\) Hugo von Landenberg.

**480**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 582. 583.

**481**

He refuses; then a Tübingen pastor) what will happen, we will hear.

In Freiburg im Breisgau, Johann Sichard, a learned man, writes, my name
must not even be mentioned in passing. Yes, the council, when it forbade
the evangelical preacher to preach, said: Our customs do not agree with
the Gospel. Behold, what strange things! Doctor Johann Rühel has
instructed me to send this gold florin to you, and to remind you of your
promise that you would provide him with this smaller 2) penny. For my
Mansfelders have also wrested the second from me. I don\'t want to have
another one either, so that it won\'t be extorted from me again, because
I don\'t have to pay anything.

Martin Luther.

**No. 5 83.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. February 1523.

**To Hans von der Planitz in Nuremberg.**

Planitz, who was then an envoy to the imperial regiment in Nuremberg,
had rebuked Luther for his vehement letter against Duke George, against
which Luther defends himself here.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 169b; in the Jena
edition (1585), vol. II, p. 188d; in the Altenbnrger, vol. II, p. 282;
in the Leipziger, vol. XVIII, p. 3l6; in Walch, vol. XXI, 37; in the
Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 161 and in De Wette, vol. II, p. 305.

Grace and peace in Christ. Dear Lord and friend! I have received your. I
have happily received your grace\'s letter concerning Mr. Johann Gülden
3) together with the friendly admonition of my hard letter, and thank
you both for your favor and friendship, undeserved by me.

11 At this discussion, the Bishop of Constance was represented by the
well-known Joh. Faber and others, as well as by Doctor Martin Mansch
from Tübingen (not by Joh. Lemp, as Seidemann states in De Wette, vol.
VI, p. 675 s. v. Lemp).

2\) In the manuscripts: *minusculum*; in Aurifaber and De Wette:
majusculum.

3\) Joh. Gülden, pastor in Weida, later in Uhlstädt near Orlamünde, was
found skilful and learned during the visitation in 1529, but was deposed
in 1535 because of an arousal (compare Luther\'s letter to him of June
15, 1535).

However, I do not want to hold back Your Grace\'s good opinion, so that
I hope that no one will be harmed by my letter. And whether Duke George
would accuse my most gracious lord, unaccused and blameless, I am
confident that my Lord Christ shall defend him. If, however, he is
accused, he can ever abundantly prove that H. C. F. G. has always been
against me in such hard writing, has often let me resist, and has had a
great displeasure in it, that I have been well aware of it all. Nor have
I ever touched Duke George in such a way as the pope, bishops and king
of England, and I have submitted and offered myself to him so deeply
that it seems to me that I have spared him almost too much. For I should
have long since grabbed the wool from such a raging tyrant. I also know
well that my writings have all been of the kind that at first they were
regarded as if they were from the devil, and one worried that the sky
would soon fall; but after that things soon changed. It is now another
time to touch the great heads that were unaccustomed before; and what
God has in mind will be seen in his time.

Not that I excuse myself with this, as if there were nothing human about
me, but that I can boast of this with St. Paul, even if I am too harsh,
that I have nevertheless ever spoken the truth, and no one can blame me
for having been hypocritical. If I ever make a mistake, I would rather
speak too harshly and push out the truth too unreasonably than to be
hypocritical and keep the truth. If, however, the great lords are
disturbed by my freely harsh writing, they will leave my teaching
unadulterated and wait for theirs; I do them no injustice. If I sin in
it, they shall not forgive it, for I only do right, but God alone.

This is what you want to receive. We will receive it in all faithful
friendship, and be confident that Christ is Lord even of His enemies. He
is Lord even of his enemies, and can keep his promise to us when we ask
that there be no doubt that we shall not need him.

have before the burning tails of Syria and Samaria \[Isa. 7:4\]. Hereby
commanded by God. Wednesday after *Purificationis* \[Feb. 4\] *Anno*

*Domini* 1523.

Martinus Luther.

**482** Letters from the year

No. 584 to 587. **483**

**No. 584.**

(Wittenberg.) February 8, 1523.

**Concerns of Luther, Melanchthon, and Bugenhagen,**

**whether a prince may protect his subjects against the persecution of
the emperor and other princes by war for the sake of faith.**

In Latin, Luther\'s objection alone is found in manuscript in Gotha,
*Cod. B* 28, p. 63 (with the caption:

*D. M. Luth. judicium Anno 23. vivo Friderico duce Saxoniae);
ebenbafelbft Cod. A 401;* in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Aug. 11, 10, fol. 157b
(with the superscription: Ejusdem Lutheri judicium de illa quaestione,
scriptum, anno 1523, vivo adhuc Friderico, Duce Saxoniae Electore);*
ibidem *Cod.* The Latin original, which the Weimar court preacher D.
Slbrafiam 2ange befafj, bore the inscription by *Spalatin\'s* hand*: D.
Martinus Lutherus, de bello a Principibus Christianis suscipiendo.
M.D.XXIII.* , and contained five concerns: by Luther, Link, Melanchthon,
Bugenhagen, and Amsdorf; the latter with the timing we have given. All
five concerns are found in J. E. Kappen\'s little Nachlese, vol. II, p.
571 (Latin, from Spalatin\'s papers in the library of Raimund Krafft von
Dellmensingen, mayor of Ulm). In German, the three concerns of Luther,
Melanchthon, and Bugenhagen are found in Hortleder, \"von der
Rechtmäßigkeit des deutschen Kriegs,\" Gotha 1645, tom. II, p. 61, and
from them in Kapp 1. o. p. 578; in Walch, vol. X, 672 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 64, p. 277; everywhere without date. Four of
these concerns (with the exception of Melanchthon, for which reference
is made to the *Corp. Ref.*) Latin in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 76.
Melanchthon\'s objection alone, German and Latin, in *Corp. Ref.,* vol.
I, 600. (Bretschneider erroneously considers the German text to be the
original, overlooking the fact that Spalatin translated such writings
for the Elector). Luther\'s misgivings alone, Latin and German, in De
Wette-Seidemann, Vol. VI, p. 39. We have, as Walch has done, left it at
the communication of the three documents mentioned in the
superscription.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 572.

**No. 585.**

Wittenberg. February 9, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a married priest. From affairs of the monastery and
the convent at Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 242. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 24; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
306 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 81. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
826.

Mr. Georg Spalatin, court preacher, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

\"Grace and peace.\" I commend this married priest who asks that I
prepare the way for him to come to you.

stand by him as much as you can. I could not refuse him this service. By
the way, if it cannot happen that Dabrun is handed over into the hands
of the prince, so be it. But in the meantime we have no use for it,
since Staupitz 1 will pay nothing if the prince does not force him anew.

The dean 2) of All Saints will die, and part of your office will be to
help that they do not get back a man of the same kind as dean. The
provost Justus Jonas considers Crotus suitable; you yourself know the
man. Farewell. Wittenberg, 1523, Monday after Sexagesimä \[9 Feb\].
Martin Luther.

**No. 586.**

(Wittenberg.) Mid-February 1523.

**To Wilhelm Nesen in Frankfurt. 3)**

The first part of the book is a copy of Luther\'s book \"Wider den
gewappneten Mann Cochläus\" (Against the Armed Man Cochlaeus).

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 580 and 597.

**No. 587.**

(Wittenberg.) February 25, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Repeated request for Franz Lambert. By Hartmann von Kronberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 136 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 164. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 125 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 307 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 85. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 827.

To Georg Spalatin, evangelist at Lochau, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! I send you back the letter of Melberin 4), my dear
Spalatin, but you do not answer anything that you have addressed to the
Prince for the Lord Franz Lambert, the Frenchman. He is sure

1\) Günther von Staupitz.

2\) D. Lorenz Schlamau. Compare St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX,
Introduction, p. 51b f.

3\) At that time, Nesen was still in Frankfurt as the head of the
Patrician School, but left for Wittenberg around Easter.

4\) Wife of Sebastian Melder, at the court (aulicus) of Ludwig, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Elector.

**484** Letters from the year 1523. no. 587 to 590. 485

Indeed, he is a good man and an exile, but it is hard for us to feed him
completely, but harder still to leave him in the lurch. For no doubt
Christ is set before us poor in him; but if you obtain nothing, Christ
will assist his own from elsewhere. I do not ask for a salary for him,
but that he may be helped from time to time, or even once more with ten
florins or thereabouts. So you see that I become a beggar for others,
since I need nothing for myself. But Staupitz also pays us nothing, and
perhaps will pay us nothing. Mr. Hartmann Kronberg is with us together
with Count Albrecht 1) and we have entertained both of them with a
breakfast in our monastery; the man who has suffered so much2) is still
very firm in his faith. Farewell and answer. Wednesday after Invocavit
\[25 Feb\] 1523.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 588.**

Wittenberg. March 1, 1523.

**To the provost and canons of Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1180.

**No. 589.**

(Wittenberg.)March 1. March 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

News from Switzerland and other news.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 235. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 27; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
309 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 91. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 877.

To the learned and godly man, Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the court of
Saxony, his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have received this news from Switzerland. I
am also sending the letter of Caspar Schalke, for the reason that you
may change your opinion about Georg von Ebeleben, which you got from
earlier dillgen.

1\) von Mansfeld.

2\) Landgrave Philip of Hesse had taken Kronberg\'s castle on October
16, 1522.

again. Everywhere the word is more powerful than with our neighbors, and
even than with us. Yesterday, Nicolaus Maurus 3) arrived from Worms, the
cantor at St. Andreä, whom you know. He will stay here for some time
with his comrade Friedrich, 4) who is also a divine scholar, and he
tells us that Busch is writing against Erasmus, of whom he praises so
wonderfully that he has become a different man and a husband and is
living in Heidelberg. I wonder what may have happened to the official at
Trier, D. Eck, who is now a husband, that he rages so rebelliously
against the princes and even against his own at Trier, unless these
times must be fruitful in monstrosities, and everything must be changed
for everyone. Farewell and pray for me. Sunday Reminiscere \[March 1\].

Martin Luther.

**No. 590.**

(Wittenberg.)March 2. March 1523.

**To Wolfgang Stein, court preacher in Weimar.**

First an economic matter. Report that Michael Stiefel is wanted as a
preacher in Mansfeld, and that Neustadt an der Orla is well provided for
by Hieronymus von Enghuizen.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 1048, fol. 76. Printed by Schütze, vol. II,
p. 44 (with the wrong year 1522); by De Wette, vol. II, p. 152 (also
wrong: \"March 17, 1522\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 93.

Mr. Wolfgang Stein, Evangelist at the Court of Weimar, his most esteemed
\[friend\] in Christ.

Mercy and peace! The money for the wine should have been sent to Cyrold
in Jena the other day, my dear Wolfgang, but twice the expectation of a
messenger deceived me. Now, however, Anton Musa is taking it with him;
you will see to it that it is handed over to his master. In earlier
letters I answered your questions. Now Michael Stiefel 5) of Albrecht,
Gra

3\) Nic. Maurus from Goarshausen, later pastor at St. Catharinen in
Frankfurt a. M. in 1536, later superintendent at Groß-Gerau, died before
1553.

4\) Friedrich Baur, according to an old Worms chronicle.

5\) Michael Stiefel, Augustinian of Esslingen, born there in 1486, was
an early follower of Luther. In the

**486** Letters from the year 1523. no. 590. 591. 591a. **487**

fen at Mansfeld, as a preacher, and I ask that you help him to go there.
For Neustadt seems to be duly provided for by Mr. Hieronymus, who
belongs to our order, whom my prior Wenceslaus 1) has sent there.
However, if Michael is sent there, I do not want him to be called away,
but to remain there. Farewell and pray for me and commend me to the
princes. Monday after Reminiscere \[March 2\] 1523. 2) Martin Luther.

**No. 59 L.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early March 1523.) 3)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther urged that the idolatries in the All Saints\' Monastery be
stopped and that such people be employed who would arrange the service
according to the word of God.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 180. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 134; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 314 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. IV, p. 94. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 843.

Magister Georg Spalatin, court preacher, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I write again, my dear Spalatin, both myet- and

In the summer of 1522, because he was not safe from Archduke Ferdinand,
he left his monastery and entered the service of Hartmuth von Kronberg
as a preacher. After the latter lost his rule in October 1522 (see No.
587), he went to Wittenberg, where Luther took him in. Then he came as a
court preacher to Mansfeld, where he did not stay long, but went as a
pastor to Christoph Jörger in Tollet in Austria, and from there came to
Lochau in 1528. He had to leave this position because of his prophecy of
the end of the world on a certain day in October 1533. At the end of
1534 or beginning of 1535 he became pastor in Holzdorf near Wittenberg,
where he remained until the village was destroyed in the Schmalkaldic
War. For a while he then lived in Frankfurt a. O., until Duke Albrecht
of Prussia made him pastor in Haberstrohm near Königsberg in 1552.
Already in 1554, however, we find him again as pastor at Brück near
Belzig, because he had to leave Prussia as an opponent of Osiander.
Finally, he was professor of arithmetic in Jena and Diaconus at the city
church there, where he died in April 1567.

1\) P. M. *Venceslaus* in the manuscript; resolved by another hand by:
*Prior meus,* and inscribed: *Lynck*.

2\) That this letter belongs to the year 1523 is not only attested by
the Gotha manuscript, but can also be seen from the course of Stiefel\'s
life.

3\) This letter must have been written around the same time as No. 588.

for the sake of other people. For now is the time to weaken this
Bethaven, which has hitherto been tolerated with great vexation against
the great purity of the word given to us from heaven: Heaven. God does
not need to be tempted further, so help as I know you will and as you
can. If nothing else can be done, that at least such men are appointed
who despise these abominations: only then will there be hope that they
will establish the praiseworthy use of singing psalms with each other
without the prince, according to the example of the \[first\] letter to
the Corinthians, Cap. 14. Even if this cannot happen, it is good to
rather postpone the appointment \[of new priests\] than to establish
Jeroboam\'s priests anew \[1 Kings 12:32\]. This honor must be given to
the word which is with us, as thou thyself knowest and desirest all
things better. Fare well in the Lord. Mart. Luther.

**No. 591a.**

Wittenberg. 7. 4) March 1523.

**To Joh. Schwanhausen, pastor at Bamberg.**

Luther (perhaps moved by Camerarius, who was a native of Bamberg) became
acquainted with him because he preached Christ, and comforted him in his
tribulations.

From a manuscript in the royal library in Munich, *Cod. Clm*. 943, fol.
134b, printed in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 8.

To the preacher at St. Gangolph\'s in Bamberg, the esteemed and highly
learned man, M. L.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I am unknown to you and you to me,
dear man, the one you preach (as your Bambergs testify to me) is known
to both of us through

4\) The Erl. Briefw. has overlooked the *Saddatho* and therefore wrong :
\"March 8\".

5\) Schwanhausen had already been teaching in a Protestant spirit at
Bamberg since 1520. After the Convention of the Papal Princes in
Regensburg in July 1524 (see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2296),
persecution arose and Schwanhausen had to leave. In April 1525 he was
appointed preacher at the Catharinenkloster in Nuremberg and remained
there until December 1525. His further circumstances are uncertain. He
died on September 1, 1528.

**488**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 591a to 594.

**489**

the grace of God, and this compels me to seek your acquaintance at least
by letter and to greet you, that is, as Paul speaks modestly, that we
comfort one another through common faith \[Rom. 1:12\]. Go forward
valiantly, dearest brother, be manly, and let your heart be strong, and
hold your peace unto the Lord. \"The servant is not greater than his
lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you\" \[John
15:20\]. \"But be of good cheer, for I have overcome the world. In the
world you have fear, but in me you have peace\" \[Jn 16:33\]. But what
do I comfort him who is firmer than I? Rather, I will ask only this one
thing, that you ask God for us and let me be in command of your prayers
in our Lord, in whom you may be well pleased. Amen. Wittenberg, Saturday
before Oculi \[March 7\] 1523. Martin Luther.

**No. 592.**

Schweinitz. March 8, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2634, annex, no. 124.

**No. 593.**

Wittenberg. March 10, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Request for a painter who did not feel safe in Wittenberg because of a
rape he had committed, that Spalatin help him to calm down.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 138 and in the 6oä. 3eu. a, foI. 165. printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 127b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 311 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 98. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 828.

To the learned and godly man, Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the court of
Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! Free me, I ask, from this burdensome matter, my dear
Spalatin. It is with Lucas 1) a journeyman painter \[Hans von
Schmalkalden\], 2) who about two years ago either obtained it from the
prince, or requested that he be granted a license under

1\) Cranach.

2\) The words: *Hans Schmalkaldius* wrote Spalatin in the margin.

He is afraid that he would like to live safely under his rule until the
matter of his death would be settled. Now, as far as I can see, he,
tormented by his conscience and, as he says, offended by the words of
his companions, fears all dangers and suspects treason and capture.
Therefore, the poor man asks me to find out whether the prince has
changed his mind and has ceased to grant him security in his country. He
does not quite believe my words and those of others, no matter how much
I always assure him that the prince\'s mind is not like that, nor will
Lucas suffer a treacherous betrayal or capture without first informing
him or warning him. For such is the miserable conscience of every guilty
man. You will therefore free me and reassure him if you write either in
the name of the prince or in your own (since it is certain that nothing
of the sort is to be feared from the prince), and make us certain, so
that we thus fulfill the duty of brotherly consolation. For nothing must
be treated more tenderly than a guilty conscience, which is punishment
enough in itself. Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, 1523, on
Tuesday after Oculi \[March 10\].

Mart. Luther.

**No. 594.**

(Wittenberg.) (Before March 12, 1523.)

**To Spalatin.**

Of a false rumor that negotiations had been held with Duke George in his
name. Interpretation of Match. 18, 22. About the refilling of the
vacancies in the monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. From the same, the
beginning, about 3 lines, is cut off. Handwritten in *Cod. Dessav*. No.
161 and in *Cod*. *Jen*. a, fol. 182. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p.
135; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 315 (with the too late date: \"In April\")
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 99. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 845 f.

To Georg Spalatin, the faithful and blessed evangelist in the Lord.

\... Nothing has been negotiated with me in the name of Duke George. For
here, too, false tongues lie wonderful things about me and against me.

**490** Letters from the year 1523. no. 594. 595. 596. **491**

I take the passage Matth. 18 \[v. 22\] according to the common
understanding \"seventy times seven times\", that is, as often as it may
always be, by putting a certain number for an indefinite one, as the
Scriptures generally use the word \"seven\" in the third book of Moses
\[Cap. 26, 28.\] and elsewhere \[Deut. 28, 7. 25\]. Furthermore, this
matter does not pertain to private forgiveness alone, but also to public
forgiveness. Because the gospel is the voice of forgiveness, and the
voice of forgiveness is the gospel, it must not be circumscribed by any
place, by any time, by any person, by any thing, but must be freely
granted everywhere and always and to all.

The prior 1) says thanks, also I, for the order of the prince against
Staupitz. 2) Farewell and pray for me.

On Friday 3) the dean and the canon will be elected, but how I would
like that either Amsdorf or a similar man would become dean by order of
the prince, and in the meantime the interest of Amsdorf would go to
Pomeranus, likewise the interest of Rachal4 ) to some reader in the
Collegio, so that the chamber of the prince would be relieved, and in
the meantime one would like to pretend that the appointment of the
canons would be postponed until the matter falls by itself. Farewell.
Mart. Luther.

**No. 595.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around March 17, 1523.)

**To Johann Brismann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 564. 5)

1\) Eberhard Brisger.

2\) Günther von Staupitz.

3\) This is Friday after Oculi \[March 13\], on which the election of
the dean took place. (See Kolde, \"Frederick the Wise,\" p. 65.) Our
letter is written in the same week, and before March 12, for on that day
Luther would have written *cras* instead of *feria* 6.

4\) In Latin *Rachals*. Seidemann in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 690 writes:
\"Raphals\".

5\) At that point, we have provided this letter with the time
determination assumed by De Wette: \"Perhaps in January 1523\"; here, we
give the one in the Erl. Briefw. (which we have followed almost
everywhere), although the reason given for it does not quite satisfy us.
It reads: \"We place the letter at the same time as Brismann\'s letter
to Spalatin, d. *d. Wittemb.* 16. *cal. April.* in the letter of his
work (p. 9); also \'Erläutertes Preußen\' II, 309 places it on this
date.\"

**No. 596.**

(Wittenberg.) March 29, 1523.

**To Esban Hesse in Erfurt.**

Luther testifies to Hesse\'s applause because of a poem he received from
him, and comments on the importance of poetry and rhetoric for true
theology.

First printed in a collection of letters addressed to Eoban Hesse under
the title: *De non contemnendis studiis humanioribus futuro theologo
maxime necessariis etc.,* Bl. A jb ; in Aurifaber, Vol. II, Bl. 307; in
*Fr. Jac. Bayschlag, Sylloge*

*varior. opusculor*. 1729. I, 292; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 312 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 118. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 829.

Martin Luther wishes Eoban Hesse, the poet faithful in Christ, his
exceedingly dear brother, salvation.

Grace and peace! Your very lovely letter was delivered to me by our dear
Crotus, the companion of Jakob Fuchs 6) and Petreius, but the *Captiva*
was handed to me by Philippus. To write the foregoing (*hactenus*) to
you, dear Eoban, would perhaps have been enough for the uneducated
Luther, just so that he answered you. For what should I write to you
further, since I wanted you to read only things worthy of your muses?
although your kindness of heart is known to me, that you do not despise
even lesser things. You will be able to judge for yourself what I judge
of the *Captiva,* for you are not so obtuse 7) that you should not
recognize yourself, nor so full of self-love that you should flatter
yourself, but that you should also overcome yourself; but in this you do
not overcome yourself, that you might believe that the *Captiva
displeases* either me or you. However, it will soon come to light 8) and
will also find its way into the world without us.

6\) Fnchs, a canonicus, from an old Franconian noble family. - Petreius
Aperbach or Eberbach from Erfurt. - Eaxtiva is the name of the 428 verse
elegiac poem addressed to Luther, in which Hesse expressed his most
resolute commitment to the cause of the Reformation. The Wittenbergers
had this poem printed by Joh. Secerius in Hagenau as late as 1523.

7\) *cornea fibra, Persius, sat.* 1, 47.

8\) The *Captiva* was published under the following title: *Ecclesiae
afflictae epistola ad Lutherani Eobano Hesso viro pio ac docto autore.
Haganoae, ex Neacademia Seceriana*. At the end: *Haganoae ex aedibus
Johannis Secerii Lauchensis. Anno M. D. XXIII*.. Nine quarto leaves.

**492**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 596 to 599.

**493**

The author should make known what kind of man he is, and also not fear
envy himself. By the way, if I did not know that you would answer that
this was done by you for the sake of the preservation of prosperity, I
would complain that too much honor has been done to my name by this
excellent little work, you may give the honor of this name to others
(says that1) ); but I will suffer the undeserved honor, which I am
accustomed to suffer so many deserved disgraces. By the way, these fears
of yours shall move you in nothing, since you fear that we Germans will
become more uneducated than we have ever been, by the fall of the
sciences through our theology; certain people also often have their
fears where there is nothing to fear. I am convinced that without
knowledge of the sciences, pure theology cannot exist at all, as it has
fallen and fallen in the most miserable way since the sciences fell and
fell. Yes, I see that a glorious revelation of the Word of God has never
happened, unless He had prepared the way beforehand, as it were through
antecedent Anabaptists, through emerging and flourishing languages and
sciences. There is absolutely nothing that I would like to see happen or
be committed in youth less than that poetry and the art of oratory be
left in the queue. My wish is certainly that there should be as many
poets and orators as possible, because I see that by these studies, as
by no other means, people become extraordinarily skilled both in
grasping sacred things and in dealing with them in a right and happy
way. It is true that wisdom makes the tongue of the underage eloquent
\[Wis. 10:21\], but the gift of speech is not to be despised. Therefore,
I also ask you, that you also at my request (if it can do anything)
create in your young people, that they eagerly practice the art of
poetry and speech. As Christ lives, I am also often unwilling about
myself, that with this age and this \]my\] I am often displeased that at
this age and in this way of life, time does not permit me to occupy
myself with poets and orators from time to time. I had a ho

mer bought to become a Greek. But enough that you have been burdened
with these trifles; from Luther keep yourself fully convinced of what
you can assure of your *captiva*,3) and be well, strong in Christ, Amen.
Palm Sunday \[March 29\] 1523.

**No. 597.**

Wittenberg. (March?) 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of Magnus Groß, a monk who had left the monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 159 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 181. Printed by *Buddeus,
p.* 28; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 446 (without date) and in Erlanger
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 121. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 879.

Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his \[friend\] in the Lord,
grace and peace! I recommend this Magnus Groß to you, my dear Spalatin,
because he wanted a letter from me to you, so that he could reach the
prince more comfortably with his petition through you. I believe,
however, that it is an exceedingly godly work to serve such people who,
out of the captivity of Satan, long for the light of Christ. You will
therefore do what the Lord has given you to be able and to want. Fare
well and pray for me. Wittenberg 1523. Martin Luther.

What the provost Jonas writes to you, I believe you have read, so that
it is not necessary to urge the one who is not unwilling 2c.

**No. 598.**

(Wittenberg.) (First months 1523.)

**To the Brethren in Bohemia and Moravia.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1308.

**No. 599 .**

Wittenberg. (Before April 4) 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1784.

1\) *Horace, Sat. lib*. I, 4, v. 43.

2\) Erl. Briefw.: *insigne* instead of: *insignem*.

3\) That is, the best (Walch).

**494** Letters from the year 1523. no. 600. 601. 602\^ 495

**No. 600.**

Wittenberg. April 4, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Intercession for a girl in a \"r matrimonial matter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 139 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 166. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 128; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 316 f. and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. IV, p. 124. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 832.

To the learned and godly man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court,
his brother in Christ.

Mercy and peace! There is a girl from Torgau, who wants to have her
bridegroom, namely the barber of our prince, by showing a ring and a
broken coin, which is given to her as a pledge (*arrha*), and says that
it was also declared by the prince\'s councilors at Torgau, since D.
Schwertfeger 1) and Christian were present here with the preceptor, for
a right and lawful marriage, but the latter now withdraws his promise,
since others advise him to another person. Therefore she asks that the
prince may not suffer that the promise is taken for a mockery. But you
know that we must not tolerate that this already miserable sex is
oppressed, and also that everywhere, as many very bad examples show, the
girls are deceived by those unrighteous 2) and unrighteous people.
Therefore, as your office requires, see to it with the prince that the
complaint about this breach of trust is no longer heard. 3) Fare well
and pray for me. 1523, Wittenberg, Saturday before Easter \[April 4\].

Mart. Luther.

1\) \"D. Schwertfeger\", professor of law in Wittenberg. - \"Christian\"
either I). Christian Baier (Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 644 8. v.
Baier) or Christian Döring, mayor in Wittenberg (Erlanger Briefw.). -
The \"preceptor\" in Lichtenberg, Wolfgang Reißenbusch.

2\) The expression *inphrinitos*, which cannot be proven lexically, will
have been taken from the notorious woman builder at Athens.

3\) The meaning is in any case: \"that one no longer has to hear that
this breach of trust is complained about\", that is, that it is stopped.

**No. 601.**

Wittenberg. April 4, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of a young man for support. From a letter from Duke Georg
to Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 140 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 166. Printed by
*Buddeus*, p. 24; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 317 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 125. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 831.

To the godly and learned man, Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his
brother in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! This young man has asked me to recommend him
to you, so that through you he may obtain some support from the prince,
the patron of the poor, to learn a trade. To me he seems good and
worthy, and a man who has it better in mind than he can talk it out; do
what you can. Yesterday I received a letter from a certain friend, which
Duke Georg wrote against me to Count Albrecht von Mansfeld, which is so
full of rage, nonsense and threats that one could believe that Satan
himself is brimming with anger and pouring out his displeasure. But I
was told not to give anyone the opportunity to copy it, otherwise I
would have sent it to you. Perhaps you prophesied this in your previous
letter4 ). Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Saturday before Easter
\[April 4\] 1523. Mart. Luther.

I ask you to read this letter to the prince. 5)

**No. 602 .**

Wittenberg. April 8, 1523.

**To Wenc. Link in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2619, appendix, no. 113.

4\) Compare No. 599 at the beginning.

5\) This postscript of the original is found only in Burkhardt, p. 55
and in Erl. Briefw.

Letters from the year 1523. No. 603.

**497**

**No. 603 .**

Wittenberg. April 10, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Request for temporary support for the nine nuns who had left, among them
Catharina von Bora. Luther hoped to accommodate them elsewhere. Council,
how the bad housekeeping of Duke Johann may be helped.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 141 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 166. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 1306; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 319 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 127. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 836.

Mercy and peace! Those nine apostate nuns have come to me; a wretched
little people, but brought to me by honorable Torgau citizens, namely by
Leonhard Koppe and feilten cousin and Wolf Dommitzsch (*Tomitsch*), so
that a bad suspicion cannot take place in this matter. I am very sorry
for them, but most of all for the others who are perishing everywhere in
such large numbers through that cursed and impure chastity. This sex is
in itself far too weak, and by nature, yes, by God bound to the man, and
is, separated by such great cruelty, ruined. O over the tyrants, O over
the cruel parents and relatives in Germany! But you, O pope, and you,
you bishops, who can curse you according to due? Who can sufficiently
curse your blindness and fury, which teaches and demands such things?
But here is not the place to deal with it.

You ask what I will do with them? First, I will tell the relatives to
take them in; if they do not want to, I will see to it that they are
taken in elsewhere. For I have been promised by some people that I will
help some into marriage if I can. But these are their names: Magdalena
Staupitz, Elsa von Canitz, Ave Große, Ave Schönfeld and her sister
Margaretha Schönfeld, Laneta von Golis, Margaretha Zeschau and her
sister Catharina Zeschau, and Catharina voll Bora. They are such that in
truth they are in need of mercy; in them Christ is served; but they have
escaped quite miraculously. I beg you, however, that you too may be a

Do a work of love and beg some money for me from your rich courtiers,
with which I can keep them for about eight or even a fortnight, until I
can hand them over comfortably to their relatives or my friends. For my
capernaites 1) increase by the so great abundance of the daily word in
such a way that the other day I could not get ten florins borrowed on my
person for a certain poor citizen. The poor, who would gladly give it,
do not have it; the richer either refuse it, or let themselves have it
with such difficulty that they must either lose their gratitude to God
for what they have given, or I must lose my freedom, but this is nothing
unusual in the world and its kind. Yes, I have only nine old shocks as
annual pay,2) apart from these, neither I nor my brothers receive even a
penny from the city. But I also do not demand it from them, so that I
emulate the glory of Pauli, by robbing other churches in any case, in
order to serve my Corinthians for free \[2 Cor. 11, 7. f\].

There is another thing that I have so often wanted to write to you, but
have just as often forgotten. I wonder why our prince, since he knows
that his brother, Duke Johann, has such fathers of the household 3) that
the estates are going to ruin more and more every day, does not accept
Sebastian Kötteritz there, a man, as he proves daily with deeds and
examples, who is extraordinarily skilled in administrative matters. For
I would also like that Kötteritz himself would be advised, but much more
this princely court, especially that the very good young man, Prince
Johann Friedrich, the future regent, would learn by some excellent
example to take care of the goods and to recognize the frauds of the
people better. For those who now rule there are evil to me, since they
have become so rich.

1\) That means: the inhabitants of my city, as Capernaum Matth. 9, 1. is
called \"his \[Christ\'s\^ city\". Compare Matth. 11, 23.

2\) \"9 old shocks\" makes 7 thlr. according to current money.

12 gr. (Erl. Briefw.)

3\) Luther probably chose the word *patresfamiIias* here instead of
*adimstratores* (stewards) to indicate that they care more for their
house than for the general best.

**498**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 603 to 606.

499

and the prince comes down. I beg you to report this to the prince in my
name, for I would very much like that place to be helped by such a man,
who is godly and at the same time skilful. Fare well and pray for me.
Wittenberg, 1523, on the Friday after Easter \[April 10\]. 1) Mart.
Luther.

**No. 603a.**

Wittenberg. (Around April 10, 1523.) 2)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther complains about the defaulting debtor Günther von Staupitz and
the poverty of the monastery caused by him, which will force him to
leave Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv (with the inscription
Spalatin: De IX. sanctionialibus. 3) 1. 5. 2. 3.). Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen. a*, fol. 244. Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 27; in De Wette, vol. II, p.
433 (\"In November?\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 132. German (in
Spalatin\'s translation) in Burkhardt, p. 56 and in Walch, vol. XXI,
878.

To the dear man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist, \[his\] superior in
Christ.

Staupitz still pays none of our interest, and the castle does not care
about us. So we are getting into debt every day. I do not know whether
we should continue to complain to the prince or let it go so that what
wants to be lost will be lost, so that I will finally be forced either
by poverty or by necessity to leave Wittenberg and to fulfill the wishes
of the papists and the emperors. Of course, I would gladly accept a
sufficient reason to leave, since I am very disgruntled about the
hardness and ingratitude of the godless people of this city.

1\) Spalatin translated this letter for the Elector, and inserted the
translation of the next letter before the last paragraph of this letter;
Burkhardt, p. 56, considers the latter to be a postscript to our letter.

2\) The time for this letter results from the last note to the previous
letter. Spalatin will have received it at the same time, as its
erroneous inscription suggests. That this is an independent letter is
proven not only by the special address, but also by the different
folding of the letter.

3\) This word written by Spalatin means: *sanctis monialibus*, of the 9
holy nuns.

4\) Burkhardt offers: \"herlickeit\", which will be read from:
\"hertickeit\".

**No. 604.**

Wittenberg. April 10, 1523.

To Leonhard Koppe, citizen of Torgau.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1666.

**No. 605.**

Borna. April 16, 1523.

**To Wolfgang Stein in Weimar.**

Luther recommends Heinrich Zwetzen, former administrator of the
monastery at Neustadt a. O., to intercede with the prince.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 49; in De Wette, Vol. II, p. 331 (dated:
\"In April\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 133.

To the faithful evangelist Wolfgang Stein, in Latin *Saxo,* in Greek
*Petro,* in Hebrew *Kepha*, at the court of the Prince of Saxony in
Weimar.

Grace and peace! I recommend this Magister Heinrich Zwetsen, former
administrator of the monastery in Neustadt, to you, best Wolfgang, that
you, if you are able, assist him with your prince 5) if he could perhaps
obtain something from these monks, on whom he has done his wrong. He
insisted that I should write to the prince himself, but I did not want
to be burdensome to the prince. Rather, I wanted to accomplish through
you what I wished, so I ask you to have mercy on the poor. Farewell. At
Borna, on Thursday after the miraculous wedding of Wenceslaus \[April
16\] 6) 1523. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 606.**

(Wittenberg.) April 21, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

From the letters of Hans von Planitz and the fugitive provost of the
Neuenwerk in Halle.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. \[4, no. 144 and in Cod. Jen a, fol. 169. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 1326; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 328 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 133. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 840.

5\) Duke John of Saxony.

6\) The wedding on the left took place on Tuesday, April 14 (see vol.
XV, 2620, note 1). Already Seidemann at De Wette, vol. VI, p. 622, note
7, has the correct time determination.

**500** Letters from the year 1533. no. 606. 607. 608. **501**

To Georg Spalatin, his! \[Friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Behold, there is Planitzen\'s letter, 1) but Johann
Gülden (*Aureus*) writes to me that Plauitzen\'s earlier letter, which
was addressed to me, has not been handed over to him, which I sent to
you, so that you should hand it over to him, in order to see from it
what he must do in his matter. If I have not yet reminded you of this, I
now remind you to send it to him, who is so anxiously awaiting such an
answer.

2\) The circumlocutions are long, the story is ludicrous, but I hope
that everything can be settled peacefully in the near future, because
Doctor Aurbach was also here yesterday. This year keeps on giving birth
to new monstrosities. Be well, and do what I have asked. On Tuesday
after Misericordias Domini s21. April\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

**No. 607.**

Wittenberg. April 21, 1523. 3)

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of the provost of Halle and the request of the priest
Friedrich \[Baur\] for support.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. I, No. 143 and in *Cod. Jen*. n, fol. 163. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 132; in De Wette, vol. I I, p. 328 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. I V, p. 135. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 839.

To the worthy man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! This 4) Provost of the New Work in Halle
asks that I recommend him to you, for he fears that the Eardinal in
Mainz would criticize him too harshly at the

1\) Aurifaber refers in a marginal gloss to the second volume of the
Jena edition (1555), where this letter Fol. 207 is printed. This is
Planitzen\'s letter to the Elector of Jan. 8, 1523, which is found in
our edition Vol. X V, 2234. The marginal gloss is hardly correct.

2\) Nicolaus Demuth.

3\) This letter is from the same day as the previous one, but later.

4\) According to this, Demuth himself seems to have taken this letter of
recommendation with him.

I hope that it can be settled and brought to a good end. He has fled as
a man who fears his prince\'s displeasure, but he offers to stand up and
give an account after he has been escorted to a safe place. Therefore,
if it is necessary, serve the man wherever you can. He is neither a bad
man nor unworthy of your assistance. He is also accused of having stolen
a certain sum; 5) I wish it were true, if only it were hidden; but this
matter is easily excused.

Then I recommend to you this petition of the very poor priest Frederick,
who is very depressed by old age and lack, that you hand it over to the
prince. It is a good work which is done to him. Farewell and pray for
me. Wittenberg, Tuesday after Misericordias Domini \[April 21\] 1523,
Martin Luther.

**No. 608.**

(Wittenberg.) April 22, 1523.

**To Spalatin in Lochan.**

On the matter of the Hall provost.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav.* No. 145 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 169. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 133; in De Wette, vol. 11, p. 329 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 136. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 841 f.

For the attention of Magister Spalatin \"zur Lochaw\".

Grace and peace! Behold, as you willed, immediately after receiving your
letter we arranged for the provost to leave.

5\) Demuth had left the monastery on April 14 and had taken with him for
his sustenance \"a small allowance\" and two \"principal letters\"
(bonds of the monastery) and some jewels in order to obtain a
\"commission\" (settlement sum or annual pension) from the monastery or
the Cardinal. On April 20, D. Aurbach (Stromer), as the Cardinal\'s
intermediary, had negotiated with the Cardinal for their surrender.
Demuth finally returned the things he had taken as a pledge, but it is
not known whether he received anything in return. Incidentally, in 1523
Demuth married the stepdaughter of Wolf von Dommitzsch, a née of
Seidewitz, who had left the Cistercian monastery in Sitzeroda.

**502**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 608 to 611.

**503**

so that you may show what the prince wants to write to the cardinal.
But, O Cardinals and Princes! For the Cardinal has written a gracious
letter to the provost, inviting him kindly, and I have written for him
in the most humble way, and have laid out everything on both sides in
the best way, but perhaps the letter has not yet arrived, and the
Cardinal is doing this against him surreptitiously. By the way, I would
also like the Prince\'s answer to the Cardinal to be postponed, so that
the Provost can go further and further and more safely away. Farewell
and pray for me. 1523, Wednesday after Misericordias Domini \[April
22\]. Martin Luther.

**No. 609 .**

Wittenberg. - April 22, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther complains that Spalatin has sent off a poor woman recommended by
him, and renews his request for the support of the nine nuns.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 146 and in *Cod. Jen.* a, fol. 169. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 1336; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 330 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 136. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 842.

To the excellent man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his
superior in the Lord.

\"Gnad und Fried. Will you, dear Magister Spalatin!\" I wonder why you
have sent this woman back, since you know my handwriting exactly, and
you alone objected that the letter was not provided with a seal. But
there may be some reason here, which I do not ask to know: now at least
I ask in my name and that of the woman, ask the prince to give her
something, like those ten florins and a robe, either a new one or an old
one, or something else. If I have not been drunk or still am, I have
understood that she is certainly the sister of the stepfather (*patris
legitimi*), not the biological father of the preceptor at Lichtenberg
1). But what is the point of that? So do your duty, because you are
sitting in that place of plague, I also in mine.

1\) Wolfgang Reißenbusch.

By the way, you should not forget our colleague, and I want you to
mention the prince in my name, so that he will contribute. \"Oh, I will
keep it secret and tell no one\" that he has given something for these
renegade virgins, who have been abducted and preserved against his will.
Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Wednesday after Misericordias
Domini \[April 22\] 1523. Martin Luther.

**No. 610.**

(Wittenberg.) April 25, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1782.

**No. 611.**

Wittenberg. May 3, 1523.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Use for Leimbach. - Answered by Spalatin in the next number.

First made known by Herr Oberbibliothekar L. Prell er zu Weimar in the
Allgemeine Monatsschrift für Wissenschaft und Literatur. Then in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. VII, and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI,
p. 42.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have now decided for the third time to write to E. C. G. on
behalf of Leimbach, although I have requested and asked most earnestly.
For I know well, as the Scripture says \[Tob. 12, 8\], that hiding the
king\'s secret is honest, and I have no desire to find out about this
matter. But because he is so anxious and worried about it, and knows no
one else to call upon except E. C. G., and does not want to fill
people\'s ears with it, he has immediately refused to do such a service
for my conscience. I therefore humbly and humbly ask E. C. G. to
consider his distress and anxiety, which he has long since borne in such
matters, and, if he has deserved mercy, to show mercy again. So that E.
C. G., before his last departure from this world, may not only show what
is right in this matter (for that is a bad service before God), but also
something about the right and Christian and find himself a gracious
lord.

**504** Letters from the year 1523. no. 611. 612. 613. **505**

let him. It is true that his case, as he claims, has a powerful
appearance against E. C. G. But because God has forbidden to judge
according to one part\'s submission, I cannot yet judge anyone in this
matter, nor do I wish to be either a hearer or a judge, but only, if
something could be obtained, to ask for him humbly, or to have
Christianly admonished and warned E. C. G., if she is lacking as a human
being. E. C. G. wants to allow me to do so, because I do not like it to
be said that I am hypocritical to the Elector, or that I could say it
too harshly. I hope I will not become an E. C. G. hypocrite, because I
would never know why. God enlighten and strengthen E. C. G. with His
gracious good pleasure, Amen. At Wittenberg on Sunday Cantate \[April
25\] 1523.

**No. 612.**

May 13, 1523.

**Spalatin to Luther.**

Response to the previous letter.

Handwritten in the Weimar archive,

138\. VII, 48. Printed in Allg. Monatsschrift 1.6. p. 239; in Burkhardt,
Luthers Briefwechsel,\'p. 56 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 139.

God\'s grace and peace before! Venerable in God Father, dear Doctor! The
most illustrious, highborn Prince, Duke Frederick of Saxony, Elector
2c., my most gracious Lord, has ordered me to write to you that H. C. G.
Eur\'s letter concerning Leympach has been received today and its
contents have been read out, and that his C. G. Eur and everyone\'s
Christian reminder and admonition could well suffer. Therefore also his
C. G. would have no difficulty in trusting you to act in this matter
between his C. G. and the Leympach. However, since you know that his C.
G. has hitherto let himself be heard in all respects by His Imperial
Holiness, His Royal Majesty and other estates that they have never had
anything to do with your cause and you, and that his C. G. is in
agreement with you in this matter. G. should get involved with you in
this matter, may his C. G. be charged as if his C. G. had acted secretly
with you; he is not to be held responsible for this. G. had secret
dealings with you; undoubtedly, if his C. G. would have allowed you to
act in the matter, you would have heard his C. G. in such action. G. in
such an action, from which you shall find with truth that his C. G. does
not like to give their hope neither to Leymbach nor to anyone else
against fairness.

wanted to inflict weight, although his C. G. know that all people, and
before those who trust themselves, can err. Where it is not to your
liking because you ask that his C. G. want to show mercy to Leymbach
again, if he deserves it, then send his C. G. a list of the articles of
which Leymbach complains to you from his C. G.. From this his C. G.,
with God\'s help, would like to be heard with a fair and unavoidable
answer. Upon the order of my most gracious lord, the Elector of Saxony
2c., I did not want to let this go unreported in the best way, and I
have no doubt that you will send the following list to his C. G. about
which Leymbach is to complain. 1) With this I command you divine
protection and protection with grace in eternity to maintain. Date on
the evening of *Ascensionis Domini* \[May 13\] *anno ejusdem* 1523.

**No. 613.**

Wittenberg. May 17, 1523.

**To Wolfgang Stein in Weimar.**

Recommendation of a certain Thomas.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p.47; in De Wette, Vol. II, p. 333 and in
Erl. Briefw., Vol. I V, p. 140.

To the highly venerable man, Mr. Wolfgang Stein, *Petro* in Greek,
*Kepha* in Hebrew, *Rupi* in Latin, \"Stein\" in German, ducal
evangelist at Weimar.

Grace and peace! This Thomas, who stands personally before you, I don\'t
know what, desires from the prince, and naturally asks to be recommended
by me. I, who know that you have nothing to do, gladly place this burden
on you, that you either advise him or use yourself for him. He is indeed
a good and honest man, but you see what you can do for him. I have said
the same to M. Veit, 2) the winner of the chess game. All our people
greet you, especially the prior. 3) I am busy, as you know, with matters
that are not worthy of me. Wittenberg, Sunday Exaudi \[May 17\] 1523.
Yours, Martin Luther.

1\) This happened with the letter to Spalatin of June 9.

2\) Veit Warbeck.

3\) Eberhard Brisger.

**506** Letters from the year 1523. no. 614. 615. 616. **507**

**No. 614.**

Wittenberg. (Around May 20, 1523.) 1)

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

Luther asks for Spalatin\'s help in obtaining a scholarship for Georg
Mayer (Majors). Rumor of Sickingen\'s death.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen.* a, fol. 234. Printed in *Buddeus, p.* 31; in
De Wette, vol. II, p. 340 (\"In June?\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV,
p. 141. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 883.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, the
faithful evangelist, the serviceable (*dextro*) man.

Mercy and peace! This good young man, Georg Mayer, to whom you have also
done good before, asks that I intercede for him with you, so that you
may apply to Hieronymus Ebner and Anton Tücher, the Nuremberg city
councillors, for the scholarship, which is free after Ambrosius Neuter
2) has had it. Therefore, do your work, that is, a Christian and godly
one, as much as you can. I wish that the rumor that Franz Sickingen is
dead may be false. Amen. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg. Mart.
Luther.

**No. 615.**

Wittenberg. (Around May 23, 1523.) 8)

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

Luther recommends a French knight (the coctus).

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 9. Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 31; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 340 (\"In May?\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p.
142. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 884.

1\) This letter is written shortly before the following one. Luther
knows here only by rumor of Sickingen\'s death (died May 7), in the
following letter definitely.

2\) later mayor in Wittenberg.

3\) The date is derived from *Spal. ap. Menck*. II, 623, where it is
reported that on May 23 three Frenchmen came to Lochau, namely the
knight *Anemundus Coctus a Castellare (Anemond de Coct* from the castle
of *Chastelard* in the Dauphine), formerly a Rhodes knight; Francis
Lambert, called Serranus, and Claudius *a Tauro*. Coctus is named on the
title of the book edited by Lambert. See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV,
262. note.

Mr. Georg Spalalin, the godly and learned man, evangelist at the court
of Saxony.

Mercy and peace! This French knight would like to see the court and the
all-face of our prince. He is certainly a very good man, learned and
godly, and exceptionally fervent for the Gospel, for the sake of which
he, having come here from France, has been here for some time and will
still be here. I know that an interview \[with the prince\] will not be
granted to him, but it will do you good if you show yourselves
respectful and friendly. Yesterday I heard and read the true and
lamentable story of Franz Sickingen. God is a just but wonderful4 judge.
Farewell. Mart. Luther.

**No. 616.**

Wittenberg. May 24, 1523.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther reports that he is well, but complains that he is burdened with
many outward trades.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in the
Franciscaneum at Zerbst, No. 26, fol. 10b. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 134; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 333 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 845.

To Nicolaus Hausmann, the godly and learned man, pastor and evangelist
of the church in Zwickau.

Mercy and peace! This young man returns to you, my best Nicolaus, after
he has received from me what I had and could, but he also wanted to have
a letter full of me to you. Do now what Christ teaches you.

By the way, I pray quite well in the flesh, but I am taken up by so many
outward concerns that the spirit is almost dampened and can seldom take
care of itself. Pray for me that I may not be perfected in the flesh
\[Gal. 3:3\]. Greet all fellow believers and be well in the Lord.
Wittenberg, on the day of Pentecost \[May 24\] 1523.

Martin Luther. -

4\) Erlanger Briefw.: *miserabilis* instead of: *mirabilis*.

**508** Letters from the year 1523. no. 617 to 620. **509**

**No. 617.**

(Wittenberg.) May 27, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

From an economic matter of the monastery; from Pfaffenbeck and Leimbach.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in
*Cod.185*. 4. *Bibl*. *Goth.* and *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 242. Printed by De
Wette, vol. II, p. 334 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 163.

To the worthy Magister Georgio Spalatin, princely preacher and servant
of Christ, my favorable master and friend.

Grace and peace! Worthy master, our prior 1) asks and I also ask that
you ask for good counsel for him against my most gracious lord. For the
locksmith 2) in Wittenberg wants to have paid the malt he sold him by
Saturday, and the prior has no money, nor will he be able to have any.
The beggar\'s sack has a hole, it is large, and unfortunately it does
not want to be torn. But he shall not vex us long, God willing. If I had
not had so much money to spend on runaway monks and nuns, I could have
given the prior a tax. The Pfaffenbeck has asked me again, but I may not
come anymore, God help him. I have given the Leimbach the answer 3) M.
G. H., have heard nothing more. Hiemit GOtt befohlen. On Wednesday in
Pentecost \[May 27\] 1523. Martin Luther.

**No. 618.**

Wittenberg. May 29, 1523.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2187, no. 724.

**No. 619.**

(Wittenberg.) (About May 1523.) 4)

**To Bernard, a converted Jew.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1822.

1\) Eberhard Brisger.

2\) Gregor Burger.

3\) No. 612.

4\) The Erl. Briefw. bases this time determination: \"May, or earlier\"
on the fact that according to a letter of Gerbel to Joh. Schwebe! of
June II, 1523, at that time already in

**No. 620.**

Wittenberg. (About the beginning of June 1523.)S)

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

Luther sends Melanchthon\'s notes on the Gospel of John so that Gerbel
will promote them for printing.

First this letter is printed in: *Philippi Melanch- thonis, Annotationes
in Iohannem, castigatiores quam quae antea inuulgatae sunt. Vtpote in
quibus multa, quae desunt in aliis, habentur, una cum epistola
commendatitia M. Lutheri, Indiceque rerum memorabilium quae passim in
hoc Annotationum opere excutiuntur. Ex Foelicissima Hagenoa.* At the
end: *Haganoae, Ex Neacademia Iohannis Secerij Lauchensis. Salutis anno
M. D. XXIII.* 147 leaves text and 6 leaves index. Octav. Further in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 150 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p.303 (\"beginning
of the year\"); in *Corp. Ref.*, vol. XI V, 1043; in the Weimar edition,
vol. XII, 56 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 149. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 854.

Mr. Nicolaus Gerbel, the pure Christian man, Martin Luther.

Grace and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ!

Earlier, I had secretly stolen our Philip\'s notes on three letters of
Paul 6). Since he was not allowed to be angry with Luther, the thief, he
thought that he was thereby excellently avenged on me, because the
booklet had come out incorrectly due to the negligence of the printers,
so that I, too, was almost ashamed of it and was annoyed by the theft,
which had been so badly done. In the meantime

Strasbourg (or Hagenau?) a reprint of the writing \"dass Jesus Christus
ein geborner Jude sei\", to which this letter of Luther had been
attached, was produced; therefore writing and letter must have appeared
at the latest in May.

5\) In this determination of time, we have followed the Weimar edition.
The guiding considerations are these: In March 1523, Melanchthon had
finished the interpretation of the Gospel of John. Without his
knowledge, a postscript reached Basel and was printed there (by Adam
Petri) and published in May, of course without Luther\'s letter, which
is not yet found in the September edition of Adam Petri, which was
improved and increased according to the authorized Hagenau print. In
April, Oecolampad had begun his lectures on Isaiah, which are
commemorated at the end of this letter with almost the same words as in
Luther\'s letter to Oecolampad of June 20, 4523. But already on June 11,
Gerbel was waiting for the arrival of the commentary and letter from
Wittenberg, as he states in the letter mentioned in the previous number.

6\) See Luther\'s Preface to Melanchthon\'s Notes on the Epistle of Paul
to the Romans and the Epistles to the Corinthians, St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XIV, 172.

**510**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 620. 621. 621a.

511

he laughed at me and hoped that I would henceforth refrain from such
theft, instructed by my damage. But I have not cared for this laughter
and have become more daring, and now no longer steal, but rob by force,
as the author resists in vain, his notes on the evangelist John. But I
do not want to cut them out with words, they will recommend themselves
to your reader, so that I do not again have to suffer his nose wrinkling
and frowning. For he does not despise himself and his own out of a
desire for modesty, but because he believes in a Christian spirit that
all that is ours is nothing, but that Christ alone is entitled to
everything, so stubbornly that he seems to me to be completely mistaken,
at least in that he imagines that Christ is farther from his heart than
he actually is. And even I, who try to persuade him otherwise, he no
longer believes, so much has he increased and surpassed me: thus the
last become the first and the first the last. Yes, he assures that he
does not want to be considered the author of these remarks. Surely
Philip, to assist the church in this matter, is too much of a nobody. I,
too, would rather that there were no interpretations anywhere, and that
Scripture alone and loudly reigned everywhere, acting with a living
voice. But I do not see how the church could do without such
interpretations, which at least give an indication of the Scriptures, as
Philip\'s are. And who does not see that the epistle to the Hebrews is
almost an interpretation? Likewise Paul\'s letters to the Romans and
Galatians. For who could have so acted the holy Scriptures, if Paul had
not shown that they must be so acted? But this showing I call
interpreting. This alone is desired by Philip. But he dreams that
something else is desired by him. Therefore I send this robbery of mine
to you, my dear Gerbel, so that you may take care to make it common and
known among yourselves, however much it may be against the will of the
author. For I hope that Johann Secerius 1) will take pains to ensure
that this is correct.

1\) Johann Setzer from Laucha in Saxony.

I hope that this booklet will be printed more accurately and more
precisely than my stolen book has been printed before. But if this
relentless Achilles 2) had wanted to use his oratory in this booklet of
himself, he might have added much light and pleasantness. If there
should be a lack of order or eloquence, the wisdom and truth itself
brings enough pleasantness and light. For this book will praise Philip
as a true and wise man, unless Christ is not the truth and wisdom whom
it drives and teaches, even though he may choose to be and be called a
fool with Christ. And would God that we too were so foolish with them
that we might boast \[1 Cor. 1:25\], \"Divine foolishness is wiser than
men are.\"

I am very happy that Johann Oecolampadius is reading about Isaiah at
Basel, although I hear that many people dislike this. But that is the
fate of Christian teaching. Christ will also give us some light or
interpretation on the prophets through this man, which is especially
necessary for our times. Fare well in Christ, my dear Gerbel, and pray
for the sinner and fool Luther. Greet all of us in the Lord. Wittenberg,
Anno 23.

**No. 621 .**

Wittenberg. June 3, 1523.

**To the Grasen Albrecht von Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2210.

**No. 621a.**

(Wittenberg.) (After June 7, 1523.)

**To the scribes and printers of his**

**Sermons.**

Inspired by a sermon on the Gospel of the Rich Man that was published
without his prior knowledge, Luther asks in the preface to this sermon,
which he subsequently edited himself, not to have any sermon printed by
him unless it had been produced by his hand or had been printed in
Wittenberg beforehand on his orders. It will belong to the year 1523.
See Erl. Ed. (2.), vol. 13, p. 1 f.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 456.

2\) *Iliad*. 9, 182 sqq.

**512**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 622.

513

**No. 622.**

(Wittenberg.) June 9, 1523.

To Spalatin.

Luther sends Leimbach\'s \"Articles\" and again intercedes for
Kötteritz. - Enclosure: the list of Leimbach\'s debt claims.

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. X 122, fol. 23 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol.
327. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 140 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p.
346 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. IV, p. 153. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
848. - The supplement from Aa, pag. 137, X. VII, 40 of the Weimar
Archive in Burkhardt, p. 58 and in Erl. Briefw., I. a. p. 154.

To the learned and godly man, Georg Spalatin, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Behold, I have the articles of the Leimbach brothers of
which you have written so often. 1) Not that I wanted to be a judge or
advocate in these matters (for what do these matters concern me?), but
that in truth I fear that the prince sometimes does too much in such
matters, as it is the fate of all princes that they are lacking almost
out of a kind of necessity on both sides, namely with elevating the
unworthy and with oppressing such people who deserve it differently.
That this evil is also in our princes, many things prove very much; and
even if nothing proves it, it would still be shown by David, the special
example of all princes, who finally heard the godless Ziba \[2 Sam. 16,
4\], and became unjust against Mephibosheth \[2 Sam. 19, 29\], and that
at the time when he was in the middle of the virtue of the highest
kindness, so that I pass over other faults of him.

I have also written to you about Sebastian Koetteritz, 2) that you might
recommend him to the prince; you have not yet answered, answer what you
have done. If you have not tried anything, I will make an attempt for
myself. I see that he, too, is very unhappy about being held up like
this, even though by a gracious prince. For elsewhere a service would be
open to him, if he could accept it with the prince\'s permission. But
now the prince does not need him, and at the same time he is uncertain
about his future.

1\) See No. 612.

2\) In No. 603.

whether he can dare to let himself be used by another. This delay is
detrimental to such a man, since, as the children grow up, he must earn
for them while he is still strong and provide for them through his
paternal service. I do not like to be drawn into these things, since I
am far too busy with others, and yet, imprisoned by the law of love, I
see no opportunity to escape. This, together with other things, makes me
disgusted with the public) and extraordinarily long for solitude. Be
well and pray for me. Tuesday after Boniface \[June 9\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

See, I have the articles of the Leimbach brothers:

**The Leimbach Directory.**

Hansen Leimbach\'s abandoned debt to the Elector and Duke Johansen of
Saxony.

Item in the account, which is raised on Thursday after St. Blasius Day
and decided Thursday in the Holy Easter Week, all in the 1500th and
other year, my most gracious and gracious lords have remained indebted
to me 3164 florins 6 pf. 1 heller. In addition, at their request and
demand for the loan of my lord, Margrave Joachim, on Quasimodogeniti in
the same year, 2835 florins 20 gr. 5 pf. 1 heller. Summa 6000 florins;4)
I have promised to lend to her F. G. at her request until Michaelmas
immediately thereafter, and then her F. G. has promised to pay such 6000
florins to me again without any damage to me, as Mr. Hans von Minckwitz,
Knight, is well aware of. Such 6000 florins I have been deprived of from
Michaelmas in the next year until Michaelmas in the 13th. If you count
five to a hundred interest, they would have borne the time: are 11
years, every year 300 guilders, that is 3300 guilders. For the 11 years
I took money on bills of exchange instead of the 6000 guilders I had
borrowed, 21 gr. for each guilder, and had to pay gold or 22 gr. for
half a year. That makes a year on 100 ten 5) old shocks, makes on 1000
hun.

3\) Erl. Briefw.: *servituti* instead of *servitute*.

4\) This calculation shows that 2 Heller - I Pf.; 12 Pf. == 1 Gr.; 21
Gr. == 1 Gulden.

5\) So put by us instead of: \"ufs IIO alte schock\" in Burkhardt and in
Erl. Briefw. - The latter has all the errors found in Burkhardt.

**514**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 622.

515

The 11 years: 6285 florins 15 gr. Such 6000 florins wanted to pay me
their F. G. again in one year without any damage, which nevertheless
remained from *Cathedra Petri* in the 1504th year. Has my lord Duke Hans
Duke Hans had to give me 300 guilders interest every year at midday,
from Cathedra *Petri* in the 4th year to *Cathedra Petri* in the 14th,
nine years, every year 300 guilders, to 9 years 2700 guilders interest.
So I have also instead of such 6000 guilders, which I paid to Albrechten
von Brandenstein, for the preservation of my trade money on usury must
take and to half years 300 old shocks must pay, thut a whole year 600
old shocks, makes the nine year 5400 old shocks, thut in gold 5142
guilders 18 Gr. I have organized all the markets in Leipzig for the 19
years and have not counted anything for my most gracious and gracious
lords, there are approximately 57 markets; if I calculate a market at 10
fl., since 1) now none is held, the 19 years amount to 570 2) guilders.
Summa of the cash advanced amounts to 12,000 summa; on it damage taken
and received amounts to 17,428 guilders 12 gr. 3) Summa of my earned
wages still outside and the held markets amounts to 4370 fl.4) Summa
Summarum 33,798 guilders \[12 gr.\]. 5) On such before written our dear
father\'s blessed faithful presentation of money, damage and earned
wages we Leimbach have to forgive us all demand, also must prescribe and
agree to it, as if we had received such a delusion to remind such debt.
Although we are far from most gracious and kind lords. Lords, we have
left a clear, unambiguous handwriting of our father\'s blessed
handwriting, after his death.

1\) Burkhardt: \"the\"; Erl. Briefw.: \"der\'\" \[== whose\]. The sense
seems to us: with it (that is, with such a small sum) one cannot get
along now. In the original perhaps: \"dar\" instead of the one we put:
\"da\".

2\) \"570\" set by us instead of: \"530\".

3\) This sum comes to: Unpaid interest 3300 guilders .

Interest that Leimbach has pay

must (Schadewacht) 6285 \" 15 Gr.

Unpaid interest 2700 \"

Leimbach damage watch 5142 \" 18 \"

Summa 17428 \" 12 \"

It is easy to see that Leimbach\'s \"Schadewacht\" in the amount of
11,428 florins 12 gr. was quite an outrageous usury. See our note in the
15th volume of our Allsgabe, Col. 2636.

4\) Specificirt: wage for 19 years @ 200 guilders makes 3800 guilders;
57 markets in 19 years @ 10 guilders makes 570 guilders.

5\) \"33,798 florins 12 gr.\" set by us instead of: \"30,798 florins\".

We have to deliver and hand over all the counter-bill and the von
Brandenstein bill of debt for 6000 florins, which our father redeemed
from his money, plus all the years of their F.G. transmission and order
letter, which went out to our father, and everything else, which we have
placed in their souls and ask Christ to soften grace and mercy. But
above all this we still have outside and are promised by our most
gracious and kind lords of Frederick of Thun. Friedrich von Thun, as
spokesman of the same time, in the presence of other of their C. and F.
G. counsels, that the 2581 florins of advanced money, which our father
blessed in the last account of all the sum written before, should also
be presented to their F. G., which Degenhart Pfeffinger, chamberlain,
and Hans von Dolczk should receive on their F. G. order. The same
invoice has been inspected and presented in good time; although our
father himself had also done it long before during his life, nothing has
happened to us since his invoice was made. Now into the 14th year we
have had to pay interest on such money to the hundred with great damage,
and still daily, and have had to do without ours until now without any
principal and interest, because we do not receive ours. On such debt of
2581 guldens interest has run to damage the 14 years over 1800 guldens.
In addition, we still owe 200 guldens to the Dabrun seizure, according
to a contract in our father\'s handwriting, as recorded below, together
with the copy of the seizure letter, 7) which we have humbly requested
to be paid according to the same contract. But if the contract should be
nothing, that we, according to their C. and F. G. fief letter and seal,
would be consecrated in the same our before written goods, which 2000
florins our father and we since (are) the contract together with the
seizure now also do without from the 99th year on. If our father and we
lack such payment, damage, interest for the time, we have to let remain
2400 florins, and in addition we have to miss our benefit, if we did not
have ours, and have to live in poverty.

6\) Burkhardt: \"different\".

7\) We omit the communication of the \"contract\" following this
document and the \"Anfallbrief von Dabrun\", since the complaint of the
Leimbach brothers communicated here seems sufficient to us for the
explanation of the letter. Burkhardt has also not brought the latter.

**516**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 623 to 627.

517

**No. 623.**

Nuremberg. June 14, 1523.

**Grand Master Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.**

(Regest.)

A credentials letter for M. Johann Oeden, who is to negotiate with
Luther on behalf of the Grand Master. - Instruction for Oeden; he should
instruct Luther to conceal what he will bring to him until the grave.
Luther was to burn the letter of credence handed over to him as soon as
he had read it; if Luther did not want to respond, he was not to
disclose anything to him. If Luther agrees, however, he should present
the copy of the Book of Orders to him with the request to show in
writing how it is to be emended and how a reformation is to be carried
out in a Christian manner. Furthermore, to suggest how the bishops,
prelates and clergy who would be resident in the Order\'s territory, but
who would not belong to the Order, could be brought into a Christian
order. The order was to be brought into a Christian nature. The
Instruction ends with a beginning \"To the fifth\".

Handwritten in the Royal State Archives at Königsberg, Ms. 184, II, fol.
16. Printed in Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte XI, 1889, p. 279 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 158.

**No. 624.**

Wittenberg. June 17, 1523.

**To Count George II of Wertheim.**

Luther instructed a preacher \"sent\" to him by the count on how to most
successfully practice the Reformation and sent him back. A complaint
about the arbitrary procedure of D. Strauß in Eisenach.

The original is in the possession of Geh. Archivrath Friedländer in
Berlin. Printed in \"Die Musen,\" edited by de la Motte Fouquö and
Neumann, Berlin, 1813, vol. 1,53; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 43
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. IM.

To the noble and well-born Lord, Lord Georgen, Count of Wertheim 2c., my
gracious Lord.

Grace, Peace in Christ. Gracious Lord! I have received E.G.\'s preacher
together with E.G.\'s writing to the best of my ability, and have
reported all his questions, as much as God has given me, as he will tell
E.G.. I am glad that Christ has consulted E. G. with such a man, and I
hope that E. G. will keep him and learn in time that he is a righteous
man who will please E. G.. For D. Strauss has his head, and is now doing
as well as he can in Eisenach, and lets us say and write. But I have
told this preacher, E. G., our way here in Wittenberg, that he should
first do the word well, before one

until faith and love are seen to increase among the people; for they
would be public and offensive acts against the gospel, even though they
must first be punished by the word and the people must be informed. I
hope he will keep himself right. God keep E. G., Amen. At Wittenberg on
Wednesday after Viti \[June 17\] 1523.

E. G. Diener

Martinus Luther.

**No. 625.**

(Wittenberg.) June 18, 1523.

**To three expelled court ladies.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1930.

**No. 626.**

Wittenberg. June 18, 1523.

**To Jhan von Schleinitz at Jhanshansen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 706.

**No. 627.**

Wittenberg. June 20, 1523.

**To Joh. Oekolampad in Basel.**

Luther praises him for leaving the monastic state and encourages him to
continue in the explanation of the Scriptures and not to be misled by
the displeasure of Erasmus, of whom he judges that he has rendered
service to the cause of the Gospel but cannot find Christian truth.

Reprinted from the original in *Hottinger, hist. ecel. Novi Testamenti
saeculi* XVI, p. II, *tigur*. 1665, pas. 757; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p.
88; in De Wette, vol. II, ,p. 352 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 163.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1364.

To John Oecolampad, the learned and godly man, Christ\'s disciple and
faithful servant, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! First I want to ask you, best Oecolampad,
that you do not attribute this to my ingratitude or laziness, that I
have written nothing to you so far. For after you shook off Brigitta, 1)
I have not received a letter from you.

1\) Oecolampad had entered the Order of St. Brigitte as a preacher from
Augsburg on April 23, 1520, in the Altenmünster monastery near Augsburg,
had left the monastery again at the end of February 1522, was then
chaplain at the Ebernburg near Sickingen from April on, and since Nov.
1522 in Basel.

**518**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 627. 628.

519

received. At the same time, since Christ has strengthened your heart
with the power of such a great spirit, I thought that by overcoming the
superstition of conscience and freeing yourself from this yoke of Satan,
you had become too great for me to hope for a letter from you, or for
you to be strengthened by a letter from us. 1) Surely we have perceived
this thy spirit and glorious deed with great favor. And Philip also does
not cease to make thee greater to me daily, since he delights with
peculiar joy in thy remembrance. May the Lord also strengthen your
intention to read about Isaiah, although it has been written to me that
Erasmus dislikes it. But this displeasure may by no means weigh you
down. What Erasmus holds in his judgment about spiritual things, or even
only pretends to, is abundantly attested by his books, both the first
and the last. I feel his thorns everywhere, but because he poses as if
he were publicly not 2) my enemy, I also pose as if I do not understand
his pitfalls, although he is understood more thoroughly than he himself
believes. He has done what he was ordained to do: he has introduced the
languages, and turned away from godly studies. Perhaps he will also die
with Moses in the regions of Moab \[Deut. 34, 5\], because he does not
get to better studies (concerning godliness). 3) I would very much like
him to refrain from treating the holy Scriptures and from his
paraphrases, because he is not up to these tasks and occupies the
readers in vain and delays them in learning the Scriptures. He has done
enough that he has shown the evil; but to show the good (as I see) and
to lead into the land of promise, that he cannot do. But what do I say
so much of Erasmus? Only that you should not be moved by his name and
reputation, and even rejoice when you find that something is wrong with
him in this matter concerning the Scriptures, since he has spoken about

1\) Erl. Briefw.: *firmaveris* instead of *firmareris*.

2\) This \"not\" is missing in Walch.

3\) This letter also came into the hands of Erasmus and he complains
about it very much \'in a letter to Zwingli of Aug. 31, 1523 and in
another to Johann Faber in Constance of Nov. 21.

The same either can not judge correctly or does not want, as almost the
whole world begins to think of him.

I have not yet seen your translations of Chrysostom. You will kindly
suffer these many words of mine. I know that you do not need this
comfort. Christ, who dwells in you and works through you, will not leave
you. But you pray for me, for I am occupied with so many outward affairs
that there is danger that I, who began in the spirit, will finish in the
flesh.

The nuns and monks who have left steal many hours from me so that I may
serve the needs of all, not to mention the great mixed multitude who in
many ways claim me as their debtor. Farewell, dear Oekolampad, and the
grace of Christ be with you. Greetings to all of us. Wittenberg, 1523,
June twentieth.

**No. 628.**

Wittenberg. June 24, 1523.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

Luther sends Franz Lambert\'s letter in which he informs Spalatin of his
engagement. He reports the departure of sixteen nuns from the monastery
of Widderstetten in Mansfeld.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 147 and in *Cod. Jen.*

a, fol. 170. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 139; in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 353 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 168 and (without the
conclusion) in *Spalatin ap. Menck*, vol. II, p. 626. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 850.

To the godly and holy man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his
\[friend\] in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Behold a new monstrosity in this letter,4)
my dear Spalatin. I beg you, what else will finally happen that you
could be surprised about? unless you too become an unheard-of
bridegroom. God makes His counsels and works so marvelous that I, who
formerly seemed to be an expert in the things of God, was compelled to

4\) Franz Lambert had become engaged to Christine, the daughter of a
Herzberg baker, who served as a maid in the house of the professor of
medicine Augustin Schürf, and reported this to Spalatin in the letter
that Luther sent along.

**520** Letters from the year 1523. no. 628 to 633. 521

But let it be done, let his holy and blessed will be done, amen. Sixteen
nuns have left the monastery of Widderstetten under the Counts of
Mansfeld, eleven of whom have come to the castle in Allstädt 1), from
where Count Albrecht has accepted five. There are now negotiations among
them as to whether they should be kept or expelled; however, the end is
not yet there. This year has been very fruitful in new things, and will
continue to be so, as I see. Farewell and pray for me, at the same time
be on your guard. We have agreed that we want to drive the prince and
his court out of Schweinitz as well as Lochau on a pleasure trip in the
near future. Wittenberg, St. John\'s Day \[June 24\] 1523. Martin
Luther.

**No. 629.**

(Lochau.) July 10, 1523.

Spalatin to Luther.

Response to Letter No 622.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, p. 137, VII, 40. Printed
by Burkhardt, p. 61 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 173.

God\'s grace and peace before. Venerable Father of God, dear Doctor! The
Leimbach Directory, which you sent me in the past few days, I have
humbly sent to my most gracious Lord, the Elector of Saxony, and would
have liked to give you an answer to it again much sooner, as my most
gracious Lord was also inclined to do before. So far, all sorts of
things have happened that have prevented his C. G. have been prevented
from doing so. But now his C. G. have ordered me to write to you that
his C. G. have no small complaint that the Leimbach are subject to be
heard against you and perhaps others as well, as to how their list,
which they handed over to you, sounds, and especially that, as the
Leimbach should have had to pardon themselves of all demands, they must
also prescribe and grant that which they have given to his C. G.
brothers and his C. G. brothers. G. brothers and his C. G. in their
souls and ask Christ to soften grace and mercy, might perhaps be
interpreted as if the Leimbach had been pushed by their C. and F. G. to
inequity. Now his C. G. to God of the

1\) House Zeis.

We hope that the Leimbach will never prove this to be true. However, so
that you may have knowledge of the prescription, his C. G. have ordered
me to send you a true copy of the same prescription, as I do herewith,
in which you will clearly find, among others, that their C. and F. G.
never dealt with the Leimbach personally, but that such an act was done
by six of their C. and F. G. councillors, four of whom are still alive.
However, in order for the truth to come to light in this deal, which
their C. and F. G. want to have imposed upon them, their C. and F. G.
are inclined, at the request of the Leimbach, to confess the councilors
and Leimbach. If the Leimbach then know with truth that they were forced
by the councilors to such an unfair prescription, their C. and F. G.
want to show themselves against them in such a way that, whether God
wills it, it shall be found that their C. and F. G. are not in the mood
to let someone complain about the fairness, which you may therefore
indicate to the Leimbach. I do not want you to know this for a longer
period of time, and hereby entrust you to divine mercy. Date Friday
after Kiliani \[July 10, 1523.

**No. 630.**

(Wittenberg.) (Shortly before July 11, 1523.)

To the imperial governors and estates of the imperial regiment at
Nuremberg. See St. Louis edition, Vol. XV, 2208, No. 733.

**No. 631.**

(Wittenberg.) July 11. 1523.

To the canons of Wittenberg.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1178.

**No. 632.**

(Wittenberg.) July 11, 1523.

To Spalatin.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2598, annex, no. 102.

**No. 633.**

Wittenberg. July 26, 1523.

To Jakob Montanus in Herford.

Luther apologizes because of his few letters, confirms Montanus\'
opinion that it is not necessary to list individual sins in confession,
and reports the death of two martyrs in Brussels.

**522**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 633. 634. 635.

**523**

The original, pasted on the cover of a Lutheran Bible, is in the
possession of D. Häberlin in Frankfurt a. M. Printed in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 357 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 179.

To the worthy man, Mr. Jakob von Speier, 1) his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace! It is true, dearest Jacob, that I, who am only one, am
very busy through Christ\'s grace, which means that you and all friends
must be prepared that I either write nothing or very rarely and very
briefly. But what you wrote in your last letter about confession I
consider quite certain, namely that it is free to omit the statement of
individual sins altogether, and that it is enough to ask for the
consolation of the Gospel and the forgiveness of sins in a general
confession of sins. With regard to all other matters, the bearer of the
present letter will tell you how it is held with us. From Flanders we
have received the good news that two of our brethren have been burned to
a spectacle in the public square in Brussels for the sake of the Word of
God; thanks be to God through Christ. Farewell and pray for me, a
sinning sinner. Wittenberg, Sunday after Jacobi \[July 26\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

**No.634.**

Wittenberg. (End of July or beginning of August 1523.) To Johann Crotus.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 258.

**No. 635.**

Wittenberg. (July 29 or 30, 1523.) 2)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a resigned monk to a pastorate; reports the executions
in the Netherlands and the death of Johann Feldkirch, and sends 30
florins that have been given to him for restitution to the Elector.

1\) Jakob Montanus from Gernsbach in Baden, diocese of Speier (hence
*Spirensis*), was a teacher in the Bruderhaus at Herford; a zealous
supporter of the Reformation.

2\) This approximate date is derived from the news of the death of the
canon Johann Dolsch of Feldkirch, who died on July 29.

The original is in *Cod. Gothan*. 122, fol. 22. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 148; in De. Wette, vol. II, p. 360 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 184. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 852.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, the
exceedingly faithful evangelist at court.

Grace and peace! This Moritz,3) who has become a renegade to Sodom in
Altenburg, I recommend to you, best Spalatin, that you, if you can help
him to obtain the parish in Schönewalde, near Herzberg, do this in the
love of Christ, so that he may be given comfort in his lack. I believe
that the man will be quite suitable for this. By the way, on the first
of July, two of our Augustinian brothers from the number of prisoners in
Antwerp were burned and died steadfastly in Christ; the most hasty of
them is called Johann Neffe, 4) not yet thirty years old. On the fourth
day after that a third brother, Lambert, was burned, our Jacob Probst\'s
successor in word. This thing happened in Brussels on the public market.
Thanks be to Christ, who has finally begun to show some fruit of our,
rather of his word, and to create new martyrs, perhaps the first, in
this region. Jacob himself, called by the Count of Emden, 5) left for
Friesland; God grant that he may create fruit in many baptizing ones,
amen.

D. Johanit Feldkirchen has died, I do not know of what manner of death;
I fear that the judgment of God will begin to haunt this BethAven,6)
which so stubbornly despises the word. More than thirty florins have
been handed over to me, which are to be given to the prince as a
restitution. Someone had stolen them from the prince during a business
transaction, and now, urged by his conscience, he is giving them back
through me, under the seal of confession. I do not know the person, but
I could not refuse him the service. I wanted to give it to the

3\) Moritz Pfleumer. See No. 550.

4\) According to others: \"Esch\" or \"von Essen\".

5\) Edzard I, Count of East Frisia, died Feb. 14, 1528.

6\) namely by the successive deaths of the canons within a short time.
Compare No. 585 and

**524**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 635. 636. 637.

525

Lucas that he should bring them there, but he is not going to the prince
now, and even you do not show me through whom they would like to be
handed over safely and secretly. For it is burdensome for me to have the
foreign gold with me. But, I beg you, tell this secretly to your
princes, and no one shall know it but the prince and you and I, so that
I keep my promises. For I have decided, and even he has advised, and it
has pleased him, that in this way the matter should be settled through
you. Farewell. Wittenberg, and tear up the letter.

Martin Luther.

**No. 636.**

Wittenberg. About the end of July 1523.

**To the reader.**

Preface to Franz Lambert\'s writing on the Rule of the Barefoot. .St.
Louis edition, vol. XIV, 260.

**No. 637.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early August 1523.)

**To the Christians of Holland, Brabant and**

Flanders.

Luther testifies to his joy over the steadfast death of the two martyrs
and exhorts the Christians there to be of good courage. - The first
addition brings the story of the burning of the martyrs, the second the
articles for which they were burned.

The original of the letter is in *Cod. Chart.* 122 *Bibl*. *Goth*.
Printed in several individual editions under the title: \"Ein Brief an
die Christen im Niederland. M. Luther\", partly with the date 1523,
partly without it. The letter alone (without additions) is printed by De
Wette, vol. II, p. 362 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 180. In
Latin translation by *Obsopoeus* in his *farrago,* no. 4; by Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 148 b and in the Latin Wittenberg edition, tom. VII, fol.
484 b. With the second addition in a single edition under the title:
\"Die artickel warum die zwen Christliche Augustiner münch zu Brüssel
verprandt sind, sampt eynem sendbrieff. D. Mar. Lut. to the Christians
in Holland and Braband. Uittemberg 1523.\" 4 leaves. Printer Nic.
Schirlentz. Reprinted from it in the Wittenberg ed. (1553), vol. VI, p.
397; in the Jena (1585), vol. II, p. 252; in the Altenburg, vol. II, p.
353 and in the Leipzig, vol. XVIII, p. 482. The second addition alone,
in the Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 197. - The first addition appeared in a
single edition under the title: \"Der Actus vnd Handlung der Degradation
vnd Verbrennung der Christlichenn dreyen Ritter vnd Merterer, Augustiner
ordens geschehen tzu Brussel. Anno M.D.xxiij. Prima Julij.\" 2 leaves in
4, without place

angabe. (Wittenberg by Lotther.) Reprinted in the Eisleben edition, vol.
I, p. 147; in the Altenburg edition, vol. II, p. 352 and in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XVIII, p. 481. The Erl. Briefw. brings vol. IV, p. 186 a
large excerpt from it. Complete together with the second addition and
Luther\'s epistle in Walch, vol. XXI, 40 ff. We give the first addition
according to Walch, the second according to the Wittenberg edition, and
Luther\'s epistle according to De Wette, using the variants given in
Erl. Briefw. given variants.

**a. Actus or act of degradation and burning of the three martyrs,
Augustinian Order, at Brussels.**

Of the monks of the Augustinian order who were expelled from Antorf,
three were imprisoned in many places for the sake of Christian truth;
they were accused of some articles which they were to revoke, but none
of them agreed to do so. Now other monks and clergy have traded so much
with the rulers through money, also giving the pope that a mandate has
come from Rome, in which the pope has condemned all those who hold this
opinion and doctrine of the Gospel to be burned. At this point, those at
the court of Brussels had the monks brought to justice, and held up to
them several articles that they should recant. Among these, the two that
moved them the most were that the pope had no power to forgive, bind or
absolve one\'s sin, but God alone, for the pope was a more sinful man
than other men; and otherwise they were to revoke all the other
evangelical articles. Then they stood firm and said: No; they did not
want to deny God\'s word, but would much rather die for the sake of the
Christian faith. Then they were told that they had to burn. They were
quite willing and said that they were glad that God had given them the
grace to die for the sake of the Christian faith.

There was \[one\] among these three who asked for four days to consider
whether to recant or not, and he was led back to prison. The two,
however, took them and put on all their clothes as if they had taken
mass, and erected an altar there; bishops and other ecclesiastical
prelates were present, took away the consecration of the two monks, and
put on other clothes for them, a yellow skirt for the youngest, and a
black skirt for the other, and then handed them over to the court in
Brussels. They took them and gave them to the executioner on ropes. Then
four confessors went with them, when the heretic

**526**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 637.

**527**

The following monks were present: the Master of Cologne, the Order of
Preachers,1) and a friar from Brussels, and two other monks. These four
went beside them, persuaded them much that they should recant. But they
praised God for giving them the grace to die for the sake of His word.
Apost. 5, 41.

Now when they were come to the fire, and the four confessors were
gathered together, the two said, Weep not for them, but for their sins,
Luc. 23:28; and said, Weep for the great wrong, when ye thus pursue
divine righteousness; and therewith they entered into the fire quite
cheerfully with laughing mouths. When their skirts were taken off, one
of them almost comforted the other, and they went into the fire with
each other. Then the confessors asked them one more question: whether
they still did not want to believe in the Christian faith? They said: We
believe in God, even in a Christian church, but we do not believe in
your church. So they stood in the wood for half an hour until it was
lit. Meanwhile they kept saying that they wanted to die in the name of
Christ. Then the confessors shouted at them that they should convert or
they would lead to the devil and die in the devil\'s name. The two
answered that they wanted to die as devout Christians for the sake of
the evangelical truth. Then they lit the fire. They did not cry out in
any other way than: O *Domino Jesu, fili David, miseree nostri,* O JEsu,
thou son of David, have mercy on us! And the ropes around their bodies
were burned rather than they were suffocated. One of them fell on his
knees in the fire, clasped his hands together, and cried out, \"O Lord
Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on us. After that, both of them passed
away and were burned to powder.

This act lasted for four hours. After that, on the third day, the third
monk, who had taken a care of him, was also burned and treated like the
others. He was almost a learned man, who also preached a long sermon at
the woodpile, and then went to the torture. And when they lit the fire,
he still preached until the fire and flames burst out over him, and so
he also passed away blessed in God. 2)

1\) Hoogstraten.

2\) It is erroneous what Walch I. 6. says, namely that this \"Actus\" is
found in Aurifaber, Vol. II, p. 142. There, but not connected with the
missive, are two letters of an eyewitness from Brussels, from the 10.
and

**b. The articles why the two Christian Augustinian monks found burned
in Brussels.**

Namely, the Christian men in question were asked by Hochstras and
several other heretics (who are called masters of other heretics because
of their unchristian wickedness) and answered by them, as follows:

[Question]{.underline}: What do they believe? - [Answer]{.underline}:
The twelve pieces of the Christian faith, the biblical books and
evangelical scriptures, also a holy Christian church, but not the church
they, the questioners, believe.

The other question: Do they also believe the laws of the Conciliar and
Ancient Fathers? - [Answer]{.underline}: As many of them as are in
accordance with the divine Scriptures and are not repugnant, they
believe.

The third question: Do they also believe that those who sin mortally or
damnably 3) transgress the law of the pope and the fathers? -
[Answer]{.underline}: They believe that divine commandments and
prohibitions, and not human laws, make blessed and condemn.

[Verdict]{.underline}: From this, the said questioners, who for the sake
of their wickedness cannot stand the evangelical divine doctrine, have
recognized the above-mentioned two pious Christian men as heretics and
handed them over to the secular power (as Christ did to the Gentiles
through the Jews) for death, who have been unjustly condemned to the
fire.

Although it is right and proper, especially in Brussels, that each
person\'s death sentence be read publicly, this was not done in this
case out of shame and great injustice, but the same articles were
thoroughly experienced by those who were in Brussels at the time, but by
other persons.

Item, when the High Stras put off the condemned, where they recanted the
above-mentioned Christian truth, he had power or authority to let them
go, one answered him: These are the words of Pilate, and you would have
no power over me if he had not given it to you from above; and both said
publicly: they thanked God that they should die for the sake of his
word. And suffered such innocent torture and death not only willingly,
eagerly, cheerfully, and continually, but

July 14, 1523, which also report on this event. Neither are the
\"articles\" (the following writing) in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 145 (as
Walch says), but 62 articles on which Heinrich Voes insisted.

3\) Thus the Jena edition; Wittenberger: \"verthumlich fünden\".

**528** Letters from the year 1523. no. 637. **529**

In addition, they gave, admonished and taught many Christian good
answers, also praised God with the singing of the holy Psalms and
otherwise, and devoutly called upon Christ our Lord, as a son of David,
for mercy and grace, because they were able to speak before the
adversity of the fire, For which Christian constancy all pious
Christians rightly give praise and thanks to God Almighty (who bestows
such great grace on these and all other of His holy martyrs), and, if
divine honor and Christian necessity require it, also desire that
they 1) exist, amen.

**c. Luther\'s epistle to the Christians of Holland rc.**

Martinus Luther, E. W. 2)

To all dear brothers in Christ who are in Holland, Brabant and Flanders,
together with all believers in Christ, grace and peace from God our
Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.

Praise and thanks be to the Father of all mercy, who at this time again
lets us see his wonderful light, which until now has been hidden because
of our sin, has made us subject to the terrible power of darkness, and
thus shamefully stray, and serve the Antichrist. But now the time has
come for us to hear the voice of the turtledove, and for the flowers to
spring up in our land. \[Of which joy, my beloved, you are not the only
ones, but have become the most distinguished, in whom we have
experienced such joy and delight. For it is given unto you before all
the world, not only to hear the gospel, and to know Christ, but also to
be the first to suffer shame and harm, anguish and distress,
imprisonment and peril, for Christ\'s sake, and now have become so full
of fruit and strength, that ye have also shed and confirmed it with your
own blood; seeing that with you the two noble jewels of Christ, Hinricus
and John, have in Brussels made light of their lives, that Christ might
be glorified with his word. Oh how contemptuously the two souls were
executed, but how gloriously and in

1\) Thus the Jena edition; Wittenberger: \"jn auch zu bekennen\".

2\) E. W. == *Ecclesiastes Wittenbergensis*.

With eternal joy they shall return with Christ, and shall rightly judge
those by whom they are now unjustly judged. Oh how small a thing it is
to be ravished and killed by the world, to those who miss that their
blood is precious \[Ps. 9:13, 72:14\] and their death is precious in the
sight of God, as the Psalms sing \[116:15\]. What is the world against
God? What pleasure and joy have all the angels seen in these two souls!
How gladly the fire will have helped to their eternal life from this
sinful life, from this ignominy to eternal glory! God be praised and
blessed for eternity that we have experienced to see and hear true
saints and true martyrs, whom we have so far raised and worshipped so
many false saints. We here above 3) have not yet been worthy to become
such a precious sacrifice to Christ; although many of our members have
not been without persecution, and still are. Therefore, my beloved, be
of good cheer in Christ, and let us give thanks to his great signs and
wonders, which he has begun to do among us. He has given us fresh new
examples of his life. Now it is time for the kingdom of God to stand not
in words but in power. Here is what is said: \"Be glad in tribulation\"
\[Rom. 12:12\]. \"It is a little while (saith Isaias Cap. 54, 7.) that I
will leave thee; but with everlasting mercy will I receive thee.\" And
the 91st Psalm, v. 14, 15: \"I am (saith God) with him in tribulation; I
will save him, and will set him in honor, because he hath known my
name.\" Seeing then the present tribulation, and having such a strong,
comforting promise, let us renew our hearts, be of good cheer, and with
joy let us slay unto the Lord. He has said it, he will not lie: Even the
hairs of your head are all numbered \[Matt. 10:30.\]. And though the
adversaries shall cry out these saints Hussite, Wigleffian, and
Lutheran, and boast of their murder, let us not marvel, but strengthen
ourselves the more; for Christ\'s cross must have blasphemers. But our
judge is not far off, he will pass another sentence; we know that and
are sure of it.

3\) \"up here\" as opposed to the Netherlands.

**530** Letters from the year 1523. No. 637 to 643.

531

Pray for us, dear brethren, and for one another, that we may reach out a
faithful hand one to another, holding all in one Spirit to our Head,
JESUS CHRIST, who strengthens you with grace and prepares you for the
glory of His holy name, to whom be glory, praise, and thanksgiving, with
you and all creatures forever and ever, Amen.

**No. 638.**

(Wittenberg.) (August) 1523.

**To the Christians in Liefland.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1760.

**No. 639.**

Wittenberg. (August) 1523.

**To Johann Löser.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1026.

**No. 640.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. August 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2636, annex, no. 125.

**No. 641.**

Colditz. August 7, 1523.

**Elector Frederick of Saxony to Luther.**

Credentials for Schürf, Schwertfeger, and Melanchthon on an
advertisement from the Elector to Luther.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O. Lit.* LL, fol. 97.
Printed in *Corp. Ref.* , vol. I, 622, note 2 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 202.

We have currently commanded our advisors and dear faithful, Hieronymus
Schurpf, Johann Schwertfeger, both doctors, and Philippus Melanchthon,
to convey our opinion to you in an advertising manner, as you will hear
from them. Accordingly, it is our gracious request that you listen to
those who have received our order and give them full credence in it this
time, and also show yourselves to be good-willed in it and in such a way
as we provide for you. In this you do us favor, which we are also
inclined to recognize with grace. Dat. Colditz, Friday after Sixti
\[*August* 7*, anno Domini* M. D. XXIII Friedrich.

**No. 642.**

(Colditz.) (August 7, 1523.)

**Instruction of the Elector Friedrich for Hier. Schürf, Joh.
Schwertfeger and Melanchthon for an action with Luther.**

(Regest.)

The aforementioned shall request Luther to refrain from his preaching
against the chapter, and admonish him to comply with his previous
approval of the imperial mandate and his promise (No. 630) not to do
anything further until the future concilium.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Lit.* LL, fol, 97.
Reprinted (but incorrectly) in the Öorx. Rsk., vol. I, 621. improvements
of Burkhardt, p. 63, note; with these improvements in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 202. - Schürf reported Luther\'s reply August 13.

**No. 643.**

(Wittenberg.) (Before August 10, 1523.)

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther asks Jonas, now that he has turned to theology and married, to
respond appropriately to Johann Faber\'s writing, insofar as it deals
with the marriageless state.

First printed in the manuscript: *Adversus Iohannem Fabrum Constantien.
Vicarium, scortationis patronum, pro conjugio sacerdotali, lusti lonae
defensio. Wittembergae*. 1523. 34 leaves in quarto. At the end:
*Wittembergae, Anno a nativitate Domni \[sic\]* M.D.XXIII. Luther\'s
letter is on leaf H 4b. Printed by Nickel Schirlentz in Wittenberg. Then
several reprints appeared, in Strasbourg (?), in Zurich and in Hagenau.
In the collections: in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 129; in De Wette, vol. II,
p. 365; in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 204 and in the Weimar edition, vol.
XII, p. 85. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 833. We have translated according
to the Weimar edition.

Martin Luther to Justus Jonas, provost at Wittenberg, the new husband.
1)

Mercy and peace! I leave to you, Justus Jonas, this wretched *compiler*
and accuser of holy matrimony, Johann Faber, Vicar of Constance, so that
you too may carry out the preludes of your theology against him, and
pierce with arrows this Hector, whom I have long since struck down. For
there is no need of a refuter here, since the writer is publicly
blasphemous. But see to it that it

1\) Jonas had married Catharina Falk in February 1522. (Weim. Ausg.)

**532** Letters from the year 1523. No. 643. 533

You should be warm in your assertion of holy matrimony, since he is so
miserably cold and downright insolent in his assertion of the extremely
wretched, unholy celibate state. He has reasons why he is cold, namely
because the godless man bases himself on human inventions against the
word and the work of God. But if you are not completely inflamed by the
very great fire that ignites the mountains \[Ps. 83:15\], I will
certainly wish that your wife loves you too little, so that you know how
great a danger this game is for you. Therefore play, and play earnestly,
for your wife is also watching: you will have seen how high it behooves
you to hold her judgment in the first year of marriage; unless you do
not feel this fire either.

That I myself do not answer, however, is first of all due to the fact
that he does not contribute anything that I have not previously refuted,
overcome and triumphantly eliminated in more than one book. For the
whole of Faber is nothing but fathers, fathers, fathers, concilia,
concilia, concilio, which fairy tale has long been shouted to me deaf
people even by our Leipzig bad theologians (*theologistis*), rather
donkeys. Secondly, because he does not seem to have wanted to defend the
pope and the papists, or to attack Luther, but to show that he has seen
many books; this fame I do not envy at all to such a restless busy
idler. For I have never dealt with the matter against the followers of
Rome (*Romanistas*), whether books have been seen or not (for my dog
also sees many books daily), but of the fact that the holy Scriptures
are neither well read nor rightly understood \[by them\]. Since he does
not even touch this matter in the whole of such a large book (so much is
lacking in it that he deals with it), what should I answer? It has been
the common and constant nonsense of all the papists who have written
against me, that all write against Luther, but none writes against
Luther\'s cause.

But I also want to help this restless busy little idler (since a

The great part of them seek the immortality of their name in Luther
alone), and glorify his name with my pen. Namely, in my opinion, this
Faber would be very useful to the Magistris nostris (*nostralibus) of*
Cologne, who, if they wanted to bring together something new (copulutum)
1), could use this Faber. Surely, in this small matter, such a man would
gain a not insignificant fame, then those people would not have done
badly either, namely with such an industrious assembler. I do not see,
if this talent does not come to this use, in what way he could be
granted his so ardent desire for immortal fame, since he understands
nothing and easily gathers everything. But, joking aside, I do not
wonder that Faber nor any other of the papist warriors should engage in
such ludicrous antics; I wonder about the Satan who rules in them, what
this powerful, wise, exceedingly clever and mischievous spirit may
think, that through these his tools he does nothing but inconsistent and
ridiculous things, whereas hitherto he did not seem to act in such a
nonsensical way: unless he intends this abomination against me, that,
seeing that the matter has become a serious one, and that he cannot
resist the words of God in us, he begins to detain us with nonsensical
and foolish chatter and to steal the time, and, since better things are
hindered, to overcome us by weariness. He is certainly a mischievous
man, but even so he will not accomplish anything; he will not sleep nor
slumber who guards Israel \[Ps. 121:4\]; his hope will deceive him. For
I will despise these patrists, conciliators and copulatists and let them
pass by, like Cato his wanton brawlers. But I will leave them to you
married theologians who have leisure, so that you also have something
with which you can make an attempt without danger to yourselves. For you
will fight in my victories and defeat my vanquished, so that they too
cannot complain that they have been defeated in vain.

1\) The Cologne prints of the Logic of Petrus Hispanus were titled
*[Copulata]{.underline} omnium tractutuum Petri.*

*Hispani*.

**534** Letters from the year

1523\. no. 643. 644. 535

on the battlefield. I therefore give it to these patrists and
copulalists without envy that they become immortal with me, as Judas
with Christ and Korah with Moses. But I also send Faber especially to
Zurich to Huldreich Zwingli, who will complete his martial arts
there; 1) I expect other opponents. Farewell, my dear Jonas, and pray
for me, also for this Faber. Amen.

**No. 644.**

**Leisnig. August 11, 1523.**

> **To the Elector Frederick of Saxony, in Colditz.**

Luther asks to confirm the Leisnig caste order.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. N, lit. H, fol. 108, no. 4.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement p. 33; in Walch, vol. XXI, 48 and in
the Erl. Ausg., vol. 53, p. 194.

To the most illustrious and highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Frederick,
Duke of Saxony, Elector 2c., Margrave of Meissen and Landgrave in
Thuringia, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and Peace in Christ. Sincerely, Reverend Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Prince, most gracious Lord! I have now been to Leisnig, because of
the disagreement over their common chest, and there I learned how the
matter stands everywhere, and namely that all pieces and articles are
bad except for the fact that the estates, which until now were
ecclesiastical, and many of which have served for ungodly endowments and
abuses, have not yet been handed over, and some of the council refer to
E. C. F. G.\'s conclusion, and have refused the same.

1\) Faber had attended Zwingli\'s disputation (the so-called first
Zurich disputation) in Zurich on January 29, 1523, as an episcopal
deputy, but had been drawn into the disputation against his intention
and had come off badly. On March 10, he countered Hegenwald\'s report on
the course of the religious discussion, which had originated in Zurich,
with his account of the negotiations. Then, however, on July 14,
Zwingli\'s detailed \"Interpretation and Reasoning of the Final Speeches
or Articles,\" which carefully considered Faber\'s rebuttals, went out,
followed by further polemics by Zwingli against Faber. (Weim. ed.)

want to wait. Now the procession is dangerous in that Satan, through
evil tongues, makes the matter bitter and worse on both sides, because
it thus hangs, and in the end may tear an evil compartment in the mob,
which is quite a fickle animal, where it is not composed, and becomes
certain where it should stand. For this reason, my humble request to E.
C. F. G. is that E. C. F. G. should finish the conclusion, so that not
only the present shame, which is already driving evil mouths and hearts
toward the gospel, but also the future joy of the adversaries, who wait
without ceasing, may be increased, so that they may sing and say: *Euge,
euge! viderunt oculi nostri* \[Ps. 35, 21\], which David and many
prophets also so earnestly ask God to prevent, and which we also owe to
ask to come forward through E. C. F. G. (because it is placed on them);
for the reproach of the Gospel is the reproach of God, which should move
us justly. Thus a child knows well that such goods, which through
apostasy of unchristian foundation do not belong to your council, are to
be kept by your own authority, but are to be turned again to Christian
custom, or where the authorities decree them to be. I am moved by the
fact that I see, and have now found in the flesh, the councilors so
embittered that they would rather suffer, and also want and want to
help, to bring all un-Christian customs and foundations, which have
already been done away with, into the former state and pregnancy,
contrary to the Gospel, for which God\'s grace gives E. C. F. G. to be
diligent, hoping also that Christ should let them do so, but still not
complete it. This is also my reason for asking C.C.F.G. that, if the
goods are not handed over, the box must soon pass away, for there is
nothing there, and not so much, so that the people may be preserved, as
the order says. Therefore, for the sake of God\'s honor, E. C. F. G.
wants to finish the matter in the most beneficial way, not to give the
enemies of the word room to rejoice, and the poor to mourn. May God\'s
mercy teach and govern E. C. F. G.\'s courage and mind, Amen. Leisnig,
Tuesday after Laurentii \[Aug. 11\] 1523.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**536** Letters from the year 1523. no. 645. 646. 647. **537**

**No. 645.**

Wittenberg. August 13, 1523.

Hieronymus Schürf, Joh. Schwertfeger and Melanchthon to Elector
Frederick of Saxony.

Report on Luther\'s response to the Elector\'s advertisement to Luther
(No. 642).

The original is in the Weimar archives. *Reg. O, lit.* LL, fol. 97.
Printed in *Corp. Ref.,* vol. I, 622 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p.
207, with omission of the entry.

To the most illustrious\... Lord Frederick, Duke of Saxony . . . Elector
2c.

Most Serene, Highborn Elector! Our submissive, obedient and obliging
service are E. Chf. G. always with diligence ahead. Most gracious Lord!
On the summons, which happened to Doctor Martin Luther by E. Chf. G.\'s
order and gracious instruction, he gave us the following answer:

He has previously admonished the chapter twice in writing, and then
verbally in the pulpit, to desist from their nature, so that they would
have remained in it for so long his preaching and writing and, as it
were, remained in defiance. Now \[the\] imperial mandate allows nothing
else. Now, \[the\] imperial mandate does not allow anything else than to
preach the gospel purely and to prevent innovations (which he
understands, as far as they are not contrary to the gospel). However, if
it were understood otherwise, he would not follow it or comply with it.
Because the chapter and \[the\] collegiate church\'s masses were against
the gospel, he did not want to stop preaching against it, as before, and
to pray diligently to God, but at the same time to admonish the people
so that no one would lay a hand on them or have cause for violence,
strife or rebellion, which he wanted to occur faithfully. For it was not
his opinion that one should do something with one\'s hand. So it was
also not his place to banish. But he did not want to refrain from the
gospel, and to continue as preached before.

We do not want to let this go unreported to E. Chf. G., to whom we
acknowledge that we owe all obedience to serve. Date Wittenberg,
Thursday after Laurentii \[Aug. 13\] *anno dom*. M. D. in the third and
twentieth.

E. Chf. G.

unterthane and obedient Jeronymus Schurpff, Johannes Schwertfeger,
*Doctores,* and Philippus Melanchthon.

**No. 646.**

Wittenberg. August 14, 1523.

To Spalatin.

Request for travel money for Franz Lambert, who wants to go to Zurich.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 150 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 172. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 1526; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 387 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 208. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 856.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant and evangelist at court,
his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Francis Lambert has decided to leave our country for
Zurich, because he will be better nourished there and will accomplish
greater things, because of the neighborhood of France, since he believes
that there is a great number of those who teach there. You will
therefore do well to be an intercessor for the poor man with the prince,
so that he receives a gift for his journey, for he has also fallen into
debt. Therefore, he needs a very charitable hand, especially since this
is perhaps the last gift, and will recommend the name of the prince more
to these foreigners in France. Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg,
August 14, 1523.

Martin Luther.

**No. 647.**

(Wittenberg.) August 15, 1523.

To Georg Romer 1) in Mansfeld.

Intercession for Philipp Gluenspies to help him obtain a certain
inheritance.

From the Wernsdorf collection in Wittenberg in Schütze, vol. II, p. 386;
in De Wette, vol. II, p. 387 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.
197.

To the careful Georgen Romer, my special favorable friend.

Grace and peace in Christ! Dear Jörge Romer, Philipp\'s Gluenspies has
inspired me to write to you on his behalf, namely, for the sake of your
father\'s will, to tell him that you wanted to allow him to follow it
completely, as the others have all already done.

1\) In the *AIbum* p. 82 this name is written \"Romans\".

**538**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 647 to 650.

539

I have granted him a pardon, considering that the piety at masses and
vigils is quite dangerous and harmful, as I hope you also know to a good
extent. Although I did not think it necessary to make such an
intercession to you, since I know that you are otherwise favorable
enough to him, I do not know how to refuse him. And kindly ask that you
also give your full word, so that the good journeyman may otherwise find
other honest nourishment. Hereby commanded by God. On the day of the
*Assumption of Mary* \[15 Aug.\] 1523.

*Mart*. *Lutherus*.

**No.648.**

Wittenberg. August 19, 1523.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Luther asks that the Leisnig caste order be confirmed. Intercession for
Sebastian von Kötteritz.

The original is found in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N, lit.* H, fol.
108, No. 4. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 33; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 50; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 381 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
53, p. 196. In the latter two with the wrong date: \"August 12\".

To the most illustrious and highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Frederick,
Duke of Saxony, Elector 2c., Margrave of Meissen and Landgrave in
Thuringia, my most gracious Lord.

G. u. F. in Chr. Durchl., hochgeb. Prince, most gracious Sir! I have
written to E. C. F. G. about the common caste in Leisnig, that E. C. F.
G. wants to do something for it. I have written to the C. F. G. in
Leisnig for the sake of the common church, that the C. F. G. wants to do
something for it, because even if someone among them has a wrong
opinion, the order is still Christian, and regardless of who is pious or
evil, I only want to see to it that idolatry starts again, and that the
gospel falls and becomes a mockery; since there is no pay, so that there
are no preachers, priests and other offices, and the poor must also lack
them. In this regard I humbly request that E. C. F. G. give beneficial
advice and help. Whatever happens, let the Gospel remain and not become
such a shameful mockery, for which E. C. F. G. can well be, and is
obliged to do.

I should also ask for Bastian von Kötteritz, as the E. C. F. G. might
well ask for help and mercy from now on for himself and his children,

that he would like to get an office with E. C. F. G. or with another
gentleman with favor and foliage from E. C. F. G.; because if he had
been too quick in the past, I think he should now have run out of money.
So I don\'t know how I am to take a stand on this. E. C. F. G. may,
without my intercession, as I have no doubts, consider his condition and
let him find a gracious prince. Herewith I command E. C. F. G. in God\'s
mercy, Amen. At Wittenberg, on Wednesday after *Assumtionis Mariae*
\[Aug. 19\] 1523.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 649.**

Wittenberg. August 19, 1523.

**To the provost, the canons and the chapter of Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1184.

**No. 650.**

Wittenberg. August 19, 1523.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther apologizes for forgetting a matter in which Hausmann asked him
for advice, and asks him to communicate the same matter in detail again.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
10. Handwritten in Zerbst in the Franciscaneum, Ms. 26, fol. 10 b.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 155; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 391 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 214. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 857.

To the valuable and extremely dear brother, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
pastor and right bishop of the Church of Christ at Zwickau, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! It is certain, my dear Nicolaus, that Mr. Caspars has
asked me for what you desire; but since the matter was postponed until
the famulus 2) would get well and I would be asked for it again, I have
traveled somewhere in the meantime, and since I have not been able to
get to him, I have been able to get to him.

1\) Caspar Zeuner, then pastor at Trebsen near Grimma.

2\) Probably Wolfgang Sieberger (Erl. Briefw.), not Lonicer (De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 676 8. V. *Lonicerus*).

**540**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 650. 651. 652.

541

When I returned to Hanse, I found that those had gone away. Then, since
I am already overwhelmed with letter-writing alone and plagued with so
much business, I have lost the memory of what the pieces were in which
you asked me for advice, and remember nothing, except that I know that
it was about the establishment and order of the church service; and I am
very sorry for that. But I cannot help it; how can one person carry
everything, or keep so many and so great things in his memory?
Therefore, forgive me. My memory is to blame, because the amount of
business does not excuse me. Therefore, please show me the whole thing
again completely, and you will find me as your servant, and be well in
the Lord forever. Wittenberg, Wednesday after the Assumption of the
Blessed Virgin Mary \[Aug. 19, 1523\] Martin Luther.

**No. 651.**

Wittenberg. August 24, 1523.

**To the Christians of Worms.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1758.

**No. 652.**

Wittenberg. August 26, 1523.

**To the Regensburg City Council.**

Luther exhorts the city council to take up the gospel against the
papists and to stop your superstition with the \"beautiful Mary\".

From Gemeiners Kirchenreformationsgeschichte, p. 18, in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 395 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 201.

Grace and peace in Christ, amen. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! It is
desired of me by good yours and my friend to do a writing to your
wisdom, and to admonish that after the papal priesthood in your city,
powerful and contrary to the Gospel of God, has many times refused to
preach the salvific Word of God to the poor people, and has also driven
out some of them, among whom is also this Master Hans Plaumacher 1);
lastly, E. W. also wanted to

1\) \"Plaumacher\" == blue dyer. He is also called \"Plohaus\", and was
one of the first to follow Luther\'s teachings.

Let them be noticed as lovers of the Gospel, and not allow the blinded
priestly tyranny and priestly outrage to deprive the poor souls of their
blessedness, but provide an evangelical preacher and handle him, as many
other Christian cities and communities in German lands do. Now I hear
that it almost lies in the way that the beautiful Mary 2) does not want
to suffer if she is touched; and yet the gospel cannot become beautiful,
the beautiful Mary becomes ugly. For if I were to be considered so
worthy that E.W. believed me, I would easily prove that the devil, after
the Jews have been driven out, has put himself in their place and is
doing false signs through the highly praised name of Mary, and is
deceiving you along with many others. For if he has the power to use the
name of the Divine Majesty, the name of Christ, and the name of the Holy
Spirit, how can he not use Mary\'s name or the name of a lesser saint?
It is also a sure sign of the devil, that people run as fast as the
foolish, when the Holy Spirit is a spirit of counsel, who does not run
so impetuously, nor teaches servants to run away from the Lord, but to
keep obedience. Therefore I ask you, dear sirs, to let the Spirit try
beforehand, as St. John teaches, and not to fall down immediately if he
shows signs. We are not so pious that the saints should do so publicly
to us, surely you believe that. Herewith I command E. W. God\'s grace,
and let this Master Hans and his like be commanded, Amen. At Wittenberg,
on Wednesday after Bartholomew \[Aug. 26\] 1523.

Martinus Luther.

in Regensburg. On March 22, 1523, he and another citizen, Rostock,
interrupted the cathedral preacher Augustin Marius in his sermon and
afterwards confronted him about the sermon. On his complaint, Hans
Blaumacher was expelled from the city. Provided with letters of
recommendation from his friends, he went to Wittenberg and returned from
there with this letter from Luther to Regensburg, where he was again
accepted as a citizen on September 18.

2\) Not long before the banishment of Plohan, the Jews had been driven
out of the city and on the site of the destroyed synagogue a chapel had
been built in honor of the beautiful Mary, who by her miraculous deeds
attracted a large number of pilgrims with rich gifts (De Wette).

**542Letters from the year**

1523\. no. 653. 654. **543**

**No. 653 .**

Wittenberg. August 27, 1523.

**To Johann Hess.**

Luther would like to have the interpretations of Hess on Ecclesiastes in
order to use them in the translation of this book. From a man whom Hess
recommended to him.

A copy made by. A copy of this letter, made by Hess himself, is in the
royal library in Berlin, *Mss. Iat. theol.* 8°, 91, fol. 100b. Printed
in Schütze, vol. II, p. 49; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 446 (without date);
in Krafft, 14 Briefe Luthers, no. 3, and in Erl. BriefwBd. IV, p. 217.

Martin to his Heß.

Greetings, preacher of Ecclesiastes \[Solomon\], 1) but also see to it
that that preacher sSalomo\^ is alive, because we also want to hear or
at least read him through you. Therefore you will see to it that we
receive your interpretations of this book in order to make use of them
when this book is to be translated into German. 2) Therefore we remind
you in time, and come before, so that you communicate to us as soon as
possible what the spirit has given you.

The man you recommended I have seen and have been seen by him. By the
way, it is nothing new that a trade is made out of the cause of the
gospel \[1 Tim. 6, 5\]. So it was in Paul\'s day, how much more in ours,
that they would have liberty to the cover of wickedness \[1 Pet.
2:16.\]. But they have Him who will judge them shortly. Fare well and
pray for me. Wittenberg, 1523, Wednesday after Bartholomew \[Aug. 27\].

**No. 654.**

Wittenberg. September 2, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Miscellaneous matters. Interpretation of two scriptural passages. From
the Bull of Hadrian VI in the postscript of an event in Halberstadt.

1\) Heß, called from Nuremberg by the council of Breslau as pastor of
the Maria Magdalena Church, held Latin lectures in the school about the
preacher Solomon, which Luther wants to have for the translation of this
scripture. De Wette erroneously says in his description of the contents
that Luther wanted to see the Commentary made even more useful by a
German translation.

2\) \"The Third Part of the Old Testament,\" which concludes with the
writings of Solomon, appeared in 1524.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 151 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 173. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 155 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 399 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 219. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 858.

To the Lord\' Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, evangelist at the court
of Saxony, his brother.

Grace and peace! I have handed over the book or rather the large volume
of the Augsburg 3) to Philip for evaluation. I have other things that
are more urgent than that I could review any man\'s work. Indeed, it
seems to me that such a book is not necessary in the Church of God.
Furthermore, it is prolix, especially by a new and unknown author, so
that there cannot even be a hope of profit.

I am returning the letter of the citizen of Eilenburg 4), which I do not
forbid nor do I mean to print. But the earlier letter is not of the kind
that it could suffer the public, as the author himself admits.

The story of the Italian or Roman nun 5) I expect, but fear nothing. The
fiction is so coarse that if it is not suitable for Hadrian\'s master,
it cannot be suitable for anyone, no matter how \"lame\".

3\) In the original *Augustensis*; Aurifaber and De Wette:
*Augustinensis*. - As we can see from a letter of Melanchthon (*Corp.
Ref.*, Vol. 1,639) to Spalatin, dated Sept. 2, in which he gives his
verdict on the book, the book dealt with the validity of the civil
provisions of the Mosaic law also for Christian states.

4\) The shoemaker Georg Schönichen, who had already been a main promoter
of the innovations during Zwilling\'s presence in Eilenburg at Christmas
1521, had heard Dungersheim preach in Leipzig at Pentecost 1523, and
attacked him for this sermon in a letter dated June 4. Dungersheim
replied and Schönichen replicated on July 5. In addition, the latter
wrote other writings, one of which Luther returns here. See Seidemann,
\"Contributions to the History of the Reformation\", 1st issue, p. 61
ff.

5\) From a letter of Hans von der Planitz to the Elector (from
Nuremberg) we learn that a well-dressed woman with a nun\'s cap had let
herself be heard, \"that she wants to turn over the diligence, that she
might turn over a knife in Luther\". He admonishes that if the woman
should seek \"perhaps to speak in good appearance with Luther, that one
would pay attention to this\".

6\) Pope Hadrian VI had been *Magister noster* in Louvain.

**544**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 654. 655.

545

That the sign of the Son of Man in heaven \[Matth. 24, 30.\] will be on
the day of judgment is uncertain, or the man Christ himself is called
the sign 2c. According to the Hebrew way \"the sign of the Son of man\"
is said instead of \"the sign, the Son of man\". For that by this sign
the cross is understood is nothing. This is my opinion.

I have no doubt that it is a mockery of Paul, since he saws, \"I did not
know that it was the high priest\" \[Apost. 23,4\]. The reasons by which
I am moved I have indicated in the German booklet written against the
false bishops. 1)

I have not yet decided anything about Hadrian\'s bull 2). But since the
prince has not set out to answer him, why should I in vain draft a form,
since I am busy with so many and such great things? Primarily because
this matter requires the power of the mind and scholarship, then also an
impeccable diligence, so that it would be necessary for me to devote
myself entirely to it. For, for my part, I would easily answer such a
great ass with whatever comes into my mouth. You, who have leisure, do
it in the meantime and think about it. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Wednesday after Aegidii \[Sept. 2\] 1523. Martin Luther.

Regarding the news of Halberstadt, there is only a rumor that a citizen
named Schreiber 3), a rich and powerful man, was captured; six of his
party were killed and many wounded, who had undertaken to protect the
fugitive outside the city. It is said that

1\) In the writing \"Wider den falschgenannten Stand des Pabsts und der
Bischöfe,\" St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 694 f., § 61 f.

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2110, no. 716.

3\) The mayor and clothier Heinrich Schreiber was a promoter of the
Reformation. He was captured by the papal authorities, but freed by the
people. On his escape, which had been betrayed, some were killed near
Dernburg, others wounded. In Halle, he was then sentenced to death by
the Archbishop of Mainz for sedition, but at the intercession of the
Provost of Hildesheim, Levin von Velten, he was granted life. He was
released from prison, however, on payment of a sum of money by his
relatives, who had obtained an imperial letter for him.

he was accused for life and death; as a cause false money 2c. is given.
It is said that the priests, whose adversary he was, were advising
against him.

**No. 655.**

Wittenberg. September 7, 1523.

**To Duke Carl III of Savoy.**

Luther heard from the French knight Anemundus Coctus that the duke was a
friend of the Gospel, and he encourages him to persevere, at the same
time instructing him on the main points of Christian doctrine.

This letter (as *Vincentius Obsopoeus* also says in the dedicatory
letter of his *farrago* to his brother towards the end), originally
written in Latin, first appeared under the title: *In hoc libello
contenta. Annemundi Cocti Equitis Galli ad lectorem Epistola.
Christianissimi Doctoris Martini Lutheri at Inlustrissimum principem
Carolum Sabaudiae ducem Epistola. Huldrichi Zuinglij Tigurini Episcopi
uigilantissimi ad Petrum Sebiuilla Gratianopolitanum Ecclesiasten
Epistola*. etc. 8 fol. in quarto. No place or year (Zurich, Christoph
Froschower, 1524). The introductory letter of Coct is dated: *Tiguri,
nono Kalend*. The letter of Luther is on p. Vis b; that of Zwingli to
Sebivilla, pastor in Grenoble, is dated Dec. 13, 1523. After that in the
collections: in *Obsopoeus, Lutheri Epp. farrago.* 1525, p. V5; in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. I56d; in the Latin Wittenberger (1562), tom. VII,
fol. 482; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p.45 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 222. - In German translation (without the letter of Cocts) in a
single edition under the title: \"Am Christlicher Sendbryeff, des
wolgeleerten Martini Lutheri, yn Christo. The first to the
Durchleüchtigistenn Fürsten Karolo hertzog zu Sophey, vund ist gleych
eyn inhalt vnd Haupt Summa aller seiner leer. 2c. M. D. XX i i i j.\" At
the end: \"Zu Witembergim (they) M. D. XX i i i j.\" 5 fol. in quarto.
In another translation in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 174
(supposedly after a Strasbourg print); subsequently in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 400; in Walch, vol. XXI, 850 and in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p.
205. According to the Erl. Briefw., which reproduces the first Latin
print.

To the most illustrious and most illustrious Prince and Lord, Charles,
Duke of Savoy, his most gracious patron in Christ, Martin Luther.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord, amen. Above all, I ask your
forgiveness that I, a very small person, without having orders or being
called to do so, dare to write to your Serene Highness first. This makes
the glory of the Gospel of Christ, in which I also boast and rejoice,
wherever I experience it.

**546**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 655.

**547**

shine or arise and hear. Therefore, E. F. G. will credit this to the
cause of the Gospel, that I greet you first with joy, Most Serene Lord.
For the rumor has reached us, and the same has been confirmed by
Anemundus Coctus, a knight from France, who is extraordinarily ardent
for the glory of the Gospel, namely, that the Duke of Savoy is very
zealous for sincere godliness through an exceedingly rare gift of God,
at least among princes. Therefore, I have considered it fair that the
most worthy prince should be blessed and encouraged by me, the most
unworthy, at least through the service of congratulation, because Christ
will be able to win many through the very beautiful example of E. F. G..
Therefore, in order that F.F.G. may recognize all the more the
difference between how much she holds with us and how differently the
god-robbing sophists have taught up to now under the pope, it should not
annoy me to elaborate here a few main points one after the other, while
at the same time giving an account of our doctrine, so that F.F.G. may
have something to oppose those who falsely speak evil of us and want to
tempt the righteousness of F.F.G. through the trickery of Satan.

First, we are taught, and we do teach, that the beginning of salvation,
indeed the whole fullness of it, is faith in Christ, who by His blood
alone, not by our works, takes away sins, abolishes the dominion of
death, and, as the prophet says \[Ps. 68:19\], \"takes prison captive.\"
For thus saith Paul, Gal. 2:21: \"If by the law righteousness come,
Christ died in vain; let it be far from that;\" and Rom. 3:28: \"We hold
it therefore, that a man may be justified without works of the law,
through faith only.\" But of this faith we teach that it is a gift of
God, created in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, not formed or shaped by
our actions (*actibus*, as they call it), which they have as the
acquired faith (*fidem acquisitam), that is,* as a dream image. Faith is
a living thing that changes the whole man, not by any merit we have, but
by the word of God alone,

As it says Rom. 10:17: \"Faith comes by preaching, but preaching by the
word of Christ.\"

It follows from this first main part that everything that the popes,
schools and monasteries have spread all over the world about
gratifications, about meritorious works, about works that are completely
and somewhat deserving (*congruis et condignis*) is predatory and an
abomination, and that all the essays of the monasteries and the priests
are nothing but pernicious sects \[2 Petr. 2, 1.\] of which Christ
foretold \[Matth. 24, 5. 23.\], \"Many shall come in my name, saying,
Behold, here is Christ, or there.\" For if by our works sins are blotted
out and grace is obtained, it is not by the blood of Christ. What else
can follow from this but that Christ died in vain? But if this is
obtained by the blood of Christ, it is not by our works. What else can
follow from this than that the efforts of all monasteries and laborers
are in vain? Especially since they do not do their works as such, but as
if they wanted to live before God through them, which is only due to the
blood of Christ. We therefore rightly consider that all monasteries and
convents (*cathedrales* == cathedrals) and all similar abominations that
stand in holy places \[Matth. 24, 15.\] must be completely removed or
abandoned, since they persuade people to trust in their works, to seek
salvation in them, which is nothing other than denying the Lord who
bought us, as Peter \[2. Ep. 2, 1.\] says, to openly insult the blood of
Christ and the faith.

The second main thing is this, that for us, who are now justified by
faith in the Word and incorporated into the fellowship of Christ, and
have already overcome all sins and diseases in Christ, it only remains
that we do good and live well; not that we thereby become good or want
to eradicate sins (which belongs to faith alone), but that we as good
trees testify by good fruit that we are now without sins. For as a good
tree is not made good by its fruit, but is known by it as by certain
proofs, and it is certain that the tree is good, which is the same as a
good tree.

**548**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 655.

549

not for itself, but for others: so we also prove, as Paul teaches, the
faith that is active through love \[Gal. 5:6\], by testifying or making
certain through works that we do not need good works for righteousness,
but already have them in our hearts through faith. Therefore we teach
such works, which are not useful to us, but only useful and necessary
for our neighbor. This is love. And here again the monasteries and the
common foundations throughout the world are rejected, because all their
works and undertakings are such, both of the donors and of the things
donated, that by them they want to provide counsel for their salvation
and that of their own, as it is called, for their souls. There is not a
work that is sought for another, but only for ourselves, which is
virtually contrary to love.

From this it follows, in the third principal, that no traditions, or
decrees of the fathers, or statutes of the conciliar, are necessary, or
can make any one guilty of sin; 1) for as the works of them, if kept, or
obedience to them, avail nothing in the sight of God to take away sins
(for this stands with the Lamb alone, who takes away sins, even those of
the whole world, by faith in him): so also their neglect does not make
them worthy of punishment. And since it is impossible that there should
be a law which, if not kept, should make guilty, and yet, if kept, could
not acquit, - for what would that be of a law which, if kept, should
profit nothing, and yet, if left standing, should do harm?- Therefore we
confess that the world, through the popes, councils, and decrees of the
fathers, has been miserably deceived and entangled in the statutes of
men, and more properly in the snares of the devil, since all have been
persuaded that if these things were kept, they would be blessed, but if
they were not, they would be damned. By this fiction, Christ, the
gospel, faith, love, righteous good works, Christian liberty, and the
right to be free, are all lost.

1\) *ad peccatum obligare* == to commit a sin, that is, to make it a sin
for him if he does not keep the statutes 2c. - Missed in the old
translation: \"or may bind us to sin\".

and, in sum, snatched away the palm of bliss, so that we are forced to
run in vain.

Accordingly, the extremely abominable tyranny of excommunication, with
which they fortified their abominations, had to be abolished and
abandoned. For the bishops have no other office in the church than the
service of the word, and the ban can only have a place if someone sins
against faith or love. In these cases the pope not only does not banish,
but gives freedom and security in it, both by his own example and by his
word. But in his god-robbing statutes alone he lets his lightnings
shoot. These \[statutes\] should (as I have said) be free, rather
entirely absent, since Christians must be governed by nothing but the
Word, by which they become Christians, that is, free from sins, that is,
by the pure Gospel of GOD alone, without the additions of concilia,
teachers, and fathers. For what is the use of governing Christians with
such a word, by keeping which they neither become nor remain Christians,
but rather cease to be Christians and lose Christ? But every word except
the gospel is of this kind, since (as I have said) it is not our works
but the blood of Christ that washes us from sins. Therefore, salvation
reigns in us not by the works and virtues of men, therefore not by the
laws of men, but by the power of Christ alone.

Furthermore, those who are not Christians are to be kept in check in
another way than by the statutes of men. For these are to be left alone
and (as Paul says \[1 Cor. 5:11\]) have nothing to do with them. It is
(as it is called) the secular sword, they are authorities; it is up to
them to keep the wicked from evil works through the fear of the sword,
as Paul teaches Rom. 13, 4. But the Christians will be governed by a
bishop without the sword, only by the word of God, since it is certain
that those are not Christians who are not good of their own free will.
Such a person grows out of the power of the Spirit of faith, as it says
in Rom. 8:14: \"Whom the Spirit of God impels, they are the children of
God.\" What is it, therefore, for an un

**550** Letters from the year

1523\. no. 655. 656. **551**

Is it sensible to force the voluntarily good with laws that are for the
wicked, or for those who do not want to be good? Indeed, Christians,
too, as they do everything voluntarily, put themselves under the sword
and under the laws for the wicked. Yes, they also use the sword, not for
their own benefit (since they have no need of anything for righteousness
and salvation except faith), but as an example to others and to preserve
the common peace and to strengthen the right of the sword. Therefore
they are free and shall freely use any statutes and ceremonies.

But this is the most abominable thing, and nothing else than the very
audacity and sacrilege of the Antichrist, that he has not had enough of
plaguing the free Christians with his foolish and useless laws, which
are also harmful to the faith, but on top of that, he has laid his
obviously robber hand on the testament of God. First of all, he has
deprived the whole world of both forms of the Lord\'s Supper, although
Christ so clearly said, \"Drink from it, all of you.\" Here it is
absolutely necessary not to be subservient to captivity. It has been
spared the weakness of many enough whom he has held captive and still
holds captive. Therefore, finally, the use of both parts of the
Sacrament must be restored, quite confidently, even though the gates of
hell or the angels of heaven would not want it, since we have the
prestige and the testimony of the divine majesty, indeed also its
institution and command. So \[it is also an abominable abomination\]
that they have made a work and sacrifice out of the Mass, which is a
word of the promise of the Gospel, with the attached sign of the body
and blood of Christ, instituted to nourish faith, always putting their
works in the place of faith, They are senseless and offer Christ every
day in so many thousands of masses, while he offered himself once and
does not want to offer himself anymore, and this is not necessary, since
he has taken away the sins of all who believe once and with one
sacrifice \[Heb. 10, 12.14.\].

These are approximately the main parts of the things I wanted, most
Serene Prince, that E. F. G. (as she has started) help

would like with active zeal to bring them to fruition. 1) I do not want
anything to be done or tried by force of the sword, and that will not
progress well either, but only that those who preach the gospel purely
may be safe and be called under the rule of Your Serene Highness. For
this will be the way that Christ will destroy the Antichrist with the
spirit of his mouth \[2 Thess. 2, 8.\], so that he, as Daniel \[Cap. 8,
25.\] says, will be broken without hand, whose future happened through
the effect of Satan with lying signs \[2 Thess.

2, 9.\]. For Satan will not cast out Satan, but by the finger of God the
devils are cast out \[Luc. 11, 20\]. Farewell then, most noble Prince
and most gracious Lord! Stoke up the spark that has begun to glow in
you, and make a fire go out from the house of Savoy, as from the house
of Joseph, and make all France like straw to him \[Obadiah, v. 18.And
let the holy conflagration of Christ be kindled, yea, let it burn, that
at last France may indeed be called the most Christian of all kingdoms
by the gospel, which hitherto, by the ungodly service against the
Antichrist, for the shed blood, has been ungodly called the most
Christian of all, amen. But the Lord Jesus Christ blow with his spirit
into your and your hearts, that you all do what serves the honor of his
holy word, amen. Wittenberg, Anno 1523, the seventh of September.

**No. 656.**

Wittenberg. September 17, 1523.

**To Theobald Billicanns,2) Pastor in Nördlingen.**

Luther recommends a married priest to him.

Printed in Strobel, Neue Beiträge V, 2, p. 347; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.*
91; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 407 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 229.

1\) This letter of Luther was in vain. Carl von Sa\'voyen seems never to
have had a true inclination to the teaching of the Gospel.

2\) His real name is Gerlach or Gerlacher and he was called Billicanus
from his birthplace Billigheim, near Landau in the Palatinate. In 1518
he had become acquainted with Luther in Heidelberg.

**552** Letters from the year 1523. No. 656 to 659. **553**

To Theobald Billicanus (*Billigano*), the holy evangelist of the church
at Nördlingen, his in Christ exceedingly dear brother.

Mercy and peace! Up to now, neither you nor I have made use of your
love, dearest Theobald; but the matter requires it in such a way that I
am forced to use yours first. I recommend this priest, who has become a
husband out of necessity of conscience, to you, since he has the
confidence that he can live safely with you for the sake of the
neighborhood, if he should be encouraged by your protection. For under
his archbishop it is not yet permitted to live chastely in public, that
is, in marriage, until Christ has shown otherwise. You will now be able
to judge best whether he should live with you publicly or secretly as a
husband. I have a very great confidence in you, so much so that I think
I would be more difficult for you with more words if I thought
differently of you than of a brother who does not look at what is his
own, but at what concerns others. To this end serves the exceedingly
glorious testimony of Philip about you, so that I expect no less from
you than from Philip himself, whom I hold no differently than myself,
except for the learning and righteousness of life by which he puts me to
shame, not alone surpasses me. You are well in the Lord, and may you
have good progress in your holy office. Wittenberg, 1523, Lambert\'s Day
\[17 Sept\].

**No. 657.**

Wittenberg. September 17, 1523.

**To Staupitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 610, no. 223.

**No. 658.**

Wittenberg. September 19, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2633, appendix, no. 123.

**No. 659.**

Wittenberg. October 1, 1523.

**To Conrad Pellican.**

Answer to Pellican\'s attempt to reconcile Luther and Erasmus. About the
dispute between Hütten and Erasmus. Luther regrets the publication of
his verdict on Erasmus, and wants to keep quiet against all writings of
Erasmus, unless he attacks the matter.

Printed in *Judicium Erasmi Alberi, de Spongia Erasmi Roterod. adeoque
quatenus illi conveniat cum M. Lutheri doctrina. Epistola Erasmi
Roterod. ad Fabrum Constantien. Vicarium. Epistola M. Lutheri ad amicu
piissima, de fucata Erasmi Spongia: deque Christi negocio syncerius
tractado*, 1 sheet in octavo, without place and year. Luther\'s letter
on page 14. Further in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 160; in De Wette, vol. II,
p. 411; in *opp. Hutt. ed. Bocking, tom*. I, p. 411; in *Balan,
monumenta,* p. 308, no. 133, and in Erl, Briefw., vol. IV, p. 233.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 860. - In all editions except Erl. Briefw.,
the letter is addressed to Nicolaus Hausmann, only Balan has the correct
first name *Conrade in* the text, where in the old individual editions
it says \"N.\".

Martin Luther sends his greetings to his friend N..

Grace and peace in the Lord! Rather, pray for me, dearest N., since you
now have more leisure and surpass me in godliness. Indeed, I wish and
pray to the Lord Jesus that he may give you the gift of speech, as you
desire, for the praise of his grace.

By the way, that you write that I should not let myself be provoked to
anger against Erasmus, that has already been achieved sooner than 1) you
asked for it. I at least wanted Hutten not to have published his
complaint, much less Erasmus to have wiped it out. 2) If that means: to
wipe out with a sponge, I beg you, what then is reviling and
blaspheming? In vain Erasmus hopes to mislead all good minds by his
oratory, as if

1\) We read *quam* with balan instead of: *quod*.

2\) The treatment that the fugitive Hutten had received on his arrival
in Basel from Erasmus, who tried to avoid his visit in order not to
compromise himself with his high patrons, prompted Hütten to write:
*Ulrichi ab Hutten cum Erasmo Roterodamo, Presbytero, Theologo,
Expostulatio* (June 1523), to which Erasmus replied with a venomous
*Spongia Erasmi adversus aspergines Hutteni* (August 1523). The above
*Judicium AIberi* is a replica of the *Spongia*, written after Hutten\'s
death.

**554** Letters from the year

1523\. no. 659. 660. **555**

no one, rather as if there were only a few who noticed what Erasmus was
dealing with. If Erasmus writes for himself in this way, it is more
desirable that he writes against himself. For he has done unbelievable
damage to his name and reputation through this book, so that I really
feel sorry for the man who never approaches the matter, and thus rages
against the faults of friends for the second time, while he was so mild
against his enemy Lee (*Laeum*), and otherwise admonishes everyone not
to revile even the enemies, and detests this very much. I always
expected he would act the thing. It is easy against life to prove his
oratory. Furthermore, my letter, which I wrote privately about
Erasmus, 1) then also the other to Fabricius,2) has been published,
which makes me very angry. Although I am not ashamed of a word, if I had
to defend it publicly, it is nevertheless annoying to me that through
these impetuous braggarts (I do not know whom to name) what is written
privately to good friends is made public. Furthermore, as the
scribblings of Erasmus do me no harm if they are against me, so I will
have no more confidence if they are for me. I have one who can defend
the cause, even if the whole world should rage against me alone; this is
what Erasmus calls persistence in asserting myself. But since I see that
man is so far from the understanding of Christian things (which I had
not meant until now, although I sometimes suspected it), I gladly suffer
him to call me by any name he wants until he touches the matter. For I
have resolved that I will protect neither my life nor my morals, but
only the matter as I have done so far; whoever wants to may belittle me
and my morals. Yes, I clearly owe my life even in my body to those
people, and a large part of the joyfulness of my spirit, who revile and
torment me most horribly: so much is missing that I would want to be
carried by Erasmus\' fame or name. I have sorrow and fear

1\) The letter to Caspar Börner of May 28, 1522.

2\) To Wolfgang Fabricius Capito, Jan. 17, 1522, No. 447.

I am happy when I am praised, but joyful when I am reviled and
blasphemed; if this is strange to Erasmus, I am not surprised. Let him
learn Christ and bid farewell to human prudence. May the Lord enlighten
him and make another man out of Erasmus, and may He preserve and
increase all of us at the same time; this is what I wish from the bottom
of my heart, as much as it is given to me to wish. Farewell, my N., and
greet Erasmus, if he suffers it, in my name. There is no bitterness in
me against him, but in truth mercy; if he despises this, and perhaps
hopes more for what he thinks, I would like to have lost this wish as
well. Wittenberg, October 1, 1523.

**No. 660.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. October 1523.

**Testimony for Gregor Morgenstern.**

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 177; in the Altenburg, vol.
II, p. 362; in the Leipzig, vol. XXII 580; in Walch, vol. XXI, 59; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 413 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 212.

I, Martin Luther, Ecclesiastes of Wittenberg, bear witness with this
manuscript of mine to this dear brother of ours, Gregorius Morgenstern,
that he has kept himself honest and honorable in the Augustinian Order,
that no one can accuse him of anything else; also that it has always
been the custom and right of this Order, in constant practice, not to
admit anyone unless he was born of honest, blameless parents and of
noble birth.

Therefore, I ask all pious craftsmen, if they would let my handwriting
be helpful to him instead of his birth certificates, so that he cannot
bring them up before the authority of the sovereign. Since, according to
Christian doctrine and truth, he intends to give himself up from the
dangerous state to a blessed state, since he, like all Adam\'s children,
wants to nourish himself with the sweat of his brow, with God and honor
through the help of pious people. This, in turn, Christ will undoubtedly
let them earn with right grace through His own. Hereby commanded by God.
At Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Michaelmas \[Oct. 3\] 1523.

**556**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 661. 662.

**557**

**No. 661.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. October 1523.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

From the death of Pope Hadrian. Answer to theological questions. News
from Halberstadt.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 152 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 175. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 161; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 413 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 237. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 862.

To the Lord George Spalatin, the servant of Christ, his \[friend\] in
the Lord.

Hail in the grace! The death of Hadrian 1) I command GOtte.

By the way, I do not remember that anywhere in Scripture it is found
that the faith and gifts of God in us are dark and uncertain, since they
must necessarily come into operation; I confess that some \[gifts\] are
weak, sometimes hidden when the opportunity is lacking, as when Elijah,
after killing the prophets of Baal, feared Jezebel, and went where his
will led him, not the Spirit \[1 Kings 19:3\].

The word: \"The Lord knows the way of the righteous\" \[Ps. 1, 6\] is a
contradiction, because the Lord does not know the way of the wicked;
that is, he recognizes and approves, again, he does not approve nor
recognize. Thus, \"He leads His saints astray\" \[Ps. 4:4\] is said of
the cross, that He leads His faithful astray, as He led Abraham out of
his father\'s house, and he did not know whither he should go, Heb.
11:8. But for this reason he was not unaware that he believed, rather he
felt the most faith at that time, since he did not realize nor know the
place whither he should go.

In Halberstadt, some people with disguised faces have the Carmelite
Provincial 2)

1\) Pope Hadrian VI died at Rome on September 14 at 7 p.m., according to
Roman reckoning. Spalatin determines this as 2 o\'clock in the
afternoon.

2\) Valentin *Mustaeus* had come to Halberstadt and had preached the
Gospel with the support of Heinrich Schreiber (No. 654). During his
imprisonment in Halle, at the instigation of three canons, their
servants broke into his cell, threw his library into the latrine and
killed him by a man brought with him. They threw his library into the
latrine, and had him castrated by a cutter they had brought with them.
The council let him heal. In the following year, 15 men wanted to do the
same to the abbots of the Bergen and Ammersleben monasteries in
retaliation, but they were prevented from doing so.

They beat him miserably at night for the sake of the Gospel (as it is
said, they were instigated by the priests); at last they cut out his
testicles and ransacked the house; the council now has him healed. Thus,
the wretched people are asking the people over their heads. Farewell. On
the day of Franciscus \[Oct. 4\] 1523. Martin Luther.

**No. 662.**

Wittenberg. October 4, 1523.

**To Johann Ruck.**

Luther admonishes him to wait for a call to the pastorate.
Interpretation of two scripture passages.

Handwritten in Copenhagen in the old royal library, 1393, p. 71. Printed
in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 161 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 414 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. IV, p. 239. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 863.

Grace and peace! I do not yet have another place where I can send you,
dear Johann, so it shall be at your discretion whether you want to stay
there or come here; we are waiting for a calling. To take a wife, if you
feel like it, is good, but you will not be able to preside over the
service of the word, if you have not first become an ordained minister
in a certain place, or if you do not intend to support yourself with
your hands.

The passage Jeremiah 9 \[v. 26, Vulg.\] about those who are circumcised
by the hair, refers in general to all Gentiles who cut the hair on the
forehead at two angles, as all our laymen do. For the Jews were
forbidden both to shave the hair or beard and to cut it off in front,
especially on the forehead. Therefore Jeremiah distinguishes the
Gentiles from the Jews by this mark. \"The mark of the beast upon the
forehead and upon the hands\" \[Revelation 13:16.\] (though the book is
obscure and uncertain) is, in my opinion, outward obedience to the pope
and his laws; which we also keep and confess with our hands, that is, by
public observance. For whoever did not do and live and speak publicly as
the pope has ordered until now, was a child of death. No matter how
inwardly he might be of a different mind, he still had to accept and
show the mark of the beast.

**558**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 662 to 665.

**559**

will be. Greet the mayor in my name, and farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, on the day of Franciscus \[October 4\] 1523. Yours, Martin
Luther.

**No. 663.**

Wittenberg. October 5, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a clergyman for a parish.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 244. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 25; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
415 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 240. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
864.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Magister Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant
at the court of Saxony.

Grace and peace! This Mass priest Erasmus is to receive a certain small
parish, which the one who now holds it and wants to leave will hand over
into his hands. But they claim that the prince\'s permission is
necessary for this. Therefore, he has asked to be recommended to you, so
that he can obtain the prince\'s consent through you. He is a good and
learned man, and you will probably use such a service with him;
therefore do what you do. By the way, I believe you have received my
answer. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Monday after Francisci
\[Oct. 5\] 1523. Martin Luther.

**No. 664.**

Zschepplin. 6 October 1523.

**The Leimbach Brothers to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Response of the Leimbach brothers to Spalatin\'s letter of July 10, 1523
(No. 629), sent to them by Luther, in which they partly answer and
partly apologize for the reproaches made to them by the Elector. It was
not necessary for them to humble the councilors in the old matters. Now
they ask Luther to work so that the last remainder of 2581 florins,
together with the Dabrun 1) seizure, will be paid or reimbursed to them,
so that the matter will come to an end.

A copy in Spalatin\'s hand is found in the Weimar Archives, Aa, p. 138,
VII, 40. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 64 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p.
240.

1\) In the text: \"Dobran\".

Wittenberg.

**No. 665.**

October 11, 1523.

**To the community of Esslingen.**

Michael Stiefel had sent to Luther the articles posed by the papal
clergy at Esslingen, about which Luther here makes his counter remarks.

The first printing appeared under the title: \"Meynen liebenn Herrn vnd
freünden, in Christo, allen Christlichn bürgern zu Esslingen, von Martin
Luther zugeschribn. Wittemberg.\" 4 leaves quarto. Besides this one,
three other single printings are listed in the latest editions. In the
collections: in the Wittenberg (1553), Vol. VI, Bl.432b; in the Jenaer
(1585), vol. II, p. 253b; in the Altenburger, vol. II, p. 364; in the
Leipziger, vol. XVIII, p. 490; with Walch, vol. XXI, 60; in the
Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 213 ; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 416 and in the
Weimarsche, vol. XII, p. 151. Latin in *Obsopoeus*, bl. X; in Aurifaber,
vol. II, bl. 162 and in the Wittenberg edition, tom. VII, fol. 481.

Grace and peace from God our Father and our Lord Jesus Christ! Some
articles have been sent to me by Mr. Michael Stiefel, my dearest in
Christ, as your pastor 2) together with the side preachers should have
put, namely:

The first is that they will henceforth graciously absolve those who
dissent from the Lutheran doctrine, even though they may justifiably
reject them as condemned by the pope and emperor.

The other is that they want to expel and not absolve those who eat meat
or eggs contrary to the custom and the law of the Roman churches, where
they do so publicly without just cause.

The third is that they want to keep the people to confess all their
sins, of which they are aware, before the priest, because Luther himself
praises and praises confession.

The fourth, they want to keep as before, in the cases and sins so
reserved to the pope and bishops.

The fifth, because a -good habit is considered so much as a right or
laws, they want to keep the people to confess twice in the fast.

The sixth, they do not want to absolve those who do not want to repent
and pretend that Christ has done enough for all.

2\) Balthasar Sattler from Cannstadt, formerly Docent in Tübingen.

**560** Letters from the year 1523. no. 665. **561**

Although now, my beloved, it would not be necessary to answer such poor,
loose articles, since I do not doubt that there are many among you who
see well what blindness and foolishness are in them, and who do not hold
more firmly to the Gospel, because they are moved by such articles, I do
not know what good it would do them if I wrote a hundred times against
them, since I have in so many books so many times displaced and
sufficiently weakened all such dreams of men and foolishness with mighty
writings; but because it is so warmly desired by me, I want E. Dearest,
as much as I have leisure, I will write about it.

First, we have preached, taught and written that all our deeds are not
valid before God, and that we should despair of all our works and
abilities; but through Christ\'s blood and merit alone we must be
redeemed from sins and saved, as St. Paul says Rom. 3,23. ff.: \"They
are all sinners, and lack that they cannot boast of God, but are
justified without merit by His grace through the redemption that came by
Christ, whom God presented to the throne of grace, through faith in His
blood\" 2c.

Then we see that it is not our works, since we are all sinners and can
do nothing but sin, but Christ\'s blood that redeems us, if we believe
otherwise, for I cannot earn Christ\'s blood and redemption with works;
otherwise what need is there of faith, which alone grasps, accomplishes
and retains such redemption? And if our works would earn so much, they
could also obtain forgiveness for two, three, ten sins, and finally for
all sin. But if they do not merit forgiveness of all sin, they may not
redeem one sin.

But now the text is clear, that without merit, and freely, sins are
forgiven in Christ\'s blood, that he might redeem us. So either it must
be true that we cannot by our deeds blot out one sin and obtain mercy,
or if we can blot out one sin, we may blot out them all. But if we can
put away sin by works and obtain mercy, Christ\'s blood was shed without
need or cause; so it is false that St. Paul says, \"Sins are forgiven
without merit, freely by grace.

forgiven through Christ\'s blood, whoever believes this.

This is the main point and foundation of Christian doctrine, that we
cannot atone for or do away with sin by our works, but believe that
Christ has done so with His blood; this faith, without any works, does
away with all sin.

From this few pieces you see that your blind pastor\'s articles are all
unchristian and blaspheme against the precious blood of Christ, as well
as both pope, bishops, emperor and princes, who condemn and persecute
such doctrine, which is so publicly stated by St. Paul. So the priest
acts as a wolf, and not as a guardian of souls, that in the sixth
article he demands atonement for sin, just as if our works should make
atonement for some sin, which is such a great office that no one in
heaven and earth could accomplish it, but the Son of God Himself through
His own blood alone, as Heb. 1:3. says: \"He has purified sins through
Himself.\" Whoever wants to follow this article of the priest must deny
Christ with his blood and consider it idolatry, as he, the priest, does
with his own.

Thus the first article is also a condemnation of the blood of Christ,
for Luther is nowhere condemned, except that he teaches Christ\'s blood
through faith to be useful and necessary for the forgiveness of sin
alone; which is against the pope and all his laws, who teaches it by his
own works. Therefore Christ\'s doctrine and the pope\'s doctrine are
contrary to each other, like day and night, like death and life. Whoever
follows this article is condemned before God; if he does not follow, he
is condemned with Christ and his teachings before the world of Pope and
Emperor.

The other article is foolish and foolish, where he has the opinion that
such obedience, and shunning meat, should be a good work, and atone for
sin. For, as I said, neither eating nor drinking, neither hunger nor
thirst, does it, but the blood of Christ alone. If then such obedience
does not destroy sin, neither can disobedience make sin. For where
obedience is without need and profit, there is also disobedience without
harm and danger. Therefore, in the sight of God there is no

**562**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 665.

**563**

It is a sin to eat meat or fish, whichever day I want, as St. Paul
teaches Rom. 14, 17. and 1 Cor. 8, 8.: \"Eating and drinking does not
benefit us before God. Item: \"God\'s kingdom is not eating and
drinking, but love, peace and joy.\" Whoever lets his conscience be
bound by this article denies Christ and his blood and is a heathen.

In addition, we have taught the other main thing, that the Christian
life is love for one\'s neighbor, that we henceforth have no law, nor
are we indebted to anyone, but to love, Rom. 13:8; so that we may do
good to our neighbor, as Christ has done for us through His blood.
Therefore, all the laws, works and commandments that are required of us
to serve God by atoning for sin are nothing from God, and whoever keeps
them denies Christ, such as fasting, celebrations, confessions,
pilgrimages, endowments 2c. But which law, work and commandment are
demanded of us, to serve the neighbor, those are good, those we should
do, as, to obey the worldly power in its regiment, to follow and serve,
to feed the hungry, to help the needy 2c.

From this it follows that, because confession is a work that is not
directed toward the neighbor and does not serve him, it is not commanded
in any way, nor is it necessary. And he who does it as if it were
necessary, and must do it before God, denies Christ: for no work of all
things need remain against sin, where Christ\'s blood alone cancels sin.
Therefore, the third, fourth, and fifth articles of the priest\'s
unchristian and unjustly set, to bind consciences, and to trample
Christ\'s blood underfoot, so that he may not escape the penny of
confession.

It is true that I said it was a good thing to confess. 2) Item, I do not
forbid fasting, walking, eating fish, celebrating 2c., but so that such
things are done freely, and no one who does not do them, as if he had to
do them in his conscience and in a mortal sin, as the pope rages with
his ladders for the blind. We want and should have a free conscience in
all the works that we do.

1\) Weimarsche: \"nothing\".

2\) In the writing \"Von der Beichte, ob die Pabst Macht habe zu
gebieten\". St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 847, § 69.

do not serve the faith or the love of your neighbor. Confess
confidently, fast happily if you want, but do not think that it must be,
and commit sin if you let it be, or want to atone for your sin before
God with it; for with that opinion you fall from the faith, and are
never a Christian.

Because there are zero many weak consciences, which are caught in
Pabst\'s laws, it is good that you do not eat meat 2c. For such not
eating flesh becomes thereby a work of love, because thou serveest thy
neighbor thereby to follow his way, and to spare his conscience. But if
your neighbor is not offended by this, or does not see that you eat
flesh, then you shall eat flesh, not considering the pope: for in all
this the work is no longer in love and the service of the neighbor;
therefore you shall not keep it, because it pleases you of your own free
will 3) to do so. Such an order of works in love we owe; but the works
themselves we do not owe. But where there are impudent drivers, and not
weak consciences, and want to make a necessity or law out of it, then
one should and must only do the contradiction in defiance, so that not
the works, but only the blood of Christ may have the honor to eradicate
sin and to make righteous.

This, my dearest ones, I have answered in a hurry to the blind articles
of your soul tyrant for the sake of weak consciences; for you may read
further reasons and explanations in my booklets on Christian freedom, on
good works, on monastic vows, and on the doctrine of man to be avoided4)
2c. Although I would like everyone to read and hear St. Paul, who
teaches such things so abundantly in his epistles, that my or anyone
else\'s books would not be necessary. But God grant you righteous and
evangelical doctrine, and that his word may bear fruit with you, to the
praise and honor of the ineffable grace of God, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, amen. Pray for me, my beloved. Given at Wittenberg, on the Sunday
after Dionysius \[Oct. 11\] 1523. Martinus Luther.

3\) Weimarsche: \"freiens willen\".

4\) The books to which Luther refers here are found in the St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, 986; vol. X, 1298; vol. XIX, 1500; and vol. XIX, 598.

**564**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 666 to 669.

**565**

**No. 666.**

(Wittenberg.) October 12, 1523.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

Ask for venison for a doctor\'s feast.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 154 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 176. Printed by *Buddeus*
,p. 25; byDe Wette,vol. II, p. 420 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 243.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 866.

To the worthy man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the court of
Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! The provost Jonas has asked me to come to you, if you
could obtain some game by Monday. For the pastor at Nordhausen 1) will
put on the Doctorlarve in theology, and another with him. You do what
you want. For I do not care much if no venison is eaten at this pomp,
only that those hosts wish that their own, who will be present from
Nordhausen, be honored. Only this pleases me about these larvae of
theirs, that they themselves recognize that the matter is nothing, and
they adorn themselves so with the common people for the service of the
word. Fare well in the Lord. Monday after Dionysius \[Oct. 12\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

**No. 667.**

(Wittenberg.) October 12, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reminds him of the letter (No. 453) he wrote to the Elector from
Borua and reassures him of the danger that the cause of the Gospel could
bring. Lastly, about the abolition of the blasphemous ceremonies in the
All Saints\' Monastery, about which he does not approve of the
Elector\'s opinion.

Handwritten in *Cod. Dessav*. , no. 153 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, lob 175.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 166; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 421 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 244. German in the Wittenberg edition
(1569), vol. IX, p. 177 b; in the Jena edition (1585), vol. II, p. 255b;
in the Altenburg, vol. II, p. 365; in the Leipzig, vol. X VIII, p. 499;
and in Walch, vol. XIX, 1450.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1188, no. 142.

1\) Jakob Oethe of Nordhausen; the other is Caspar Glatius (Glatz) from
Rieden near Amberg. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2627, note 6.

**No. 668.**

Wittenberg. October 16, 1523.

**To Michael von der Straßen, escort in Borna.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2094, no. 706.

**No. 669.**

(Wittenberg.) October 16, 1523.

**To Spalatin . 2)**

About the matter of the Leimbach brothers. About the economic situation
of the monastery and about the unjust treatment of Provost Jonas on the
part of the court.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 166 b;
in De Wette, vol. II, p. 423 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 246.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 866.

Grace and peace in Christ! I am sending the letter of the Leimbache, 3)
in which you see what they would like to have from the prince; at least
I believe that they are very bad about it. But I thought that the matter
had been settled and put to rest.

By the way, since you are our and everyone\'s mediator between the
prince and us, our prior asks,4) , that you execute an order with the
prince against our interest man Christoph von Bressen in Mutterwitz, who
is almost a whole year in arrears with the payment of the interest of 90
gulden. He has, of course, received various periods of respite from us
because of his wedding, and it might have suited us, if we wanted to be
wasteful, to waive the whole thing; but because our affairs are not in
such a state now, the interest would be postponed with danger for him or
would grow to a large sum. Then Blank also urges us from the smaller
choir. 5) Accordingly, since at last the whole estate will revert to the
Prince, since I am almost alone the inhabitant of our monastery, may he
see to it that I spend the short time of my life

2\) Spalatin was with the Elector in Jüterbock. Burkhardt, \"Luthers
Briefwechsel,\" p. 61, note.

3\) No. 664.

4\) Eberhard Brisger.

5\) The licentiate Christoph Blank had to receive twenty guilders
annually from the monastery as a monetary salary for the smaller choir.

**566** Letters from the year 1523. No. 669 to 671. **567**

here from our interest and next from his. Or if this is burdensome, let
him take it immediately. Because of the lack of interest, we have
certainly been living for a long time by incurring debts. But I hope I
will not live long, if Christ is gracious to me and the prince of the
world is angry.

You treat the provost Jonas a bit too ungraciously. It is easy for you
to torment a man who is otherwise already well humiliated by more than
one complaint, both from his marital status and from his household,
while you, meanwhile, are rich and without a wife, free, and have only
yourself to care for in good leisure. Dear, do not deceive the good man
with even more misery, and do not believe all those who denounce him to
you. He certainly does not seem to me to be a different man than he has
appeared to me so far, indeed greater than he has been so far. The
Torgau man may be good after all, but he is godless and has the prince
as his idol; I know that. And how is it that one does not want to allow
Jonas in his burdensome situation this small interest for nothing, 1)
for a short time, which can be allowed without sin, and that one
nevertheless insists that those godless people do not keep their godless
masses daily with greater blasphemy against God even, or that one does
not even resist them? Here I appeal to your equity. Are you not also
men, in that you entertain such an opinion, rather, would you not like
to be regarded as being guilty of all ungodliness, since you are the
effective cause that they persist in it? Therefore, spare as you wish to
be spared, and forgive that you may be forgiven. Let others deal with
us, and we would surely find abundantly what we offer them.

1\) On October 4, the Elector had issued an instruction to the councils
of Torgau, \"what they should hold against the chapter of Wittenberg in
matters of change in the monastery,\" in which he speaks out sharply
against any innovation (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. I, Sp. 640 ff.). In this
document is the following passage: \"For it would not have the opinion
that one should earn his salary and additions to the church by idleness
and taking wives, and by what he himself performs.\" This was mainly
directed at Jonah.

words, namely that it is not safe to speak against the Word of God and
the Spirit. Farewell and pray for me. On the day of Gallus f16. Oct.\]
1523.

Martin Luther.

**No. 670.**

Wittenberg. October 18, 1523.

**To Gregor Brück, Chursächsichen Chancellor.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 912.

**No. 670a.**

Allegedly from October 1523, (Wittenberg.) but in fact from April 25,
1524.

**To Jakob Strauß in Eisenach.**

At this point, in all editions, a German letter is inserted with the
wrong address \"In den Kanzler Brück\" and the wrong time \"Im October
1523\". This letter is the translation of the first part of a letter to
Jakob Strauß from April 25, 1524. We have inserted this note here to
prevent the opinion that we have overlooked this letter.

**No. 671.**

Wittenberg. 18 October 1623.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a letter to Weimar on an errand.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 244. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 26; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
427 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 250. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
868.

To Magister Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his brother.

Grace and peace! I ask that you send this letter with the booklet to the
court of Duke John, for I have no one through whom I can send it but
through you. I also wish to know whether you have seen to it that my
letter is brought to Greffendorf 2), for he has either not yet received
it, or has changed his mind. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, on
the day of St. Lucä \[18 Oct.\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

2\) See No. 658.

**568** Letters from the year 1523. no. 672. 673. 674. **569**

**No. 672.**

Wittenberg. 20 October 1523.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther sends the desired preacher.

The original is in the city archives at Zerbst. Printed in Sintenis\'
Denkschrift zur frommen Feier des 18. Februar 1846, p. 21; in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 166 and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p.
49.

To the honorable and wise lords, Burgemeister and Rathmann of the city
of Zerbst, my special favorable lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! I am sending
here a letter pointer to the magister, 1) who has been a preacher at
Jütterbock, about whom you wrote to me the other day. May E. W. continue
to deal with him; for he has been tried and taught enough in many places
so far. Command the same E. W. in God\'s grace. But what I can do, I am
willing and ready. Hereby commanded by God. At Wittenberg, on Tuesday
after Lucia \[20 Oct.\] 1523. Martinus Luther.

**No. 673.**

(Wittenberg.) Around October 20, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Thanks to the Elector for the game donated for the doctorate. Luther
expresses himself more specifically about the confiscation of the goods
of his monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 160 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 181. Printed by
*Buddeus*, p. 29; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 432 (in November?) and in
Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. IV, p. 251. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 881. The
timing is according to Burkhardt, p. 66.

To the Lord *Georgius,* the cultivator of the church field, Spalatin,
his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Our graduates say 2) to the mildness of the most
illustrious

1\) According to Sintenis, the preacher Luther sends is Johann Groner;
Beckmann calls him Gronau. Perhaps the *album*, p. 68 named Grun.
(Seidemann l. c.)

*2) Nostrandi* == *magistrandi*. - The translation by: \"Promovirte\"
(not: \"to Promovirenden has its analogy in *absolvendus*, which often
must be translated by: \"the Absolvirte\" must be translated. See *Erl
opp. var. arg.*, tom. II, p. 153 and St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 120.

Princes thanks,3) and I at the same time with them. I hear that you
handle the gospel in a prosperous way. Hail, O man! This is the way to
Christ. I wish that you may become more and more rich; may he who began
it, Christ, accomplish it.

By the way, what I wrote the other day about the transfer of our
interest into the hands of the prince, 4) we meant in such a way that
the prince, after he had taken all our rights, should nourish us with
the usual interest until our monastic system completely fell away; then
he should have it all for himself, as from the beginning. We are moved
by the fact that from now on we have no hope that the interest owed by
Staupitz will be paid, and that from day to day he will be burdened
again and again with other interest to be paid annually. For our last
letter of request and the order of the prince have been of no use to us,
so that there is a danger that the property will be burdened too much by
the arrears (*retardatis*, as it is called). Some thought that the
consent of the vicar or the general should be obtained, but since we now
neither read, nor roar, nor say mass, nor do anything that the
foundation has decreed, it seems that the benefice and the service have
lapsed, and must rightly be confiscated, except that we can be fed for a
time because of the war against the pope. You have our opinion, you will
judge. Farewell and pray for me. 1523. Mart. Luther.

**No. 674.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of October 1523.)

**To Spalatin.**

Explanation of the Gospel of the Deaf and Dumb, Marc. 7, 31. ff.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 181. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 169; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 428 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 252. German in Walch
vol. XXI, 872.

3\) Since Luther had requested the game (in No. 666) for October 19,
this letter will have been written later.

4\) No. 669.

**570**

Letters from the year 1523. no. 674. 675. 676.

**571**

Your Lord Georg Spalatin, the servant of God and evangelist at court.

You will give thanks for the game, my dear Spalatin. About the gospel I
have only this:

I. \"The ten cities\" is the people of the Law, \"by the Sea of
Galilee,\" near the promised future grace.

2\. \"They brought and asked,\" for the ministers of the Word must
outwardly teach, / pray.

Apost. 6, 1) 4. \"We / at the ministry of the word, want to stop / at
prayer.\"

3\. first \"deaf\", then \"dumb\", because the faith and the word is not
in him, therefore he can neither teach nor pray.

4\. \"He took him from the people especially\" because faith had
transformed him into another

Man transformed.

5\. Christ / the preacher,

Thrive / the praying,

6\. \"Fingers in ears\", the gifts of the Spirit follow the word of
faith.

7\. \"With spittle \[he stirred\] the tongue.\" The wisdom of the cross
is disgusting to the world, but it makes the children eloquent.

So much for the secret interpretations. By the way, according to the
history, Chri

tus / as a mystery of faith, /

/ as an example of love. Those who bring the mute show an example of
love, and at the same time an example of faith, after they have heard
good things about Christ. Martin

hundredfold busy.

because he likes to record.

**No. 675.**

Wittenberg. October 1523.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther comments on the Picards and the Bohemians. He promises to write a
book: \"Ways to say Christian mass and to go to the table of God\" (St.
Louis edition, vol. X, 2230).

1\) In the original and in the editions erroneously: *Actor*. 4.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmann-Briefe, No.
13. Handwritten in the *Franciscaneum* at Zerbst, *Cod*. 21, fol. 11.
Printed in Aurifaber, Vol. II, p. 133; in De Wette, Vol. II, p. 428 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 253. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 840.

To the worthy man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of the Church at
Zwickau, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Other things in more detail, when your messenger will
return to you, best Nicolaus. Now, by chance, I have given this letter
to you to this carrier. I have no bad opinion of the Picards now, after
having heard their belief in the Lord\'s Supper, since they were present
themselves. I do not approve of the Bohemians, 2) who communicate the
little children, although I do not consider them heretics for that
reason.

I have long been anxious to prescribe a way of saying Mass and
communicating, but have not yet been able to complete it. However, it is
my intention not to admit anyone on future days when communion is held
unless he has been interrogated and has given a correct answer about his
faith; we will exclude the others. And I think that up to now enough
leniency has been granted to the weak, and that the whole Sacrament
should be restored, and all should be communicated under both forms, who
want it and understand it, without taking into consideration any
annoyance, whether it be with the neighbors or with others. But behold,
the messenger hastens; more at another time. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 676.**

(Wittenberg.) (October or November 1523.)

**To Nic. Househusband.**

Luther again promises to publish a paper on the Wise Mass and then again
comments on the Bohemian Brethren.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmann-Briefe, No.
20 a. Handwritten in a copy of Georg von Anhalts Schriften, *ed.*
Wittenb. 1555, in the Zerbst Gymnasialbibliothek and in the Zwickau

2\) These are the Calixtines, distinguished from the Bohemian Brethren
or Picards.

**572** Letters from the year

1523\. no. 676. 677. **573**

Rathsschulbibliothek, XXXI V. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 167 b;
in De Wette, vol. II, p. 429 and, in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. I V, p.
254. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 869.

To the learned and godly man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, pastor of the
church at Zwickau, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! Your messenger has returned to you, my dear Nicolaus,
but I believe that my earlier letter has reached you. In the meantime,
however, while I was thinking about your matter, it seemed good to me to
have something printed shortly in which I describe (as I have written)
the way to say mass. Meanwhile, if you can, abolish either all or many
private masses. Then I will change the Canon and some ungodly prayers.
For I do not see why we should change the other customs, together with
the vestments and altars and the vessels, since a godly use can take
place in these, and one cannot live in the Church of God without
ceremonies. For of the other things I have written abundantly in other
books.

The Picards hold thus of the Sacrament, that Christ under the bread is
not bodily, as some say that they saw there blood and a little child,
but spiritually or sacramentally, that is, he who receives the bread
visibly receives in truth the natural blood of him who sits at the right
hand of the Father, but invisibly. Above this we cannot condemn them,
for so we also hold. Then, that they do not worship, they refer to the
same thing, that he is not there visibly, as the visions have him, but
invisibly, that is, at the right hand of the Father. Take the short
letter of the busy man with patience.

Martin Luther.

**No. 677.**

Wittenberg. November 6, 1523.

**To Spalatin.**

Answer to a pastoral question. Information about Luther\'s behavior in
the election of the new canons and about the economic matter of the
monastery mentioned in Letter No. 669.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 155 and in *Cod. Jen*. a. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 168; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 430 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p.
255. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 870.

To Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the court, who is highly esteemed in
Christ, his \[friend\] in the Lord\...

Grace and peace! That man who has the flow of seed of which you write to
me, when otherwise right seed departs from him, that is, with very great
pleasure and a shock, as the flow would be if he attended a woman (for
there are people in whom such a flow is so small, and almost without
pleasure, that it is thought to be only a kind of superfluous moisture,
which neither a woman nor any power could remedy): if this person lives
in idleness and abundance, he will be able to try, first of all, to
subdue his flesh by bodily work and fasting; then there will be hope of
recovery; but if he will not or cannot work, he must, according to
God\'s command, unite himself with a woman, otherwise he will tempt God
and remain in sin.

By the way, that you also often write and others reproach me that the
three youngest canons were chosen on my advice, while I preach the
opposite, I have always despised as an all too great lie. But it is
necessary that I finally justify myself, since I see that if I remain
silent, this will spread and gain credence. I have advised no one that
he should vote, or that he should ever be voted for, since I would
certainly prefer that at this hour that house of Satan should lie down.
But the matter is as follows: After they had been elected without my
knowledge and in my absence, and I was also convinced that the prince\'s
opinion was that their \[the canons\'\] number should remain full and
all that idolatry untouched, so they consulted me whether they should
accept the election? Here I advised thus: since the money is to be
thrown away to any people, 1) who would be \[canons\], the best would be
that it would be thrown away to those who would be worthy and skillful,
and they would receive it for this reason.

1\) Instead of *quos vel* we have assumed *quosvis.* In the original,
which has been damaged several times, the word after *quos is* torn out
and the Erl. Briefw. has, according to the *Cod*. *Dessav*. has adopted
the reading *veI.* Aurifaber and De Wette offer: quos *alios*.

**574** Letters from the year 1523. no. 677 to 680. **575**

gell, so that not Aergere and unworthier it received, how now the
servants of the avarice in exactly this house deal with the presences
1).

The prior 2) is surprised that you do not know what is the matter with
our debt to Blank 3). When we call Blank our Danista4) , we mean the
smaller choir, to which we have been paying 20 florins annually for many
years. Therefore, you will make it clear to the prince that we will
receive our money in full from Christoph Bressen, and Blank will kill us
(as he is an impetuous admonisher) with words of admonition alone. Then,
in this poverty of ours, we have received grain in full from the castle
owner, and he presses us even more. Therefore, you will either ask for
us that this debt be given to us through the kindness of the prince, or
that we soon receive the money from Bressen. Otherwise we have nothing
at hand with which we can pay, and in the meantime many other things
have been taken on Borg, and that one \[the castle owner\] is doing us
quite nice rude things. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Friday
after All Saints\' Day \[Nov. 6\] 1523. Martin Luther.

**No. 6 78.**

(Wittenberg.) (Before November 13, 1523.)

**To the Council and People of the City of Prague.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1548.

**No. 6 79.**

Wittenberg. November 13, 1523.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther informs him that \"Die Weise, Messe zu halten\" will be published
soon and sends the previous letter.

1\) *cum praesentiis* translates Walch by: \"now\". But the
\"presences\" are gifts of money, which were distributed among those who
were present at the masses and vigils. See St: Louis edition, vol. XIX,
1186; compare also ibid. col. 1173, note 6.

2\) Eberhard Brisger.

3\) See No. 669.

4\) *Danista* is the name of the plaintiff in Reuchlin\'s

*Scenica Progymnasmata of* 1498. it is the Greek word xxxxxxxxx, one who
makes money on usury

borrows, a creditor.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmann-Briefe, No.
II. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 169b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 434
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 259. German in Walch, vol. XXI,

873\.

To the dear man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, pastor and bishop of the church
at Zwickau, his brother.

Grace and peace! Dearest Nicolaus, it will happen soon that we will
prescribe a way of saying mass for our church, then you can also take
from this way what you like. I do not care about Dionysius 5), although
I would also like to follow the old custom, but it is so changeable and
uncertain, then completely contaminated with new findings, and I would
have done it in this booklet to the Bohemians 6), if the lack of time
had not prevented me from doing so. Be well and pray for me. Wittenberg,
1523, Friday after Martinmas \[Nov 13\]. Martin Luther.

**No. 680.**

Wittenberg. November 17, 1523.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther asks that the interest from a debt capital of 400 florins, in the
amount of 20 florins, on which someone had placed a charge, be given to
the Augustinians in Magdeburg.

The original is in the secret archive at Zerbst. Printed in the
memorandum of Sintenis 1846, p. 24; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p.
167 and in De WetteSeidemann, vol. VI, p. 50. - A receipt of the
Augustinian priest Udalricus Möller of September 22, 1523 was not
enclosed with this letter, as Sintenis, p. 25, states, but was already
earlier in the hands of the council, but was presumably not accepted at
first. (Seidemann.),

The honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbist, 7) my special
favorable lords and friends.

Grace and peace. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! The Schäffner of the
Augustinians in Magdeburg has asked me to write a petition to E. W., so
that he may pay the interest that is to be

5\) Dionysius Areopagita; about this Luther expresses his opinion in the
writing \"Of the Babylonian Captivity of the Church\", St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XIX, 111.

6\) This gives the approximate timing for No. 678.

7\) Luther soon wrote \"Zerbist\", soon \"Zeruist\", \"Zerwist\",
\"Zerwest\", \"Cerbist\", \"Zerbest\". (Erlanger Ausg.)

**576**

Letters from 1523.

No. 680 to 683.

**577**

1\) I would like to attain with E. W.. That I do not have to deny him
knowledge, although I do not like to trouble E. W.. However, if it can
be done without E. W.\'s help, I would like to ask that such interest be
paid to them, considering that they are allowed to do so, and that the
grief is not fixed, because the caretaker has neither written nor
documented who he is or where he lives, as is proper in such matters,
and if he were the one suspected, he could easily be held liable for
damage and loss. Hereby E. W. do what God bestows, in whose grace I
command E. W., auras. At Wittenberg, on Tuesday after Martinmas \[Nov.
17\] 1523.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 681.**

(Wittenberg.) Before December 4, 1523.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2232.

**No. 6 82.**

Wittenberg. December 4, 1523.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther sends him the \"Weise, christliche Messe zu halten,\" to which
the previous letter is dedicated; likewise, several fugitives (probably
expired monks), whom he recommends to him. He reports that the English
orator Edward Lee, as rumored, will trouble him in Nuremberg; the second
part of the Old Testament is finished, now he will go to the third.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmann-Briefe, No.
12. Printed in Aurifaber, Vol. II, p. 169 b; in De Wette, Vol. II, p.
434 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 261. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 873
f.

To the holy man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at Zwickau,
his superior in Christ.

Grace and peace! I send to you, dearest brother Nicolaus, the way of the
Mass as I have been able to bring it about, a short and light little
book, but at the same time also a burden and burden of Christian love,
that is, these brothers in the

1\) \"stunted\" == occupied with misting. See Grimm s. v. Kummer.

Lord, who are in misery and have escaped from the Babylon of the pope,
whether you could help them with you by assistance or intercession, so
that they learn some work with which they can feed themselves.

At the same time, we have a rumor that the King of England\'s orator,
Lee,2) is going to trouble me in Nuremberg. Christ will see what will
happen; I expect the raging of Satan here. Now that the second part of
the Old Testament is finished,3) which will be published in the next
feast, I will immediately start on the third part, the most difficult
and greatest. Farewell and pray for me, you man of God, and greet all of
us. Wittenberg, on the day of Barbara \[Dec. 4\] 1523.

Martin Luther.

**No. 683.**

Wittenberg. December 4, 1523.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel.**

Luther uses himself for Franz Lambert, who, for the sake of his better
advancement, intends to go to the vicinity of France.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 170; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 437 and
in Erl. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 874.

Grace and peace! Although I, my dear Gerbel, am writing in vain and am
advising myself against it for many reasons, I am urged to do so by the
one for whom I am writing, after he had scouted out that there might be
someone in Strasbourg whom I know. It is Franz Lambert with us, a
Frenchman; two years ago he was an apostolic preacher with the Minorites
(as they call it), and has taken a local woman as his wife, 4) who hopes
to be able to live better near his France, and does not listen to my
advice, so taken is he by his own. For I am of the opinion that if
people cannot get along with you, especially people of this kind, they
should rather migrate from there to us, than from

2\) Lee was a member of the English legation that presented the Order of
the Garter to King Ferdinand at Nuremberg on December 8.

3\) From Joshua to Esther. However, the printing was completed only in
the beginning of the year 1524.

4\) See No. 628.

**578**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 683 to 691.

**579**

here to you. But he has triumphed so that I may have peace.

I therefore ask for his sake that you answer me whether there is an
honorable, rather a suitable position with you, from which he would hope
to be able to live. He is a man who can do well in reading the 1). He is
a man who is able to perform and apply something in the reading of the
Holy Scriptures, but is not quite a match for our Barnabas and Paul, 2)
then in the translation of my German writings into French. He
confidently hopes to produce fruit and earn his living in the vicinity
of France, especially in this way. However, our prince sometimes pardons
him with a gift of money, so that he has had 40 florins from him this
year.

If you do not answer me, neither he nor I will have peace. From this you
can see what I suffer from such people who spy on my good friends
through me and are a burden to them. Fare well with your wife and
children. 3) Wittenberg, 1523, on the day of Barbara \[Dec. 4\]. Martin
Luther.

Wittenberg.

**No. 684.**

4 December.1523.

**To the City Council of Oelsnitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2092, no. 705.

**No. 685.**

(Wittenberg.) December 5, 1523.

**To Michael from the streets in Borna.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2096, no. 708.

**No. 686.**

Wittenberg. December 11, 1523.

**To the Christians of Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1916.

1\) Instead of *sanis* we have assumed *sacris*, which the old
translator already did.

2\) According to *Herminj*. I, 170 2 Allusion to Melanchthon and
Bugenhagen.

3\) *cum carne et costa tua*. Walch translates literally: \"with your
flesh and ribbe\".

**No. 687.**

(Wittenberg.) December 11, 1523.

**To Leonhard Puchler, fencing master in Halle.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1338, no. 154.

**No. 688.**

Wittenberg, 12 December 4) 1523.

**To the Lords of the Teutonic Order.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1730, no. 181.

**No. 689.**

Wittenberg. 14, December 1523.

**To Hanna van Spiegel,5) a convent virgin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 708.

**No. 690.**

(Wittenberg.) (1523.)

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of two village priests.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 235. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 32; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
447 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 267. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
885.

Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his superior in Christ.

Grace and peace! I commend to you, dearest Spalatin, these two village
priests, that you may help them in the matter of their exchange, as you
will hear. For they have asked me to recommend them. Farewell. Martin
Luther.

**No. 691.**

(Wittenberg.) (1523.)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks him to help that the petition of the pastor of Jessen
reaches the prince and complains about the unjust behavior of the
chancellor Jerome.

4\) This date is the conjecture of the Weimar edition, which Vol. XII,
p. 229, Note 4 expresses the assumption that this writing is to be set
on Sabb. p. *Concept. Mariae,* that is, December 12. This is due to
confusion with *Annunciat*. Marias on the 28th of March.

5\) This name of the convent virgin is derived from Luther\'s letter to
Spalatin of July 31, 1524.

**580**

Letters from the year 1523. No. 691 to 695.

**581**

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 25; by De Wette, vol. II,
p. 448 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. IV, p. 267. German by Walch, vol.
XXI, 865.

For the attention of Magister Spalatin, his brother in Christ.

Mercy and peace! I beg you, free me; I am so overwhelmed with foreign
affairs that I am weary of living. The priest of Jessen complains that
his petitions cannot reach the prince, and he is urged by the chancellor
Jerome, 1) who is hostile to him and similar people, to leave his wife,
whom he has,2) as I and the whole city know, with good reason. The
hostility of this Jerome against the gospel and its things is
sufficiently evident to me by many other proofs, so that the great power
of this man makes me very angry. Therefore, see to it that this poor
priest is heard and helped, so that he does not cry out against us to
the Lord. Farewell. Martin Luther,

Court man out of court, even against his will.

**No. 692.**

(Wittenberg.) (1523.)

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of a Bohemian nobleman to a farmstead.

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 29; by De Wette, vol. II,
p. 449 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. IV, p. 268. German by Walch, vol.
XXI, 880.

To the highly esteemed Mr. Georg Spalatin, ecclesiastical courtier, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! A young knight from Bohemia desires through me to
become a courtier at this court, to whom I have answered that he seeks
it in vain. But so that I may get rid of him with honor, you answer

1\) Here, we should not think of D. Hieronymus Schurs, as Seidemann
assumes in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 667 s. v. Hieronymus and p. 695 8. v.
Schürf, but of Hieronymus Rudlauf, secretary (*a Secretis*) of Duke
Friedrich, as D. Enders assumes. Since the latter died on Sept. I, 1523
in Torgau, this letter would have to be placed earlier.

2\) Instead of *quantum* we have assumed according to De Wette\'s
conjecture: *quam tamen.*

me. For he has stopped in such a way that I could not refuse him a
letter to you. Although he has a strong body and a good and noble
disposition, as it seems to me, there is still something that makes me
certain that he will not be admitted to this place. Mart. Luther.

**No. 693.**

(Wittenberg.) (1523.)

**To Spalatin.**

In the same matter as the previous letter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, with the inscription
Spalatin: *Doc. M. Lutherus Pro Boemo Hus* (?) *Juttoboccum*. 3) M.
D.XXIII. Printed at the locations indicated in the previous number.

To the worthy man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the court of
Saxony.

Grace and peace! The Bohemian himself comes to you to see and hear for
himself how things stand and what hope he will have in all this court.
You will hear the man, he seems to me to be a good young man, 4) Be well
and pray for me.

Martin.

**No. 694.**

(Wittenberg.) 1523.

**To the printers of his sermons.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 456, but according to the Erlanger
Ausgabe, vol. 65, p. 221, with the wrong year 1522. We have corrected
this here according to the Erlanger Ausg. (2.), vol. 13, p. 2.

**No. 695.**

(Riga.) (1523.)

**Joh. Lohmüller, town clerk in Riga, to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Lohmüller reports that he wrote to Luther more than a year ago and sent
the letter (No. 544) through a young man who went to Wittenberg.

3\) Should *Jutte\[r\]boccum* refer to the place, where Luther sent the
letter, so this as well as the previous letter would have to be put
approximately on Oct. 16, when the Elector was at Jüterbock. (Erl.
Briefw.)

4\) Here follow the words in the original, which Luther himself crossed
out again: \"By the way, I am sending the letter and the booklet at the
same time, which are to be sent to the court of Duke John. For \[only\]
through you and no one else have I been able to arrange this.\"

**582** Letters from 1524. no. 695. 696. 697. **583**

Now, however, after such a long time, there has been no answer of any
kind from Luther. 1) Since he suspects that his letter has not leached
into Luther\'s hands, he sends it to Briesf again with the present one,
repeating the same request. - The end of the letter is missing. As a
result of this letter, Luther wrote the \"Interpretation of the 127th
Psalm, to the Christians of Riga in Liefland\", St. Louis Edition, Vol.
V, 1284.

This letter is found in handwriting in the archive at Königsberg, volume
\"Rigische Kirche\". Printed by G. R. Taubeuheim, Einiges aus dem Leben
M. Joh. Lohmüller, program, Riga 1830; in Kolde\'s *Analecta,* p. 47,
note 2, and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 270.

**No. 696.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early 1524?) 2)

**To Spalatin in Nuremberg.**

Luther asks him to rewrite some psalm into a German hymn, and wants to
use Johann von Dolzig for such work.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 196. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p.238b; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 590 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 273. German in Walch,
vol. )XXI, 920.

Grace and peace! I intend to produce German psalms for the people, that
is, spiritual songs, according to the example of the prophets and the
old fathers of the church, so that the word of God may also remain among
the people through song. We are therefore looking for poets everywhere;
but since it is given to you that you have the German language in your
power and know how to express yourself delicately in it, and have also
refined it through varied use, I ask you to work with us in this matter
and to set about transforming some psalm into a song, as you have my
example here. I would like, however, that new words and words that can
only be used at court would not be used, so that, according to the
comprehension of the people, simple and quite ordinary words would be
sung, which would nevertheless be pure and appropriate at the same time,
so that the meaning would be rendered clearly and as close to the Psalms
as possible. It must here

1\) \"Luther\'s Epistle to the Christians in Liefland\", dated August
1523 (No. 638), had therefore not yet arrived in Riga.

2\) This letter perhaps already falls into the end of the year 1523.
Burkhardt, p. 78 places it \"at the beginning of January\", because
already on Jan. 14 Luther refers back to it.

The words should therefore be used freely: one must keep the sense, let
the words go and replace them with other suitable words. I do not have
the gift to produce something like that in such a way as I would like.
Therefore, I will try whether you are a Heman, an Assaph or a Jedithun.
I would like to ask the same of Johann Dolzig, who is also rich and
graceful in words, but only if you have time for it, which I assume does
not happen much now. But you have my seven penitential psalms and their
interpretations,3) from which you can take the opinion of the psalm, or
if it pleases you that a psalm be assigned to you, I assign to you the
first \[Ps. 6\]: \"Ah God, do not punish me in your anger,\" or the
seventh \[Ps. 143\], \"Oh God, hear my prayer,\" and to John Dolzig the
second \[Ps. 32\], \"Blessed are those whose iniquities are remitted,\"
for the \[Ps. 130\] \"Out of the Deep\" has been edited by me 4); \[the
51st Psalm\] \"God, have mercy on me\" has already been ordered to be
made. 5) Or if these are too difficult, take these two: \"I will praise
the Lord always\" and \"Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous,\" that is,
the 34th and 33rd, or the 104th Psalm: \"Praise the Lord, my soul.\" But
answer what we have to hope from you. Be at ease in the Lord.

**No. 697.**

Wittenberg. January 7, 1524.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Luther reports on a marriage case; then that Carlstadt had set up an
angular printing press in Jena in order to escape the censorship to
which, according to the imperial mandate, all printed matter should be
subjected.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 185, printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 50
(with the wrong date: Jan. 10); in De Wette, vol. II, p. 457 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 275.

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. IV, 1654.

4\) In the song: \"Aus tiefer Noth\".

5\) A Swiss who was in Wittenberg. Erhart Hegenwalt, rewrote it into the
song: \"Erbarm dich mein, o Herre Gott\". It appeared in Wittenberg on
Jan. 8, 1524, so our letter is earlier.

**584** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 697. 698. 585

To the respectable and highly famous man, Mr. Gregorius Brück,
Chancellor at the Court of Saxony in Weimar, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace. Respectable Mr. Chancellor! M. Wolfgang 1) has
presented the case to me like this: The husband accuses the departed
wife as an adulteress, promising that he will prove by the testimony of
the people and the council that it would not have stood with him, that
she would not have stayed. But so far he has neither proven nor produced
anything. Therefore, the Gospel of Matthew 18 must be kept here, and the
man must be forced to prove the offense either in the presence of the
woman and since she defends herself, in view of the church, or, if she
could not be present, by testimony of the neighbors and public
announcement of the citizens, that she left without criminal guilt of
the man. For it is not allowed to condemn her, either when she is
present and has not confessed, or in her absence, without her having
been convicted. Therefore, that Erfurt Aegidius 2) seems to have passed
the sentence after only one part had been heard, which is much stronger
against the gospel than against the law.

But I beg you, dear man, to do a service for your princes, in my name
and at my request. But it is this. Carlstadt has set up a printing press
in Jena in order to have printed there what man only wants by indulging
his weaknesses, namely that he is willing to teach where he is not
called, but where he is called he is always obstinately silent. Although
this matter can do little, indeed nothing, to harm our preaching
ministry, it will nevertheless bring disgrace to the princes and our
academy, since the Elector and at the same time our academy have agreed
and promised through writings and words that, in accordance with the
imperial edict, they will not permit3) to print anything unless it has
been overlooked and approved by persons appointed for this purpose.
Since the Prince and all of us now keep this promise, it is not to be
denied.

1\) Stern, court preacher at Weimar.

2\) Mechler

3\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2205 f., no. 731.

that Carlstadt alone with his own does not hold it under the rule of the
prince. Therefore, the princes may see to it that he first sends his
own, which he wants to surrender, to such people for evaluation as the
princes want, or that he refrains from doing so, so that the princes and
all of us do not get bad gossip and are accused of having violated
loyalty and faith. Fare well in the Lord, and commend me to the princes.
Wittenberg, Thursday after Epiphany \[Jan. 7\] 1524.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 698.**

Wittenberg. January 13, 1524. 4)

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Luther speaks out about an intended double marriage, and recommends a
preacher expelled from Bamberg to be pastor in Oelsnitz.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 451, fol., and in *Cod. Goth.* 185, 4.
Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 52; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 458 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 282.

To the respectable and highly learned man, Mr. Gregorius Brück, Doctor
of Both Rights, Chancellor of the Duke of Saxony in Weimar, his
\[friend\] to be highly honored in the Lord.

Grace and peace! To the man who desires a second wife on Carlstadt\'s
advice, the prince may answer thus: The husband himself must be firm and
certain in his own conscience by God\'s word that this is permitted to
him. Therefore, he may ask such people for advice who can make him sure
by the word of God. Whether this is Carlstadt or someone else is none of
the prince\'s business. For if he is otherwise uncertain, he cannot be
certain by the prince\'s permission, who is not entitled to decide
anything in this matter, and it is up to the priests to answer the word
of God, from whose mouth one hears the word of God.

4\) De Wette, as it seems to us, has rightly given the letter this date,
understanding *Pauli as Pauli Eremitae*, January 10, because this letter
is earlier than the next one. Schütze and the Erlangen correspondence
have it as *Convers*. *Pauli* (Jan. 25), and therefore date it:
\"January 27\".

**586** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 698. 699. **587**

The Lord\'s law, as Malachi 1) \[Cap. 2, 7\] says. I confess indeed that
I could not resist it if someone wanted to take several wives, 2) nor
does it contradict the holy Scriptures; but nevertheless I did not want
such an example to be first introduced among Christians, among whom it
is proper to refrain even from what is permitted in order to avoid
trouble and to lead an honorable life, which Paul demands everywhere.
For it is very unseemly for Christians to pursue the highest and
outermost things of freedom so anxiously for the sake of their
convenience, and yet neglect the common and necessary things of love.
Therefore, I did not want to open this window in my sermon 3) and hardly
believe that a Christian is so abandoned by God that he should not be
able to abstain when his spouse 4) is prevented by God. I am afraid that
there is some kind of malice involved. 5) But let it go wherever it
goes; perhaps those at Orlamünde will also circumcise themselves and
become completely Mosaic.

I also wrote before\") about the other case; I do not know whether the
one who received the letter delivered it. By the way, I have two
preachers for Oelsnitz. But one of them, whom I would most like to have
serve in this preaching position, has a female wife; otherwise he is
rich in all the gifts that befit an evangelist: Modesty, learning,
godliness, and honorable manners distinguish both him and his wife. For
he has now lived with us for more than two years without reproach and
very praiseworthy.

1\) In the Latin text: *Zacharias*.

2\) Likewise, Luther speaks in a sermon about the 1st book of Moses,
which he preached around the same time. St. Louis Edition, Vol. Ill,
276, § 10.

3\) \"On Marital Life,\" St. Louis edition, vol. X, 898.

4\) \"It will probably read *conjuge* \[instead of *conjux*\].\" (Erl.
Briefw.)

5\) This previous opinion of Luther on bigamy was enclosed by the
Elector in a letter to the Landgrave Philipp of Hesse of July 3, 1540,
in German translation. Lenz, Briefwechsel des Landgrafen Philipp mit
Bucer, gives it in Vol. I, p. 342, note as a fragment of a letter from
Luther to Carlstadt, and Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 355 gives a regest of it.
Köstlin, M. Luther, vol. II, p. 681 ad p. 540 has first drawn attention
to it.

6\) In the previous number.

worth. This is the priest, 7) who was expelled full of Cranach by the
bishop of Bamberg because of his marital status, who would have been
more sorry if he had wanted to be a fornicator and adulterer, which had
been granted and permitted to him. Whether he likes it or not, whether
he can be tolerated or not, I ask to be informed. For I would like him
to be kept in our country, as such people are seldom seen, otherwise he
will be called elsewhere out of the country. Farewell and commend me to
the princes. Wittenberg, 1524, Wednesday after Paul \[the Hermit\]
\[Jan. 13\]. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 699.**

Wittenberg. January 14, 1524.

**To Wolfgang Stein in Weimar.**

Luther reports that he has replied to Brück about the case of double
marriage, and recommends the pastor of Cranach for Oelsnitz.

Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 51 (from the Kraft collection at Husum);
by De Wette, vol. II, p. 460 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 277.

Grace and peace! About the two-woman man you described to me, I have
answered the chancellor D. Gregorius, 8) but about a pastor for Oelsnitz
9) nothing is written to me. Here with us is the pastor of Cranach, a
married man, whom I believe you know. He would be the most suitable for
the place, if it could happen. Therefore, if you want to or can do
something in this matter, then show it. In the meantime, I will keep the
man here. Farewell with your wife, 10) safe and sound in the Lord.
Wittenberg, Thursday after Octave Epiphany \[Jan. 14\] 1524.

Your Martin Luther.

7\) Johannes Grau or Caesius. He died in 1559 as the first pastor and
superintendent of Weimar.

8\) Namely, in the previous letter. The Erl. Briefw. refers from No.
697, but there is another marriage case.

9\) This is how *Parocho Olsnitzensii* will have to be grasped, not:
\"the pastor at Oelsnitz\", Wolfgang Crusius, as the Erl. Correspondence
takes it. Because about Crusius was written several times to Luther, as
his letters to Michael von der Straßen and to the council of Oelsnitz
(No. 668. 684 and 685) prove. Here it concerns the reoccupation of the
in the meantime finished parish position there.

10\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no. 123.

**588**

Letters from the Year 1524. No. 700 to 703. **589**

**No. 700**

Wittenberg. January 14, 1524.

**To Spalatin in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2622, annex, no. 115.

**No. 701.**

Wittenberg. January 18, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends him a letter from Argula von Staufen, urges the improvement
of the bad road to Kemberg and reports a new act of violence by the
Cardinal in Halle.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 163 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 183. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 181; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 461 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 278. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 885.

To the godly and learned man, Magister Georg Spalatin, evangelist at
court, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I am sending you, dear Spalatin, the letter of Argula,
the disciple of Christ, so that you may see it and rejoice with the
angels over a sinful daughter of Adam who has been converted and become
a daughter of God. If you can reach her, I ask that you greet her in my
name and comfort her in the name of Christ. For I too am seeking how to
reach her, and would have written already if I had been sure that
letters could come to her through you.

Incidentally, everything is still good with us, as it was, except that
the way from Wittenberg to Kemberg is accused with many and great cries
up to heaven, and for this reason, the prince also has a bad reputation.
God would have him leave his life with this testament and improve this
path, since he could easily do so. The Cardinal of Mainz rages now for
the third time with the episcopal tyranny also in Halle, after he has
raged in Miltenberg and Halberstadt, the unfortunate man. Farewell and
pray for me. Wittenberg, Anno 1524, the day after Anthony \[Jan. 18\].

Martin Luther.

Send back the letter of Argula.

It is rumored that the prince was killed by a defamatory note that was
posted on the doors.

had been disgraced with the accusation of heresy 2c. Likewise, the rumor
comes from Torgau that Gabriel will marry the surviving wife of the
chancellor Jerome 1).

**No. 702.**

Wittenberg. January 19, 1524.

**To Lambert Thorn.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1924.

**No. 703.**

Wittenberg. January 27, 1524.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

Luther encourages him not to lose patience in the vexations he has had
(probably with the Stadtrath), and declares that a certain feeling
prevents him from writing to the Stadtrath until Hess has struggled a
little more with the word?

Manuscript in the royal library at Berlin, *Mss. Iat. theol.* 8°. 91, p.
103. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 240; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 592
(without date) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 284. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 922.

Grace and peace in the Lord! May he who called you strengthen and
prepare you \[1 Pet 5:10\] Amen. See, there you have your comfort from
me, dearest Heß, for what instruction you desire from me I do not quite
understand; all that I have is poured out in the books which you have
and see. Then you have Paul\'s instructions for Timothy and Titus, and
Christ\'s for all the apostles, Matt. 10; what more do you want? You
have now entered the ship with Christ; what can you expect? fair
weather? rather winds and storms and floods that cover the ship so that
it begins to sink. But with this baptism you must be baptized, and then
better weather will follow, after Christ has been awakened and called,
who will sleep for you at times. I would write to the council, but I do
not know what movement of the mind keeps me from it, that it seems to me
that this matter must first be attacked with the word of God through
your ministry, so that you do not seem to have rushed too much to peace.

1\) Hieron. Rudlauf. Cf. no. 691.

**590** Letters from 1524. no. 703. 704. 705. **591**

and good weather. For Christ also created the wicked for an evil day
\[Proverbs 16:4\], in which he can harm, deceive, seduce, and destroy
those who are worthy of wrath. But when you have struggled through with
the word, He will be there, I will be there too, if I am able. Therefore
be at ease in the Lord, and sing this \[Ps. 31:25\]: \"Be of good cheer,
all ye that wait upon the Lord,\" Amen. Wittenberg, Wednesday after
Paul\'s conversion \[Jan. 27\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 704.**

Wittenberg. (January or February 1524.)

**To Duke Albrecht of Prussia.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 728, no. 113.

**No. 705.**

(Wittenberg.) (January) 1) 1524.

**To Johann Brismann in Königsberg.**

Lnther sends greetings to the Bishop of Samland and promises to dedicate
a work to him; reports that a Prussian gentleman has requested a
preacher from Wittenberg, and shares news.

The original is in the Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg. Printed in
Andr. VogIer\'s Briefsammlung, *Regiomont*. 1622, No. 2; in *Acta
Borussica,* 1730, vol. I, p. 797; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 109; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 588 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 292.

To the brother, Johann Brismann, evangelist of Prussia (Prutenorum), who
is highly esteemed in the Lord, his exceedingly dear \[friend\] in
Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your two letters have been delivered to me,
dear brother in the Lord. I did not lack the will to reply to the
earlier ones, since I always had them in mind, so that I would write if
there was a messenger, but none showed up. Now I write through the one
who brought the last ones. Your bishop, the excellent armament of
Christ, I ask to greet from me most humbly. Also, I will not refrain
from writing, if time and

1\) This time determination results several times from the contents of
the letter.

If I give you the opportunity to dedicate something to his name,2) if he
can suffer otherwise, that my name brings his name as a Christian one,
which nowadays, as you know, is more than hatefulness itself. Thanks be
to Christ, who prepares his saints so wonderfully, and who condescends
to carry out his works through you, who also blesses you to grow into
many baptizing ones.

Herr von Heydeck 3) has requested a preacher from me by letter, whom he
wanted to take away with him, just as you were taken away, but he has
been forced to go elsewhere, so that he could not visit us in
Wittenberg, as he had promised. So I do not know how the matter stands
now. I had thought of your Guardian here, Veit Jerig, 4) or at least our
Capellan from Königstein, Cölestiner, a fine man.

Your Schatzgeyer (*Thesaurivora*) is silent now. 5) Your booklet is
printed again with us, coveted at Nuremberg. Eck, returned from hell,
has poured out or rather thrown out two books printed at Rome, one for
Purgatory,6) the other for the defender of the Roman Church, namely for
the King of England, the defender for the defender, but to whom there is
no cause to answer. He is Eck, he remains Eck.

The Duke of Bavaria 7) rages about the

2\) Luther fulfilled this promise by dedicating his \"Notes on the Fifth
Book of Moses\" (St. Louis edition, vol. Ill, 1370), which, however, did
not appear until 1525.

3\) Friedrich von Heydeck, Albrecht\'s councilor, who later converted to
the Anabaptists and became their protector in Prussia.

4\) *Jeriken*, Jerig or Gericke, the Franciscan guardian in Wittenberg,
because Brismann was a Franciscan. - The capellan is Johann Mantel, who
escaped from the Cölestine monastery at Königstein, of which he was
prior, at the end of October 1523 and came to Wittenberg.

5\) Thus, Luther did not yet know about Schatzgeyer\'s counter-writing:
*Examen novum doctrinarum* etc.. About Brismann\'s dispute with
Schatzgeyer, see St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, Einl., p. 29 f.

. 6) *De pirgatorio Johannis Eckii \... contra Ludderum libri III*.
(rather IV) etc., printed at Nom by Marcellus Franck in June 1523. - The
other writing has the title: *Asseritur hic invictissimi Angliae regis
liber de sacramentis, a calumniis et impietatibus Ludderi* etc., printed
there in the month of May 1523.

7\) Wilhelm.

**592**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 705 to 708.

**593**

To a great extent, with killing, steaming and persecuting the Gospel
with all their might. The noble Lady Argula of Staufen is now fighting a
great battle in this country in a great spirit and full of the word and
knowledge of Christ. She is worthy that we all pray for her, that Christ
may triumph in her. She has attacked the academy at Ingolstadt with
writings, because they have urged a certain young man Arsacius 1) to a
shameful recantation. Her husband, who is already a tyraNn against her,
is now pushed out of his office for her sake; just think what he will
do! She is alone among so many monsters, and although she has a strong
faith, she is, as she herself writes, at times not without despondency
of heart. She is a special instrument of Christ, I commend her to you,
that through this weak little vessel Christ may put to shame these
mighty and glorious ones in their wisdom. All of us salute you. 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 706.**

Wittenberg. February 1, 1524.

**To Spalatin in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1792, anh., no. 17.

**No. 707.**

Wittenberg. February 6, 1524.

**To Hans von Minkwitz.**

Luther had pledged for Dietrich Nabel with Valentin Mellerstadt, but had
been deceived, therefore he asks to be released from this guarantee,
since one could hold oneself harmless at the funds, which have Nabel
with duke Johann. 2)

1\) M. Arsacius Seehofer from Munich had been forced by the professors
of Ingolstadt to recant seventeen articles as heretical in prison on
September 17, 1523. Against this, Argula von Staufen (Grumbach) wrote:
\"How a Christian woman of the nobility, in BeierN, by means of a
sendtbrief founded in God\'s Scriptures, punishes the high school at
Ingolstadt for having conned a Protestant youth into speaking the Word
of God. Date Dietfurt, Sontags nach erhebung des heiligen Creutzs
\[Sept. 18\] 1523.\" Luther also issued a writing in this matter:
\"Wider das blinde und tolle Verdammniß der 17 Artikel\" 2c., No. 5 in
the appendix of this volume. - \"Her husband,\" Frederick of Grumbach,
was and remained Catholic, so she used her patronymic in her writings.

2\) De Wette and, according to him, the Erl. Briefw. state the content
thus: \"Request for a prisoner for whom Luther had said goodbye.\"

From the original in Unsch. Nachr. 1734, p. 530; in Walch, vol. XXI,
886; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 474, and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53,
p. 232.

To the strict and honorable Mr. Hans von Minkwitz, knight and
churfürstliches Rath, and my but lord and friend.

Grace and peace. Most honorable, strict, dear sir, I ask for the sake of
Christian love, Your Grace, to help my 3) poor faith out of the prison,
which I have had installed at Mr. Valtin Mellerstadt 4) for Dietrich
Nabel of good opinion, and unfortunately he is in disgrace, and is not
worth a penny more, so he should help many 5) now. But I hear that the
same Dietrich has interest or chamber money with my gracious Lord Duke
Hansen. There E. Gestr. can help me well. Since faith is no longer
valid, I want to earn it with my poor Our Father, if I can. Hereby
commanded by God, Amen. At Wittenberg on the Saturday after 8 \[6 Feb.\]
1524.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 708.**

Wittenberg. February 14, 1524.

**To Albrecht, Archbishop of Mainz.**

Luther announces to him that he will send out a letter of consolation to
the persecuted Miltenbergers and assumes that the persecution happened
without the archbishop\'s knowledge.

First in the Supplement to the Leipzig edition, p. 34 (supposedly *ex
Copial. Arch. Vinar*., but De Wette did not find it there); in Walch,
vol. XXI, 66 ff; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 484 and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 53, p. 233.

To Mr. Albrechten, Tit. St. Chrysogoni Cardinal, Archbishops of Mainz
and Magdeburg, Primates, Margraves of Brandenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord, Amen. Most reverend in God, most
noble, most highborn Prince, most gracious Lord! Although I hear that it
is forbidden by E. C. F. G. Mighty, not to write, neither to

3\) \"my\" put by us instead of: \"my\".

4\) *Bindseil, Colloquia, tom*. I, p. 184 it is said that Valentin
Mellerstadt served many with his money, but not without his great harm.

5\) \"many\" put by us instead of: \"many\".

**594** Letters from the year 1524. no. 708. 709. 710.

595

E. C. F. G. nor the one in Wittenberg, because of the trade that has
taken place there. I would be heartily sorry if it could remain with a
good conscience, which allows nothing to be forbidden to it, against and
above all the power of angels. I am also heartily sorry that the third
time under C.C.F.G.\'s rule the seed has been raised; nevertheless, some
violence must be done, even if it were done by holy people, be silent,
if such people do it behind C.C.F.G.\'s knowledge, or incite C.C.F.G. to
do it, who are also not so pure that they would stone the adulteress.
This is well known, however, and the country and the people bear witness
that the people of Wittenberg are not plagued in this way because of
rebellion, but solely for the sake of the Gospel or preaching; and that
such things should happen under E. C. F. G. through such people, I am
truly sorry. Now that I am not a displeasure to E. C. F. G., I will
leave it that way, although I would gladly pray for the poor innocent
people, if it could be; but I cannot leave that, since the poor people
are also forbidden to receive letters, that I let a public letter of
comfort go out, lest my Christ say to me on the last day: I have been
imprisoned, but you have not visited me. Now I want to spare E. C. F. G.
as much as I can, because I still have good confidence that E. C. F. G.
is not of the same opinion as some wolves and lions are at E. C. F.
G.\'s court, and therefore I want this letter to reach E. C. F. G.
beforehand, so that I may, according to the Gospel, first address E. C.
F. G. with a letter of comfort. C. F. G. beforehand, whether she might
not know this, and whether I would not meet it all at once, and make it
most beautiful that E. C. F. G. does not have to speak with me, but with
the same wolves and lions, who cultivate their courage under E. C. F.
G.\'s name. Command hereby E. C. F. G. in God\'s grace, and ask that my
necessary letter be graciously understood. At Wittenberg, on 14 Feb.
1524. Mart. Luther,

**No. 700.**

Wittenberg. Around February 14, 1524.

**To the people of Miltenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1272.

**No. 710.**

Wittenberg. February 23, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther complains about Spalatin\'s silence and the lack of news from the
Imperial Diet. He complains about the difficulty of translating the Book
of Job, which is holding up the printing of the third part of the Old
Testament.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 165 and in *Cod. Jen* a, fol, 184. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. I83d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 486 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 299. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 88-7.

To the godly and learned man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ
and minister of the grace of God, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! This, my dearest Spalatin, I write to you for no other
reason than that I finally addressed a letter to you, because you are so
stubbornly silent about Nuremberg, as if you were in Rome, so that we do
not know whether you all sleep on and on, or whether you conspire to
some future monstrosity. For a long time I have received a letter from
you, but in the meantime everything is so silent that it is equally 1}
uncertain to us whether there is a pope or whether an imperial diet can
be assumed. But we hope, since Easter time is approaching, that the
princes will be incited by their confessors and preachers, that they
will render a service to Christ in satisfaction for sins, in order to be
able to communicate worthily, and pursue the gospel anew with new
examples. I also expect at the same time what spiritual songs you have
produced about the Psalms, as I wrote the other day. 2)

With us, everything still stands well. Only in the translation of Job
have we had a lot of trouble because of the sublimity of the exceedingly
grand style, 3) so that he seems to be much more impatient about our
translation than about the comfort of his friends, or certainly wants to
sit on the dunghill again and again.

1\) Instead of in the outputs, we have assumed.

2\) No. 696 and 700.

3\) See Luther\'s Preface to the Book of Job, St. Louis Edition, vol.
XIV, 19, s 5.

**596** Letters from the year 1524. No. 710 to 713. **597**

If the author of this book did not want that it should never be
translated. This circumstance delays the printing of this third part of
the Bible. Write again at last, and give us news about your and the
world\'s affairs. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Tuesday after
Reminiscere (Feb. 23) 1524. Martin Luther.

**No. 711.**

Wittenberg. March 1, 1524.

**To Georg Raubt, 1) preacher in Planen.**

Luther gives him advice on how he should behave in the persecutions
affecting him for the sake of the Gospel.

The original is in the Superintendent\'s Archives in Plauen. Handwritten
in *Cod. Goth*. 185. printed in \"Der vier Evangelisten wahrhafte,
eigentliche und kurze Beschreibung\", written by Georg Raudt, the son of
the recipient of the letter, 1579; in Joh. Paul Oettel, Historie aller
Pastoren und Superintendenten in Plauen, p. 16; in K.G. Dietmann, Die
gesammte Priesterschaft in dem Churfürstenthum Sachsen, 1754, vol. Ill,
p. 557; in Schütze, vol. ll, p.54; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 107; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 487 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 300.

To the brother in Christ, Georg Raudt, preacher in Plauen, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

\"Grace and peace.\" Dearest brother, take care of me with very few
words. If the situation is such that you cannot safely and freely follow
and speak the word there, and are forced to serve the ungodly masses and
ceremonies, then it is advisable that you rather leave the place and go
where you can do it freely and produce fruit, and leave it to those to
give account for it who oppose it. Thus I have also written to the noble
Nicolaus Sack. 2) But if you do it with certainty and

1\) Georg Raudt or Raute from Gera, preacher monk in Plauen, had to
suffer much persecution from his brothers in the order because he
preached the Gospel. Duke John of Saxony took care of him, and (on Nov.
30, 1524) assigned him a certain income. In 1525 he became the first
evangelical preacher in Plauen.

2\) He had a concubine and fathered children with her. Now, out of love
for the children, in order to make them legitimate, and moved by the
teachings of the Gospel, he wanted to marry them, whereby he encountered
many difficulties. *Vine, tom*. II, fol. 164. *Bindseil, colloqul,
tom.*.II, p. 351. There we read: *procreatis \... liberis ex ea, arnore
etc*. The Erlanger

If you are able to keep your conscience intact, so that you do not serve
the laws of those people in any way (which I believe they cannot stand,
unless a new miracle happens), stay in the name of the Lord. Pray for
me. I, who am one and alone, am obliged to answer many, so you may not
be surprised at my short writing, since I am completely overwhelmed with
so many books and letters to write. Farewell. Wittenberg, Tuesday after
Oculi \[March 1\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 712.**

Wittenberg. March 2, 1524.

**To the Counts Günther, Ernst, Hoyer, Gebhard and Albrecht von
Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1674, no. 176.

**No. 713.**

(Wittenberg.) March 8, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks him to assist Cranach\'s pastor.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 245. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 32; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
487 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 302. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
888.

To the good and godly man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant at the
court of Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! The village priest of Cranach, 3) who, as you know, is
plagued by his bishop, has hurried to the Imperial Chamber Court,4) to
seek help. If you can help the man a little, then you know how worthy he
is of it, and that what is done to Christ is done to him. Therefore do
it, dearest Spalatin, which we hope you will gladly do, and be at ease
in the Lord. Tuesday after Lätare \[March 8\] 1524. Martin Luther.

In his note, Briefwechsel has not only retained the comma before *ex
eo*, but also the one from Rebenstock, which Bindseil had already
improved.

3\) The \"village pastor\" is Joh. Grau; the \"bishop\" Weigand of
Bamberg.

4\) *imperii senatum*. De Wette: \"at the Imperial Diet\"; but the
latter could not take care of such matters.

**598** Letters from the year 1524. No. 714 to 717. **599**

**No. 714.**

Wittenberg. March 9, 1524.

**To Wolfgang Stein in Weimar.**

Luther asks for supplies for two monks who have left.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 1048, fol. 77, No. 144 and in the
Wittenberg Seminary Library. Printed in Niedners Zeitschrift für hist.
Theologie, 1861, p. 618 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 303.

To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Wolfgang Stein, ducal ecclesiastical
prince of Weimar, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace, dear Magister Wolfgange! Two brothers from the
Neuenstadt monastery have asked me to write to my lord, the young
prince, that his grace would help them to get something from the
monastery. Lord, the young prince, that his F. Grace would help them to
get something from the monastery. One of them, Michael, would like to
study here and then be used for preaching, where my lord could give him
something either from his own grace or from his own. Lord either gives
him something by his own grace, or provides him with something from the
monastery\'s spoils, since they say it is done badly. The other,
Heinricus Zwecz, is almost poor and would like to have a handicraft from
the same monastery, in which he has brought something honest of his
inheritance. Now I do not like to bother my lord. I do not like to
trouble my lord with it, nor do I know how things are done, and you are
also more idle and more skilled than I am; I ask in Christ that you take
such trouble upon yourselves and think and do in my name for the two
brothers in my lord\'s name. Lord, as much as it is possible, so that
they will finally give up the running to and fro, and we will also get
rid of them. I will earn this again, and Christ will recognize it.
Herewith, in God\'s grace, together with your Heva. At Wittenberg, on
the middle week after Lätare \[March 9\] 1524. Martinus Luther.

**No. 71S.**

Wittenberg. March 12, 1524.

**To Joh. Heß in Breslau.**

It is not surprising that the princes seek their own interests in the
Gospel; it has been like this at all times. It does not yet seem to him
to be time for him to write to the council (compare No. 703), but he
will do so at another time.

Manuscript in the royal library in Berlin, Mss. Iat. theol. 8°. 91, fol
102 b and in the Stadtbibliothek in Hamburg, *Mss. Vol.* I, kok 38.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 234; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 591 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 304. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 915. In
Aurifaber, De Wette and Walch without date.

To the highly esteemed Johann Heß, Doctor, the faithful bishop of the
people of Breslau, without island. 1)

Grace and peace! It is not to be wondered at when the princes seek their
own in the Gospel, and new robbers pursue the old robbers. For the light
of the world has dawned, in which we see what the world is, namely the
kingdom of Satan. So Paul also complains \[Phil. 2, 21\] that they all
seek their own. Furthermore, this very fact must encourage us, because
everything corresponds to the old examples of the Gospel. It seems to me
that the council of your city should not yet be written to, but I will
write at another time. Indeed, I cannot fulfill so many writing duties,
and am forced to let much go without writing. But you be well and pray
for me. Wittenberg, on the Sabbath *sitientes* 2) \[March 12\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 716.**

Wittenberg. March 14, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2623, annex, no. 116.

**No. 717.**

(Wittenberg.) March 14, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

News from the Diet of Nuremberg. Answer to two theological questions.
From Carlstadt\'s shameful

Behavior.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
14. Handwritten in the Franciscaneum zu Zerbst, No. 26, fol. 13 k and in
the Zwickauer Rathsschulbibliothek, XXXIV. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 184; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 489 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV,
p. 306. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 889.

1\) *infula* == bishop\'s miter.

2\) *Sabbatho sitientes* is the Saturday before Judica.

**600** Letters from the year 1524. no. 717. 718. 719. **601**

To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of the Church
in Zwickau, his superior in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! Nothing has been decided against me at Nuremberg, and
our prince has returned. 1) There, however, the Lord has miserably
killed the chancellor of Trier by the stroke of the river, who two days
before his death had bragged at a banquet that before the feast of St.
Martin our trade should be done with the sword; but this obvious hand of
the Lord does not at all frighten the stubborn. Furthermore, the princes
and bishops accuse the councils of the Imperial Chamber Court and the
Swabian League, the latter because they ruled in favor of the Nassau
against the Hessians,2) the latter because they devastated their lands
when they drove out the robber barons (*praedones*). The emperor also
wrote to them and punished them for not carrying out his command against
Luther.

I have dealt with the baptism of small children in Postille 3), which is
now being printed. You yourself know that confirmation is nothing other
than the laying on of hands and prayer.

It would be little if Carlstadt were only ungrateful, but he persecutes
us even more horribly than the papists do. He gives birth to many
monstrosities, as Spalatin complains to me, as you will learn in due
time. Your clan Storck 4) reigns in these people, 5) after being
expelled from Zwickau, he has knocked out his hiding place there, but
the Lord will do what is good in His sight. You also pray with us, and
be at ease in the Lord. On Monday after Judica \[March 14\] 1524, Martin
Luther.

1\) The Elector left Nuremberg on February 25, but the imperial treaty
was not signed until April 18. See St. Louis Vol. XV, 2243, No. 741.

2\) These were territories, namely the county of Katzenellenbogen.

3\) In the church postilion in the sermon on the 3rd Sunday after
Epiphany, St. Louis edition, vol. XI, 486, § 19 ff.

41 Compare No. 536; see St. Louis edition, Vol. XX, Einl., p. 10b f.

5\) namely in Carlstadt and his followers at Orlamünde, Allstädt 2c.

**No. 718.**

Wittenberg. March 21, 1524.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

Expert opinion on a marriage case.

Manuscript in the royal library in Berlin, Mss. theol. 8°. 91, fol. 104
b. Printed in I. F. Fischer\'s Refgesch. der Pfarrkirche zu St. Maria
Magdal. in Breslau, 1817, p. 48 and in Krafft, 14 Briefe 2c. in den
Theol. Arbeiten aus dem rhein. Prediger-Verein, II, p. 93.

Mercy and peace, dearest Hess! If it is the case, as this young man
says, that the woman is unable and unfit to perform the marriage duties,
then the verdict of divorce is certain. That is how I have advised.
Therefore, do it in the name of the Lord that you dissolve the marriage.
I wish your theses 6) victory, and I wish you well and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Monday after Palmarum \[March 21\] 1524. Martin Luther.

**No. 719.**

Wittenberg. March 23, 1524.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Luther insisted that Melanchthon give lectures on the Holy Scriptures.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. 0, p. 125. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 35; in Walch, vol. XXI, 69; in De Wette, vol. II,
p. 490 and in the Erlanger Ausg., vol. 53, p. 235.

To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Frederick, Duke
of Saxony, Elector 2c, Landgrave in Th. and Margrave in Meissen, my
lord. Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, most gracious lord!
E. C. F. G. know without a doubt that by the grace of God there is a
fine youth here, greedy for the salutary word, from distant lands, also
suffering much poverty, that some have nothing but water and bread to
eat. Now I have kept to M. Philip, because by the grace of God he is
abundantly gifted to read the Scriptures, even better than I myself, and
although I would gladly do so, I would have to let up on translating the
Bible, so that instead of his greek lection, he would submit to the
lection of the Holy Scriptures,

6\) The disputation about it took place on April 20.

**602** Letters from the year 1524. no. 719. 720. 721. **603**

because the whole school and all of us highly desire it: so he blocks
himself with a few words of defense, that he is appointed and paid by E.
C. F. G. for the Greek lessons, which he would have to wait for, and may
not leave them. For this reason, my most humble request is that E. C. F.
G. see to it, for the benefit of the dear youth and for the greater
promotion of the Gospel of God, whether it would be possible for E. C.
F. G. that such a salary would be interpreted to him on the Holy
Scriptures. Since there are many young people who can teach the Greek
lesson well, and it is not good that he always deals with the childish
lesson and leaves out a better one, since he can produce much fruit,
which cannot be rewarded with any money or salary. God would have us
have more of those who could read like this; otherwise, there are enough
of them, unfortunately, who swarm, and may well need time and people,
because they are here by God\'s grace. The time will come, as it did
before, that one must let up for the sake of such people\'s lack, even
if one does it unwillingly. Therefore it is to be understood here that
we people go out because we can, and yet do our best for our
descendants, and where E. C. F. G. has loved to provide such, I ask you
to bind the aforementioned Philipps in earnest to wait for the writing
with diligence, and if he should also be given more pay, then he should
and must do so. E. C. F. G. be commanded in God\'s mercy, Amen. At
Wittenberg, on Wednesday after *Palmarum* \[March 23\] 1524.

E. C.F. G. subservient servant Martinus Luther.

**No. 72\".**

Wittenberg. March 23, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

About a nativity placed on Luther and about your right understanding of
what Wesel had written about the second request.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 167 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 186. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 2035; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 292 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 309. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 891.

1\) Instead of \"he\" we have assumed \"you\" with the Erl. Instead of
\"he\" we have adopted \"her\".

To M. Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ, his \[friend\] in the Lord,
to be highly honored in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! You are right in that I am busy, nevertheless I send
everything and also send everything back again, as you wanted. I had
seen my nativity 2) before, which was sent here from Italy, but since
the astrologers have talked so much this year, it is not surprising that
there is someone who has dared to do these antics as well.

Wesel\'s article 3) about the kingdom of God, which is prayed for in the
Lord\'s Prayer, is, I believe, not said in any other way than to meet
the common opinion, according to which by the kingdom of God only the
future glory is understood, so that they do not concern themselves with
the present kingdom of Christ, which has begun, but which the Scriptures
urge most, although it is the same kingdom, here and in the future; here
begun by faith, in the future to be completed by glory. Fare well and
pray for me. Wittenberg, 1524, Wednesday after Palmarum \[March 23\].

Mart. Luther.

**No. 721.**

Wittenberg. (Before March 26 \[?\] 1524.) 4)

**To Spalatin.**

Proof of a Bible passage. Recommendation of a divorce petition with
attached protocol. Rumors, and news of the appeal of the married
Strasbourg clergy.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. u, fol. 197. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 241 d; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 492 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 310. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 924.

2\) *Genesin* == *genituram*, the nativity, the horoscope. Walch: \"my
1: book of Mosis\".

3\) Joh. Ruchrath from Oberwesel, usually called Joh. von Wesel, had
published a writing in Mainz in 1479: *Johannis de Wesalia concionatoris
paradoxa etc.,* in which this sentence is found: \"Your kingdom is
coming 2c. There we do not ask for the kingdom of heaven, because that
does not come to us.\"

4\) This time determination results from the appeal of the Strasbourg
clergy mentioned in this and the following letter (whose date is secured
by the original). Only the difficulty is, how this writing, which
appeared only on April 12, was already in March in the middle of

**604** Letters from the year

To the learned and godly man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court,
his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! The passage of Ezekiel, Cap. 34, is in the middle \[v.
10.\], where it says: \"Behold, I will myself to the shepherds, saith
the HErr\" 2c., with which Johann Hus wnrde plagued by Zacharias;
Staupitz told that he had heard it from Andreas Proles, as you know.

By the way, I ask you to see to it that this note with the enclosed
petition is presented to the prince, and see to it that an answer is
given. For although I am extremely reluctant to get involved in these
matrimonial matters, the inertia and tyranny of both powers have so far
sunk the matter so deeply that Christ himself is needed as judge and
counselor. I am therefore forced to serve the miserable need, which, I
ask, you also do not want to escape.

Rumor has it that in addition to those three servants of Ferdinand, four
other servants of the same Ferdinand were found hanged from a tree in
the Nuremberg forest, with weapons and spurs. And it is said that at
Constance a defection to the Swiss is being attempted because of
Faber\'s violence. The married priests of Strasbourg have issued a
vehement appeal against their bishop, which I will send shortly. Oh,
about the princes and bishops who are doomed to future ruin, since in
such a great movement of things and minds they do not mean what God
threatens them with, but rather strive for misfortune of their own free
will and bring it on themselves. Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg.
Martin Luther.

berg could be known? So De Wette, D. Enders says: \"I verinag this
Räthsel not to solve.\" - We would like to make the assumption that
Luther accidentally wrote *Paschatis* instead of *Pentecostes*, then May
14 would be the date of the next letter. This assumption receives great
probability from the fact that Luther mentions the appeal again in a
letter to Capito of May 25, and that the same divorce matter is
discussed again in a letter to Spalatin on June 2. Already Röhrig,
Gesch. der Ref. im Elsaß, Vol. I, p. 186, has expressed the assumption
that 26 *Magi* is to be read.

1\) Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XV. 1421, ? 33; ibid. vol. XVI,
2106, § 6 ff.; ibid. vol. XXII, 1404.

1524\. no. 721. 722. **605**

**Instruction for the prince next to the petition.**

The marriage case behaves like this:

I, Martin Luther, have heard the case between Michael Hanck 2) and his
wife in the presence of the priest and the secular judge. Finally,
Michael has been convicted by eight witnesses, men of credibility and
standing, that his wife has been in constant danger of death with him
for many years, that he beats her so, rages so, attacks her so often
with his bare sword, that one would think he was out of his mind. Nor
does he feed them; rather, if there is anything in the house, he carries
it out and wastes it. Since they unanimously testified to this, we
passed the sentence that she should be divorced from him and left it to
the discretion of the authorities as to which secular law they wanted to
punish him by. Above that she agrees to return to him, if he would only
be put to the test for a quarter of a year or half a year, or kept in
check, whether he might want to or be able to change. Here they say that
the magistrate will not agree to a concilium assembled from I know not
how many thousands of doctors, that this divorce is valid, and cares not
for so many witnesses; nay, at the risk of death (which they say is an
empty delusion) they wish to compel them, pretending that this example
of divorce would bring many others after it. Here they ask that the most
noble prince have mercy on the woman and order the matter to others than
the magistrate or us, and provide the helpless woman with justice and
equity, as he owes, as the petition enclosed here states.

**No. 722.**

(Wittenberg.) March 26 (?) 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of a pastor and his request.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 245. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 33; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
494 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p.3I3. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
892.

2! According to Spalatin\'s inscription, Hanck was a shoemaker, his wife
was Margaretha Molwitz. (Burkhardt, p. 69.)

**606** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 722. 723. **607**

Mr. Georg Spalatin, your servant of Christ and evangelist at: Court of
Saxony.

Grace and peace! I recommend to you, my dear Spalatin, this priest of
Prettin with his cause, whether his petition could not reach the prince
through you. For I suspect that there is something behind it and that he
is up to something evil (*monstri*) who has caused him this trade, since
one must not push away those to whom the people and the leaders of the
people issue such testimonies. I send the appeal of the Strasbourg
husbands. 1524, the day before Easter \[March 26\]. 1)

Mart. Luther.

**No. 723.**

Salzburg. April 1, 1524.

Staupitz to Luther.

Answer to Luther\'s letter of Sept. 17, 1523. He testifies to his love
for Luther. Although he could not agree with Luther in many neutral
things, he still held fast to the righteousness of your faith and hated
the Babylonian captivity. He sends a man from Salzburg so that he can
obtain a master\'s degree in Wittenberg. - This is Staür pitzen\'s last
letter to Luther, since he died on Dec. 28, 1524. Therefore, we share it
here in its entirety.

Manuscript in Bern, *Epistolas varior.* Printed in Krafft, Briefe und
Documente, p. 54; in Kolde, Augustinercongregation, p. 446 (with
improved text) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 314.

To Doctor Martin Luther, 2) his best friend and Christ\'s servant, your
brother and disciple John, a servant of Christ.

JEsus.

I wish you salvation and give myself to you! 3) You write so often,
dearest Martin, and consider my constancy suspicious. To this I say: My
faith in Christ and the gospel continues unchanged, but I have need of
prayer that Christ may help my unbelief, and that I may abhor human
things and love the church \[not\] 4) lukewarmly. Towards you I have a
quite constant love, which is also greater than women\'s love \[2 Sam.
I, 26.\], always unbroken. But give me credit if

1\) See the first note to the previous letter.

2i In the original only D. M. L., perhaps out of concern that the letter
might fall into unauthorized hands.

3\) *et se etc. == et se ipsum*. Compare No. 76 at the beginning.

4\) Inserted by us; the whole passage is corrupted. The text given here
is Seidemann\'s Conjectur.

I sometimes fail to grasp what you say because of the sluggishness of my
mind, and so pass over it with silence. You seem to me to condemn many
purely external things that have nothing to do with faith and
righteousness; they are neutral things, and since they are done in faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ, they do not trouble the conscience at all. Why
then are the hearts of the simple troubled, and what has made the habit
of the monks detestable to your judgment, which most of them wear in
holy faith in Christ? Unfortunately, abuses creep into almost all human
practices, and rare are the people who measure everything by faith;
nevertheless, there are some; therefore, one must not reject the essence
of a thing because of an accidental flaw found in some. Everywhere you
reject all vows, though you have good reason in very few, perhaps in
only one. Therefore, dearest friend, I besiege you with petitions,
remember the little ones and do not trouble the timid consciences. I beg
you, do not condemn what is neutral and can stand with sincere faith.
But in those things which are contrary to faith, cry out, do not desist.
We owe a lot to you, dear Martin, who led us back from the swine
droppings to the pasture of life, to the words of salvation. May the
Lord Jesus prosper us so that we may finally live the gospel which we
now hear with our ears, which many have in their mouths, since I see
that innumerable others misuse the gospel for the freedom of the flesh.
But the Spirit blows where it wills \[John 3:8\]; we owe you thanks
because you have planted and watered, and leave the glory to God, to
whom alone we attribute the power to make God\'s children. I have
written enough, but God wanted me to talk to you for just one hour and
reveal to you the secrets of my heart. I commend to you, my dear
brother, the one whom you see before your eyes, the bearer of the
present letter, 5) that you make him your disciple by your effort and by
your influence, that he receive the Master\'s Bard as soon as possible
and be sent back to me. I certainly hope that he will produce good fruit
and bring honor to the University of Wittenberg. My unworthy requests
may be somewhat valid with you, who was formerly a forerunner of the
holy evangelical doctrine.

5\) Georg Führer. He received his master\'s degree on April 30, 1524.
Köstlin, \"die Baccalaurei\" 2c., II, 18 f.

**608**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 723. 724. 725.

**609**

and, as I still do today, hated the Babylonian captivity. Farewell and
greet Philip, Amsdorf, Doctor Hieronymus \[Schurf\] and the other very
dear friends. Given at Salzburg, on the first of April, 1524.

**No. 724.**

(Wittenberg.) (April 4) 1) 1524.

To Spalatin.

Luther advises those whose conscience commands them to partake of the
Lord\'s Supper in both forms, but who dare not do so for fear, to rather
not take it at all. He wants to write against the canonization of Benno.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 195. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 240 d; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 507 (dated May; the postscript in De Wette does not belong
here, but to the end of September) and in Erl. German in Walch, Vol.
XXI, 923.

To the dear man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the faithful and fair ecclesiastics
of the Saxon court, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Thus I advise others and at all times: If someone,
through the word of God, has received the conscience concern that he
cannot take one form alone, and yet his faith is so weak that he does
not dare to take both forms for fear of men, then he should for the time
being abstain from the sacrament altogether, since there is no danger
involved if one has left the whole sacrament pending. 2)

You courtiers know better than we how to ridicule those antics about the
canonization of Benno, since you are clever and well-versed in how to
politely reject such tempters. 3)

I\) This date is derived from Melanchthon\'s letter to Spalatin, *Corp.
ref.*

2\) The foregoing was translated into German by Spalatin, probably for
the Elector, because of whom this question will be asked (Köstlin, M.
Luther \[3Z, Vol. I, p. 637). Burkhardt, p. 70, reports this translation
as a \"concern of Luther, Melanchthon and Bugenhagen freely imposed by
Spalatin\". Spalatin\'s manuscript is in the Weimar archives.

3\) The canonization of Bishop Benno of Meissen, who died in 1106 or
1107, had taken place in May 1523 by Hadrian VI, and on June 14, 1524,
the solemn elevation of the bones was to take place, for which letters
of invitation were sent both by Duke Georg and by the Bishop of Meissen,
also to the princes of the Electorate of Saxony, with the request that
the placates (*cedulas*), in which the bishop had died in 1106 or 1107,
should be made available.

However, it seems to me that it is not in the prince\'s power to do what
is demanded, especially at this time and with such kind and minded
people, since not even the emperor and the empire, not even Duke George
himself has been able or is able to do this in his country. For I
myself, as soon as I learn that the nonsensical note has been posted,
will not let myself be prevented from attacking these temptations of
Satan for the sake of warning in a small published paper. May they
therefore post it, it is certain that an edict alone cannot prevent them
\[the posters\] from being attacked with invective, and even hardly by
an armed crew, which stands guard without interruption day and night by
the note. I have nothing else. Carlstadt, who was summoned by the
university, is said to have arrived at Wittenberg on Saturday 4); I have
not yet seen the man. Fare well in the Lord. 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 725.**

Wittenberg. April 5, 1524.

To Duke John of Saxony.

Luther sends Johann Grau, formerly a priest at Cranach, to preach in
Weimar. He asks for an escort letter for a priest who has been chased
away.

Manuscript in the *Suppellexx epistollica Uffenbachiii et Wolfiorum*,
Vol. 92, Bl. 71 in the Stadtbibliothek of Hamburg (mitgetheilt von A.
von Dommer). Printed in the Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 318.

To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord Johans, Duke of
Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious
lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! On
E. F. G.\'s writing, I have diligently

to have the pious Christians invited to the upcoming festival pinned to
the church doors in Wittenberg, Weimar, Eisenach, Zwickau and Torgau. In
reference to this, Luther published the writing: \"Wider den neuen
Abgott und alten Teufel, der zu Meißen soll erhaben werden.\" St. Louis
edition, vol. XV, 2323.

4\) April 2; he was negotiated with on April 4. See St. Louis edition,
vol. XX, inset, p. 19b.

**610** Letters from the year 1524. No. 725 to 728. **611**

that he Johann Groe, 1) formerly pastor of Cranach, expelled by the
bishop of Bamberg, because he has taken a virgin, pious, chaste child,
with the will and knowledge of her parents, to marriage, shall within a
fortnight be employed in Weimar to take care of the preaching ministry.
For he is almost a reasonable, calm, quiet man, has now been with us for
two years, and has lived with his wife in all discipline and honor, so
that I hope E. F. G. will take a liking to him, and that he will be dear
and valuable to everyone. I have also asked Wolfgang Stein to obtain a
letter of safe conduct from E. F. G. for a poor priest under E. F. G.\'s
rule at Arnbach. 2) I humbly request that E. F. G. graciously listen to
my request and graciously grant the poor man such safe conduct for the
sake of the poor little children that his wife had to leave behind. This
will be known to Christ, which grace and strength be with E. F. G.
forever, Amen. At Wittenberg, on Tuesday after Quasimodogeniti \[April
5\] 1524.

subservient Martinus Luther.

**No. 72\".**

Wittenberg. Around April 15, 1524. 3)

**To Erasmus in Basel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1596.

**No. 727.**

Wittenberg. Around April 15, 1524.

**To Oekolampad in Basel.**

Luther reports that he wrote to Erasmus because he wanted Frjeden. He
expresses his joy about a mandate issued by the local council.

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 1845; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 501 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 323. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 890.

1\) Compare No. 712 and No. 539.

2\) \"the Schwarzburg village of Arnsbach, which was under Saxon
sovereignty; Count Günther von Schwarzburg was hostile to the
Reformation\". (Erl. Briefw.)

3\) This date results from the fact that Luther gave this letter to
Joachim Camerarius, who accompanied Melanchthon on his journey to his
home town of Breiten, and left Wittenberg with him on April 16.

Grace and peace! I have nothing, dearest brother, which I could write; I
only wanted to greet you and command myself into your prayer; but it
will all be reported by present Joachim, who is not the least bit of us.
I do not know whether Philip will also come to you with him5) , which I
would like to do. I have written to Erasmus wishing peace and harmony
and an end to this great tragedy, to which I also ask you to contribute
if you are able. There has been enough fighting, there has been enough
ill-will on both sides; at last Christ is due the place, and Satan will
give way to the Holy Spirit. I like excellently the mandate of the
council of Basel against the vicar of the bishop and the magistri
nostri. 6) Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. Wittenberg, Anno 1524,
Martin Luther.

**No. 728.**

(Wittenberg.) Around April 15, 1524.

**To Jakob Strauß.**

Here, Luther passes the same judgment on Strauß\'s doctrine of the
purchase of interest as he had already pronounced against Chancellor
Brück on Oct. 18, 1523.

Manuscript at Gotha in Cod. 185 and in *Cod*. *chart.* 451. Printed by
Schütze, vol. II, p. 55; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 502 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 324.

To the highly venerable man, Mr. Jakob Strauß, servant of Christ at the
Word of God in Eisenach, his brother who is exceedingly dear to the
Lord.

Grace and peace. My dear Jacob who is to be revered in Christ! That the
Evan

4\) Camerarius.

5\) Here Aurifaber has the misprint: *cum reo nos* instead of: *cum eo
vos accedatt*. After that Walch translated: \"with the guilty (or
accused) comes to us\".

6\) William Farel had come to Basel as a refugee from France and had
found shelter with Oekolampad. He had asked the rector of the university
to be allowed to debate 13 theses, but was refused, and the episcopal
vicarius, Heinrich von Schönau, forbade the clergy and students to
attend the disputation, which the magistrate had already allowed. On the
other hand, the city council issued a mandate on February 14, 1524
(according to De Wette), in which the clergy was ordered to attend the
disputation under threat of punishment.

7\) Melanchthon negotiated with Strauss on April 22. Luther probably
gave him this letter when he left.

**612** Letters from the year 1524. no. 728. 729. 730. 613

I hear the gospel taught by you, and believe it, and rejoice in it. But
I also wish you luck in this, that you condemn the interest of
redemption, as I also have condemned it. But this one thing thou dost
add of thine own, that thou dost command those who make such
\[interest\] not to pay it, uno making them guilty of usury if they make
or pay this illicit interest, as people who consent to usury. This is
not gospel, nor have we ever taught it. For on the same ground it will
follow that he who takes the skirt, or strikes the cheek, is not to be
let off the cloak, and that one must not suffer the wrong. We hold with
the Gospel that this interest is unlawful, but that it is not in the
power of the common man to set it aside and declare it null and void.
For this is the duty of the princes who wield the sword. For the common
people it is enough, since they know it is illegal, that 1) they protest
that they are paying an unreasonable demand to the one who demands it.
They must therefore offer it, however unreasonably they may demand it;
they are sufficiently secure in conscience if they say that they suffer
the unreasonableness, but do not agree. I would like you to stand thus
in the matter; if you do not stand thus, we must necessarily stand
against you. Now farewell and pray for me, and may the Lord keep you in
his grace. Greetings to your wife. Yours, Mart. Luther.

**No. 729.**

Wittenberg. April 24, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther supports the proposals to be made by Jonas concerning the
maintenance of the resigned monks and the abolition of the papist
customs in the All Saints\' Monastery, as well as Bressen\'s debt to the
monastery and Leimbach\'s trade.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 169 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 188. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 219b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 503 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 326. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 898.

To the servant of Christ, M. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at court, his
brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace! The provost Jonas comes to you to prophesy good things;
2) I do not know whether he will obtain them. I have also written before
that it would be good and godly to allow those poor people to enjoy this
income for their living, who have learned no other business and have
ignorantly fallen into these abominations. I am truly displeased that
the caretakers of our Bethaven do not want to change anything, even
though they know and confess that it is exceedingly ungodly, and also
realize that the prince is hypocritical if they do not realize that he
even insists on it and demands it; and so they knowingly rage most
horribly against their conscience. To these grievances, you take counsel
with Jonas, if you are able.

By the way, I would like to know in the name of Prior 3) whether the
Prince has written to Bressen (as you wrote the other day) and given him
his own order to pay us the money. We have not yet received or heard
anything, and the debts are weighing us down and becoming more
burdensome by the day. I will indeed finally be forced to seek my
livelihood in another way.

I cannot be free of Leimbach\'s matter; I will soon come and plague the
prince with it. Farewell. On Sunday Cantate \[April 24\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 730.**

(Wittenberg.) April 25, 1524.

**To Jakob Strauß in Eisenach.**

About usury, whether it should be offered. Luther asks him to promote
the instruction of the youth; he sends groats and complains about his
overabundance with business.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 451, p. 64. Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p.
56; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 505 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 327.
Partly in German, as a letter to Chancellor Brück, in Oct. 1523, in the

1\) Instead of *et*. [ut]{.underline} will be read.

2\) *Praepositus* == *praepositurus*.

3\) Eberhard Brisger.

**614** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 730. 731. 615

Altenburg edition, vol. VIII, p. 944; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX,
p. 352; in Walch, vol. XXI, 77; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 426 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 221.

To the faithful servant of Christ, Mr. Jakob Strauß, evangelist of the
people of Eisenach, his extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! I would like, dearest friend, that you think no
differently of me than that I think the very best of you, even if such
things occurred that would be burdensome. For I am convinced that you
triumph above all things through the glory of the gospel. Furthermore,
as we are human beings, something of the carnal man must sometimes come
in between, but this cannot be such, nor should it be, that love does
not want to bear it; otherwise where would it remain \[Gal. 6:2\]:
\"Bear one another\'s burdens\"? The only thing I find fault with you
for these usurious interests is that you think that they should be
allowed to those who take them by force, but that they should not be
offered with one\'s own hand. I beseech thee, since this tyranny reigns
in all bodies, how shall he not yield to the adversary, and give them
with his own hand to him that commandeth to pay, who, as thou teachest,
should leave them to him that taketh them? I beg you to consider only
this. The great multitude abuses the gospel, it does not let itself be
governed by the gospel. Therefore, they must be left to the laws, so
that those who use freedom only to give room to the flesh may be of
service \[Gal. 5:13.f.\]. 1) By the way, I ask that you pursue the cause
of teaching the youth among your own. For I see that the gospel is
threatened with a very great fall through neglect of the education of
the youth. This matter is the most necessary of all. Greet Schalbe and
Scultetus in my name. I would have written to both of them, but it is
unbelievable with how great matters I am overwhelmed, so that I alone
can hardly cope with writing the letters. The whole world is beginning
to be on my back, so I wish either to die or to go away.

1\) The text in the German editions goes up to this point.

to be taken so that I am not completely overwhelmed. Greet your wife and
child, 2) and smile kindly at them in my name, and bear your illnesses
as the hand of God, as befits. Pray for me very miserable person and be
well. On the day of St. Marcus \[April 25\], which was neither
celebrated nor commemorated with procession, 1524.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 731.**

(Wittenberg.) April 25, 1524.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Luther wants the question about the confiscation of the monastery
property to be decided according to canon law.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 185, printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 60; in
De Wette, vol. II, p. 505 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 328.

To D. Gregorius Brück, jurist and chancellor.

Grace and peace! \"Let the priests do what the priests do. Let the
prince refer this matter to the papal jurisdiction, and let it be judged
according to the laws of this realm. They may, after all, be ungodly
owners and misuse this income in an ungodly manner; what is that to do
with the administrators of the \[common\] box 3)? If now the prince does
not want to push the matter away, let him pronounce judgment for Johann
\"Pfister\". 4) For \"Hans Kappe\", after he has separated himself from
the corporation of the wicked, does not have the right to keep their
goods and rights, or to take them with him. Also the

2\) *prolem*. Luther had been very unhappy about the choice of Stein\'s
wife, the \"old rich Vettel\", because she was not expected to have
offspring. (St. Louiser Ausg., Vol. XV, Anh., No. 123.) Here we see now
that Luther was probably wrongly informed about the Bejahrtheit, because
the \"offspring\" has adjusted itself very promptly, \'

3\) so here *cistarios* will have to be taken (compare St. Louiser
Ausg., vol. X, 956, § 6 ff.), not as \"Schösser\" (*quaestores*).

4\) Pfister, a resigned monk who later turned to study (*Album,* p.120:
*Johannes Phister Nurnbergen. June* 29, 1525) and became a priest in
Fürth; he served as cupbearer at Luther\'s wedding banquet and was also
present at the tarife of Luther\'s first son.

**616**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 731. 732. 733.

617

It is a fault of the administrators of the castes that they quarrel
against Paul \[1 Cor. 6:6\] because of the matters concerning the
maintenance, which they should let go, even if they had the right. I beg
you, my dear man, it is neither a pleasure nor an honor for me that
these things are attributed to the theologians by the legal scholars.
Otherwise the rights of the pope must not be attacked by ours, unless
the pope\'s rule is destroyed first. For where he does not rule, we may
of course use his bequeathed rights and goods, but not before. Say now
thanks to the Prince for what has been obtained by the previous letter,
and commend me to the illustrious G. S. (*illustri G. S.*). For I am
very busy. And you are well in the Lord with your own (*cum carne tua*).
On Monday after Cantate \[April 25\] 1524, your Martin Luther.

**No. 732.**

(Wittenberg.) April 26, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther does not want to write against Emser, but leaves him to the
judgment of God.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
16. Handwritten in the Franciscaneum at Zerbst, Ns. 26, fol. 14 and in
the Zwickau Rathsschulbibliothek. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. I, p. 262 b
(under the year 1520 with the note: \"Anders setzen diesen Brief in das
Jahr 1524\") and vol. II, p. 204 b; in De Wette, vol. I, p. 441 (under
the year 1520; he declares the date 1524 to be incorrect) and vol. VI,
p. 51; in Studien und Kritiken, 1835, p. 342 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 329 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 690 (with the wrong date: \"Den
andern Tag nach Martin 1520\") and ibiä. Col. 892.

To the in Christ highly venerable brother Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of
the church at Zwickau, also to his superior.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Nothing needs to be answered to the
Emser, 1) dearest

1\) Towards the end of the year 1523 Luther had sent out the writing:
\"Weise christliche Messe zu halten und zum Tisch GOttes zu gehen\"
(\"Wise Christian Mass to hold and to go to the table of God\") and
provided it with a dedication to Hausmann. In contrast, Emser wrote:
*Missae Christianorum contra Lutheranam Missandi formu*

*larn etc.*, which he provided with a note to Hausmann, datirt *ex
Dresda, prid. Kalend. Mart*. \[It is to this writing that this passage
will refer.

Nicolaus, because he is such a man, of whom Paul says \[Tit 3,10. f.\]:
He is perverse and condemned by his own judgment and to be avoided,
because he commits sin unto death \[1 John 5, 16.). A little more, and I
will pray against him that the Lord will pay him according to his works
\[2 Tim. 4:14\], for it is better that he die than that he continue to
blaspheme Christ against his conscience. Therefore let him go; all too
soon this wretched man will be sufficiently subdued. 2) But you also
refrain from praying for him. Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. The
next day after Marci \[April 26\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 733.**

(Wittenberg.) April 29, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

About the collection of Bressen\'s debt to the monastery. Luther sends
Staupitzen\'s letter to Spalatin (No. 723).

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, lob 246. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 33; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
506 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 330. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
893.

To the servant of Christ and faithful steward of the mysteries of God,
Mr. Georg Spalatin, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! The prior sends this Johann Lufft, the printer, my dear
Spalatin, as the attorney or resident of our interest at Bressen.
Therefore, see to it that he is finally sent, if it must be so, equipped
with letters from the prince, to the castle of Colditz, so that we
finally receive ours, so that we are relieved of the daily increasing
debts. Create, therefore, that what has been promised so often may one
day be fulfilled by deed. I am sending the letter of D. Staupitz, who
has finally begun to blossom again, greeting and addressing us after so
long a silence and so many letters addressed to him. Fare well in the
Lord and pray for me. Wittenberg, April 29, 1524.

Martin Luther.

2\) Already on Nov. 8, 1527, Emser died completely unconscious, at the
age of 50. (Waldau, \"Emser,\" p. 21.)

**618**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 734. 735. 736.

619

**No. 734.**

(Wittenberg.) (April 1524.) 1)

**To the knight Hans Schott.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 712.

**No. 735.**

Wittenberg. May 2, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends the Mosaic laws on the punishment for thieves and
gives his advice on an intended marriage.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 186. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 204; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 508 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 333. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 894. One part of this letter, the second paragraph, is printed
in German as a special concern in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 196
b; in the Altenburger, vol. II, p. 864; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p.
433; in Walch, vol. X, 801, also in the St. Louiser Ausg, Vol. X, 674
and in the Erlanger Ausg., Vol. 64, p. 281.

To M. Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the court of Saxony, his
\[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! The punishment for the thieves no one has
established in a cheaper way than the one who created everything, God,
who also decreed this to his people among other civil laws, Ex. 22, that
from the thief should be restored double, fourfold, fivefold, according
to the kind of theft, but he should die if he had stolen a man; if he
had nothing \[to restore\], he should be sold. This law is also approved
by Solomon in Proverbs \[Cap. 6, 31. f.\], since he says that a thief
can sell his goods and redeem himself, but an adulterer brings his life
to ruin. God would have this law accepted again.

About your friend\'s marriage this is my opinion: The soul is more than
the body, and the spirit greater than the belly; since now here his soul
is in danger, but there alone the

1\) De Wette has for this letter the time determination: \"in May\"; the
Erl. Briefw. on the other hand: \"April 1524\" and justifies this by the
fact that Melanchthon on April 11 to Spalatin (*Corp. Ref. ,* I, 653)
treats the same question in a letter and says at the end: \"But I assume
that D. Martinus will interpret all this amply.\"

If the belly of his friends, you see what he must choose first: namely,
that he hastens to take a wife, and first counsel his soul; after that
he may have something left, by which he may also help the belly and the
need of those people. This he may do; if not, let him command her to
God, and win his soul, and do not tempt the Lord in this.

I have not yet answered Staupitz. However, I hear that tremendous
threats are being concocted at Nuremberg. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, May 2, 1524 Martin Luther.

**No. 736.**

Wittenberg. May 6, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

Luther expresses his joy that the Gospel is coming to dominion in
Strasbourg; he reports of its progress in Germany, but also of a new
sect that has arisen.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 233; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 509 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. IV, p. 334. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 895.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Since I had nothing, my dearest Gerbel,
which I could write, it suited me well that, since this letter carrier
came to me in the litter, I greeted you and asked you that you greet all
brothers and sisters in the Lord, admonish them and recommend me to
their prayers. For I hear that the word of God has almost come to rule
among you; 2) at least among us, the more it is forbidden, the more it
runs far and wide. It already has Magdeburg and Bremen in its
possession, and soon it will move to Brunswick, as I hope, especially
since that Prince Heinrich, who before was extremely hostile, is now
becoming a different man. I believe that our Lonicer 3) has received my
letter, and I hear that he has received a new master; may the Lord not
abandon him. But Satan is setting up a sect among us in another place,
which accepts neither the papists nor ours. They boast that they are
driven by pure spirits.

2\) Only one church was still in papist hands.

3\) Joh. Lonicer was corrector first with Joh. Knobloch, then with Wolf
Köpfel in Strasbourg; later pastor at Marburg.

1524\. no. 736. 737. 621

**620** Letters from the year

without the testimony of the Holy Scriptures. From this you can see that
our word is in truth the word of God, since it is already plagued not
only with violence but also with new heresies. May you now always be
well with your nipple, and greet all in the Lord. Wittenberg, the sixth
of May 1524, Martin Luther.

**No. 737.**

Wittenberg. May 11, 1524.

**To Spalatin in Lothan. 1)**

Lnther, recommends Johann Apel as successor to the late D. Schwertfeger.
News about the progress of the Evangelii.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 168 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 187. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 204b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 510 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
IV, p. 340. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 896.

To the faithful servant of God, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the
Court of Saxony, his \[friend\^ in the Lord.

Grace and peace! D. Schwertfeger, the dear man, passed away yesterday in
a gentle death and sleeps in the Lord, my dear Spalatin. Now you know
that Johann Apel 2) is here, who is also otherwise recommended to the
prince, who could be put in his place for the lection, and he wishes it.
But why should it be necessary to recommend him to you, since you know
the man and know that he is not only suitable for this lecture, but also
godly and Christian? Not to mention how he has been plagued up to now by
damage to his property and insult to his good name, and spends his life
almost in the greatest want, and is oppressed by poverty in his house.
Therefore, you see how godly you will make your effort when you
recommend him to the prince, and become the cause that his
recommendation and the good hope given to him before will be refreshed.
If now his wife should be in the way,3) that

1\) According to Spalatin\'s letter to Mutian of May 9, he was in Lochau
at that time.

2\) Compare St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIV, 258, Note.

3\) She had been a nun, which is why the Elector might have had
reservations. ,

he- could not be accepted publicly, he could teach in the name of
another, but that the salary would be paid secretly. But what is the use
of your continuing to pretend, since they \[the papists\] will not let
you go uncharged, and can do so justly, because you cherish heretics.

The people of Bremen are making progress in the word, so that they have
appointed our Jacob of Ypres 4) as evangelist at the second church. Both
dukes of Mecklenburg desire evangelists, the one through Hans Löser, the
other through the prior at Sternberg, 5) Duke Heinrich of Brunswick, as
Cordus Rutius testifies, begins to accept the gospel by calling someone
of our order from Helmstädt as preacher. After the council of Brunswick
had rejected him, he can decree in his house in Brunswick,6) that he
should preach. For he praises his brother Wilhelm, who is a prisoner, 7)
nevertheless as very Christian. The disputation of Johann Hess 8) at
Breslau proceeded happily, since the so many envoys of the kings and the
artifices of the bishop resisted in vain.

4\) Provost; he was employed at the Liebfrauenkirche.

5\) Joh. Steenwyck. - Cordus Rutius is the well-known poet Euricius
Cordus. However, the favorable circumstances changed very quickly in
Brunswick, for already on June 24 he wrote to Lang that the duke
suspected him of being a Martinian and that the council was hostile to
the Evangelio. It was not until 1528 that the pressure of the guilds
opened the gates to the Gospel.

6\) This passage offers, since in the original *constituat* should
stand, quite special difficulties, on the one hand by the *consecutio
temporum: recusasset* - *constituat,* on the other hand by the sense,
which can be with this reading hardly another, than that Henry may order
the preacher appointed by him to the chaplain for his imprisoned
brother. Aurifaber and De Wette read: *constituit*. Then the sense would
be: the appointed preacher has decided to preach in his house. But then
the following does not follow the preceding.

7\) Wilhelm, the younger brother of Henry of Brunswick, was imprisoned
by the latter in 1523 because he demanded the division of the country
and co-government. He remained in captivity for twelve years.

8\) The disputation took place on April 20-23 on the theses put forward
by Hess, which dealt with the word of God, the highest priesthood of
Jesus Christ and marriage. The theses are printed in Kapp, Nachlese,
Vol. II, p. 606.

**622** Letters from the year 1524. no. 737. 738. 623

set. 1) This is the news. Fare well in the Lord and do not forget the
Apel. 2) May 11, 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 738.**

Wittenberg. May 25, 1524.

**To Capito in Strasbourg.**

Luther is annoyed that the rumor is spread that there is a great discord
between him and the Strasbourg theologians, which probably comes from
the fact that his letter to Capito (No. 447) was printed. He rejoices
over the marriage of the priests and the departure of the monks and nuns
from the monasteries.

In the *Bibl. of Bremen. Class*. IV, fase. 5, p. 911; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 98; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 522 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 347. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 899.

Grace and peace in the Lord! If it were not for your constant assertion,
my dear Fabricius, and Bucer\'s with you, that there are some people who
say that we condemn what you do, and that we are in complete
disagreement, I would have been ready to interpret this to the weakness
of your suspicion because of our long silence, since I heard the same
thing said by the brethren who traveled here to us barely three days
ago, when I received this letter of yours. And although Christ thus
reigns among you, and you have no harm to fear, whether we do not agree
with one another, or whether we condemn what is yours, yet nothing is
more vexatious to me than to hear our disunity so highly exalted, while
there is the highest unity and sincere and perfect unity of spirit.
Since I tend to cover up and conceal as much as I can, if some of our
people deviate from us in truth (as many I do not know what kind of
spirit is already doing), how much less can I suffer this annoyance and
this kind of injustice against Christian unity and spiritual peace.
Therefore

1\) In the original resistente; in the older editions: *resistentibus.*

2\) Apel received the position with an annual salary of 50 guilders, for
which he had to give the lectures in *Digest. vet.*; in addition, he
took over the lecture on canon law for Jonas, for which the latter gave
him 20 guilders.

If I were not too busy, I would not refrain from testifying in a public
writing both about the lie of those ear-blowers and about our sincere
fellowship in Christian matters.

I like extraordinarily the marriages of the priests 3) and the monks and
the nuns with you; I like the appeal of the married against the bishop
of Satan; 4) I like those who are called to the parishes. 5) What shall
I say? After that I have heard nothing but such things, by which I have
been highly pleased with you. Continue, and let your right hand also
teach you marvelous things, and let the nations submit to you in the
midst of the king\'s enemies \[Ps. 45:5 ff\]. Yes, I think that in these
years enough has been given to the weak. Henceforth, because they harden
more and more day by day, everything must be acted and spoken of in the
freest way. For I, too, will begin at last to cast off the habit which I
have hitherto retained for the strengthening of the weak and the mockery
of the pope. 6) We will let the dead bury their dead \[Matth. 8, 22.\],
they are blind and blind guides \[Matth. 15, 14\].

I believe, however, that this quite trivial rumor of our discord arose
from my letter to you, which has already been printed so many times and
has now also been translated into German. This almost deters me from
writing letters, since I see that they are thus dragged to the presses
against my will, although one may and must write many things more freely
among friends than is advisable to spread throughout the world.

3\) In the last months of 1523 Martin Enderlin, Anton Firn and Matthis
Zell had married; in January 1524 Wolfgang Schultheiß (an Augustinian
monk), Conrad Spatzinger, Lonicer, Alexander von Villingen (a
Johanniter) and Lucas Hackfurt (Bathodius) 2c. Capito did not marry
until August I.

4\) Compare Nö. 721 and 722.

5\) Namely Bucer to St. Aurelien, Theobald Schwarz (Nigri) to Old St.
Peter and Capito to Young St. Peter, all around Easter 1524.

6\) Already in 1523, Luther no longer wore the habit in his home, but
ordinary clothing, but publicly he took off the monk\'s habit only in
1524. On October 9, he preached for the first time without it; then only
one more time in it on the morning of the following Sunday (Oct. 16), in
the afternoon without it (Köstlin, M. Luther \[3.\], Vol. I, p. 597 f.).

**624**

. Letters from the year 1524. No. 738. 739.

625

But you too were then another man and a servant of the court, but now
you are Christ\'s freedman and a servant of the gospel, entirely mine,
and I entirely yours. Greet me in Christ M. Bucer together with his wife
and children, and all new husbands, especially the Hedio. 1) Our church
greets your church. May grace be with you. Wittenberg, 1524, on the day
of Urban \[May 25\].

Martin Luther.

Excuse me for not answering Bucer and the others; I will write at
another time when I am freer and have more leisure.

**No. 739.**

Wittenberg. June 2, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

About the divorce case presented in No. 726. About the filling of the
pastorate in Heimchen, Luther wishes the termination of the Leimbach
affair.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 170 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 188. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 220 (incomplete) ; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 523 (incomplete;
the addition in Burkhardt, p. 71) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 349.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 903 (incomplete).

The man to be revered in the Lord, Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the
court of Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Above all, I ask you to restore my good
standing with the prince through these letters, which bear witness,
since it has been somewhat injured by the rash rescript of our
Wittenberg council, since they indicated to the prince that he had not
been properly reported on the divorce case between Michael Hancke and
his wife. Perhaps they did not know that the report had been made by me,
therefore they dared it all the more. For in the presence of the
Schösser and Gregorius,2) the Mitcommissarius, I convinced them that my
report was correct, and they promised that they would yield to my
judgment as to what could be learned from the Schösser and Gregorius.

1\) Hedio did not hold a wedding until May 30.

2\) Gregor Burger.

I do not know whether I am lying or not. But I do not want them to be
blamed as if they had deceived the prince with a lie. Perhaps, as we are
human beings and are always driven by Satan, they have been overtaken by
this error, and for this reason, in a spirit of prudence, they have
considered that we also suffer our punishments in hell,3) each one his
own, and no one is pure from filth.

I have dealt with Veit Jerig, 4) the guardian; he is willing to take
over the office of a pastor in Heimchen, as he is also worthy and
suitable, if he is called and elected. I will therefore work with the
mayor in Düben (*Didon*) so that he and the citizens desire and call
him. You, too, should intercede with the prince so that he will be
allowed and appointed. 5) Thirdly, the Leimbach have again been to me
with very great complaints. And that I say what I have heard: the lapel
which they have given to the prince, the copy of which you have sent me
by order of the prince, 6) is given in such a way that they should
obtain the fief and the right of possession in this way. By the way,
they were promised at the same time that after the handing over of the
reverse a settlement should take place, and they should also be
satisfied, I do not know with how large a sum. But this has been
postponed until today and has not been fulfilled. This they present with
so great a semblance that they have made the matter probable to me. In
addition, they show the letters of Frederick Thun, which say more or
less the same thing. Then one senses something of violence and coercion
in the lapel itself, as if it had been wrung from \[them\] by the
prince. Therefore, I ask you to make an effort that \[finally\] both the
prince and I are freed from this matter. I do not like to burden the
prince with these monstrosities, since I have no pleasure in them, and
they are not part of my office, and yet

3\) *Virg. Aeneid, lib. VI, 743: Quisque suos patmur manes*.

4\) Compare No. 705.

5\) The following to the end is missing in the above issues.

6\) Compare No. 622, Supplement.

**626** Letters from the year 1524. No. 739 to 742. **627**

I cannot withdraw from them, since they lament, ask and sigh so much.
Fare well in the Lord. Wittenberg, June 2, 1524

Martin Luther.

**No. 740.**

Wittenberg. June 15, 1524.

**To Capito in Strasbourg.**

About tithes, which are good and to be kept; the re-purchasable interest
should be abolished.

Printed in *Bibl. Brem. Cl. I V, fasc*. V, p. 913; in *Strobel-Ranner*,
p. 100; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 524 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p.
351. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 902.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Our Philip reminded me, my dear Fabricius,
that I would like to open my opinion about the tithes 1) to you, since
one hears that the common people there want to refuse them. Indeed,
tithes seem to me to be by far the most just of all, since they have
existed through divine testimony and almost from the beginning of the
world, and also the cheapest, since they increase and decrease only as
much as the earth bears through the blessing of the Lord. Therefore,
every effort must be made to keep the tithes intact, so that there is
something to pay the authorities and the princes. Rather, those who
fight against the tithes may be bent on abolishing the re-purchasable
interest and other such burdens that plague the whole world. And yet,
God wanted that after the abolition of all other interests, not only the
tithes, but also the ninths or eights would remain. Of the Egyptians
even the fifth was given \[Gen. 43:34.\], yet they lived. We cannot even
live on the tithes, so much do other customs and burdens rage. So I
stand and ask that you help others to do likewise, so that the mob may
not be allowed such licentiousness. Greetings to all, and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Wednesday after Barnabas \[June 15\] 1524.

1\) The gardeners in Strasbourg in particular refused to pay the
priestly tithe. In 1525, this dispute was settled amicably. Seidemann in
De Wette, vol. VI, p. 485, note 7, and others refer this passage to the
peasants of Hauenstein near Waldshut, who in May 1524 refused to pay the
serf dues to the abbot of St. Blaffen.

**No. 741.**

Wittenberg. June 15, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther asks him to intercede for a man with the mayors.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmann-Briefe, No.
17 (the postscript on a separate sheet). Handwritten in the
Franciscaneum at Zerbst, Ms. 26, iol. 14d. Printed in Schlitze, vol. II,
p. 62; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 106; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 572
(*Barbarae* instead of Barnabas, therefore wrongly dated: \"December
7\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 352. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1366.

To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church
at Zwickau.

Grace and peace! This man saw me and spoke to me as he wished. But since
he did not press me in his cause, even though I was willing, it pleased
him and me that you should act for him, if necessary, with the mayors,
so that they may do all they can according to their goodness. Farewell
and pray for me, a sinner. Wittenberg, Wednesday after Barnabas \[June
15\] 1524.

I have written to your brother Valentin before through others who
requested letters from me (*postulatores*). Greetings to Mr. Hermann
Mühlpfort.

**No. 742.**

Wittenberg. June 18, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends some new writings, including a letter to Duke John
Frederick for forwarding. Intercession for a captured barber.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 248. Printed by Buddeus, p. 34; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
518 (incorrectly dated: \"May 21\") and in Erl.Briefw., vol. IV, p. 353.
German by Walch, vol. XXI, 898.

To the servant of Christ, M. Georg Spalatin, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I send to you the Argnla, which is painted in its own
image and in a foreign one, 2) and the nonsensical writing

2\) This probably refers to a collection of Argula von Stauffen\'s
writings (a number of letters) published at the beginning of March 1524,
and a crude mockery of her written by a student from Ingolstadt, Johann
von Landshut.

**628**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 742 to 746.

629

One, 1) at the same time a letter to the younger prince. 2) The other
day, when you were here, I should have asked you for the barber \"Master
Hansen\", but I forgot, namely that you should help the prince to speed
up his cause. For it is not only the young man who is burdened by being
imprisoned for so long, but also the one who had him imprisoned, because
he is ordered by the council to feed him at his own expense. The matter
is known to the prince. Therefore do your duty. Be well and pray for me.
Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Saint Benno\'s Day \[June 18\] 3)
1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 743.**

Wittenberg. June 18, 1524.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Expert opinion on the validity of Mosaic rights; on the purchase of
interest and on spiritual goods to be confiscated in Eisenach. Lastly by
Carlstadt and Münzer.

From a copy in the Weimar Archives printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p.
35; in Walch, vol. XXI, 70; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 519 (with the wrong
date: \"May 21\") and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 244
(according to De Wette). In all these editions with the wrong address:
\"An den Churfürsten Friedrich.\" De Wette\'s remark with respect to the
first piece: \"on the validity of Mosaic rights,\" that it was hitherto
unprinted, is erroneous, for it is found in the Jenaer Allsgabe (1585),
vol. II, p. 464b and thereafter in the Altenburger, vol. II, p. 815; in
the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p. 351 and in Walch, vol. X, 402. -
Completely, this entire writing is found in the St. Louis edition, vol.
X, 354, but, just as in the Jena edition, without indication of the
addressee and with unresolved time determination. From this a wrong note
arose in ibid. Col. 912, in which the later letter of the duke (from
June 24) is listed as a request to Luther, whereas the earlier letter of
Luther to the duke (June 18) is listed as an answer to it. - Readings to
be improved: Col. 356, line 2 v. u. read: \"ob\'s\" instead of: als, and
line. I v. u.: \"GOtt\" instead of: gar.

1\) De Wette is mistaken in assuming that this is Emser\'s writing
\"Wider der zweier Pröbst zu Nürnberg falschen Grund und Ursachen\" 2c.,
because the writing against which Emser\'s is directed was published
only in October 1524. What is meant can only be either *Missae
Christianorum etc*. *assertlo* or the \"Answer to the blasphemous book
against Bishop Benno of Meissen\" 2c.

2\) The next following number.

3\) On June 16, the Benno celebration had taken place.

**No. 744.**

**Luther\'s concerns about Mosaic law.**

In the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 188, in Walch, vol. X, 402 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 355. The latter remarks: \"I find this concern
neither in Walch nor in De Wette.\"

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 356.

**No. 745.**

Weimar. 24. Jum 1524.

**Duke John Frederick of Saxony to Luther.**

Response to No. 743.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 352.

**No. 746.**

Wittenberg. July 4, 1524.

**To Joh. Busmann in Königsberg.**

Luther expresses his joy about the blessed effectiveness of Brismann. He
recommends to him the Specatus, who has been appointed by the Grand
Master, and asks that he, together with him and his colleagues, work to
ensure that the Grand Master follows his advice, namely to make his
principality a secular one, and to marry.

The original is in the Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg (very damaged).
Printed in Andr. Vogler\'s collection of letters, *Regiomonti* 1612, no.
2; in \"Erläutertes Preußen,\" vol. I (1724), p. 248; in *Acta
Borussica, tom*. I (1730), p. 793; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 101; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 525 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. I V, p. 358. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 904.

To the highly esteemed brother in Christ, Johann Brismann, the servant
of God and faithful servant at the word at Königsberg in Prussia.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your letter was exceedingly pleasant to me,
my dear Brismann, and filled our mouths with joy, because the Lord Jesus
thus promotes and strengthens his word with you. May He grant that it
may continue in this way until the end, until His \[last\] day, and
increase more and more, amen.

We also love you very much, because you make sure that nothing is done
by force and noise, but everything is done by the power of the Word
alone. May the Lord keep and increase this spirit in you and all others.

But there comes to you as a comrade D. Paul Speratus, who is called
there by the Grand Master. I recommend him to you from

**630** Letters from the year 1524. No. 746. 631

hearts. He is a worthy man and has suffered many things; from him you
will hear everything that goes on in these lands. Satan has awakened
prophets and sects among us, who finally go so far that they want to use
weapons and violence to spread their opinions; I see that we will have
to deal with them from now on. Carlstadt also remains the same as he has
been and keeps it himself with these people. People boast unbelievably
about their spirit, which they claim to have directly from God, almost
without Christ, so that it seems as if they only want to make Christ an
example for us and take away all sacraments together with Christ.

There is a rumor that the cruel edict of the emperor, which was passed
three years ago at Worms,1) that the Lutheran sect is to be completely
eradicated, is to be omitted, and some cities of the empire are in fear;
but Christ lives, who will also conquer and triumph.

By the way, when I first 2) spoke with Prince Albrecht, the Grand Master
2c., and he consulted me about his order rule, I persuaded him that he
should despise this foolish and confused rule, and take a wife, and make
Prussia a secular dominion, either a principality or a duchy. The same
thing meant and advised Philip after me. He smiled at that time, but
answered nothing. In the meantime, I see that the man liked the advice
and that he wishes this to be put into practice as soon as possible. But
this could be done most conveniently if the people of Prussia, together
with their great ones, were led to besiege him with requests that he
should undertake this very thing; then it would happen that he would
have a necessary and completely sufficient cause for the work he
desires. And for this, if I am not mistaken, Paul Speratus is also sent.
Seeing then that a door is opened for the great and marvelous work of
the Lord, by which also other poor bishops may be made an example.

1\) This will be Edict No. 744 in the 15th volume of our edition.

2\) on November 29, 1523, when Albrecht visited Luthern. (Tschackert,
Preuß. Refgesch.)

who would like to be first and who do not dare to be first without an
example: You see, of course, that it is your duty, together with
Speratus and Amandus 3) and the other servants of the word, to guide and
encourage the people to first call upon the hand of God, so that instead
of this abominable principality, which is a kind of hermaphrodite,
Instead of this abominable principality, which is a kind of
hermaphrodite, neither layman nor monk (*religiosus* == religious), they
wish and desire a principality of a right form, and, tired of
fornication, urge the Master of the Order with common and united pleas
that he take a lawful wife and make a right dominion out of this
abomination.

This persuasion of the people must, however, so that it is not too
sudden and violent, first be attacked by suggesting and questioning, as
with an established disputation sentence (*themate*), namely: after they
see that this order is an abominable hypocrisy, it would be nice if the
master of the order took a wife, and likewise the other lords, and with
the consent of the people made the country a secular one. But after they
had discussed and talked a little about this matter (*themate*), and the
minds seemed to incline to this side, then the matter would be publicly
pursued and promoted with ample reasons. I wish that the Bishop of
Samland would have the desire to do the same, but since here one must
proceed with caution, it would seem safer that he give himself the
appearance of not yet having formed a judgment about the matter. 4)
Finally, however, if

3\) Johann Amandus, a Westphalian, had earlier come to Prussia as a
preacher of indulgences; later he appears as a preacher of the gospel in
Holstein, comes to Wittenberg chased out from there and, recommended by
Luther, is sent to Königsberg in the fall of 1523 by Friedrich von
Heideck. From there he was expelled because of his stormy nature (he was
of Carlstadt\'s kind) in 1524. Then for a short time in Danzig, then in
Stolpe, from where he had to flee because of iconoclasm; then again
temporarily in Wittenberg, from where he came to Stettin and was
imprisoned by the Catholic Duke George of Pomerania. Through Luther\'s
use by the Elector he was freed again (see Luther\'s letter of April 26,
1526), then became a preacher in Goslar, where he died in 1530, also
often hostile.

4\) In the next period, among others, the Comthur of Neydberg, Friedrich
von Waldburg, and the Bishop of Samland, Georg von Polenz, took part in
the advisory board.

**632**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 746. 747. 748.

633

the people agrees, and is overcome by the reasons, also its confirmation
would follow. But Christ will give you mouth and wisdom in all these
things, and understanding and insight to the people, so that you will be
better instructed by the matter itself than by my precepts as to how to
act here.

I am editing the notes to your fifth book of Moses, attributed and
dedicated to the Bishop of Samland, but being overwhelmed with business,
I am slow in advancing the work. Commit me faithfully to his sincere
grace and greet Amandus and all the brothers in the Lord. Live and
prosper in Christ. Greetings to you from Philip and our prior, whom
Satan recently tried to kill in the marketplace by hurling a tile from
the roof, but the Lord surely preserved him in a miraculous way. One
hears nothing yet from your treasure vulture. 2) Murnar with his own has
taken off his habit and has left the monastery with all of them, since
he has become, as some say, *canonicus regularis,* or one who strives
for a position in the monastery, but he still remains the same Murnar
that he was.

Be mindful, my dear Brismann, that you work faithfully for the
establishment of boys\' schools. For here Satan feels that he is being
attacked, since he fears that the children will be snatched from him,
and resists everywhere with incredible art. Therefore, I recommend to
you this young man Johann Haddamir, 3) who is capable of taking care of
these things. Wittenberg, Monday after the Visitation of the Virgin Mary
\[July 4\] 1524. Martin Luther.

**No. 74 7.**

Wittenberg. July 6, 1524.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

Luther asks him to assist Justus Jonas in his affairs. He reports
Nesen\'s death.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 309; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 528 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 362. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 907.

1\) St. Louis edition, Vol. Ill, 1370. They did not appear until 1525.

2\) Compare No. 705 - Murnar was in Strasbourg at the time.

3\) Here recommended by Luther as a school teacher, he became preacher
at Saalfeld in East Prussia in 1534, where he died in 1554.

Jonas is coming to you, my dear Lang, while his wife is left here, close
to her confinement, in order to take care of the sick brother, then also
to take care of his own affairs. Therefore, he asks, and I ask, that you
faithfully assist him in the matters in which he may be in need of you,
so that he may be ready the sooner and be able to return home. You, who
are now out of danger of poverty, know what it means to be in want or in
need of money; perhaps Jonah also suffers from this disease, because he
has taken a wife and has a household. As we now have confidence that you
will do, so we pray that you may do.

William\'s Nesen perished miserably in the water, to our great sorrow
and to the great joy of the enemies, perhaps also to even greater
blasphemy of our Gospel and the name of Christ. Satan would almost have
killed our prior, too, if he had not been preserved by a glorious
miracle. The Lord is near and far at the same time. Farewell and greet
your rib. Wittenberg, Wednesday after the Visitation \[July 6\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 748.**

Wittenberg. July 8, 1524.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Luther and Hieronymus Schürf ask that three canonists, who had given up
their prebends, be provided from them, but that the income of the
prebends be assigned to the university.

From a copy in the archives at Weimar in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 36;
in De Wette, vol. II, p. 529; in Walch, vol. XXI, 73 and in the Erlanger
Ausg., vol. 53, p. 247.

To the most illustrious, highborn F. and H., H. Friedrich, Duke z. S.,
Elector 2c., L. in Th. and M. z. M., our most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, H. F., G. H.! Now have E. C. F.
G.

4\) In the editions: *Georgius*, but his name was Wilhelm. See St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, 416, § 9. Probably Luther only wrote \"G.\", which
Aurifaber wrongly resolved by *Georgius* instead of *Guilelmus*. -

Nesen drowned on July 5 around dusk during a trip on the Elbe River
because the barge hit a hidden log.

**634** Letters from the year 1524, No. 748, 749, 750 . **635**

the three prebends of the three new canonries, given up by them, home
again. But because they did this out of comforting confidence that
C.F.G. would take such willing work in grace and let them enjoy it, so
that they would not bring vain harm and disgrace from it, we are
inspired by some, and also moved out of Christian duty ourselves, to ask
C.F.G. for these canons. C. F. G. for the same canonries, that E. C. F.
G. either from the same prebends and pensions, or shall, as E. C. F. G.
knows how to mean, graciously provide for them. Also, because C. F. G.
himself sees how schools and lessons are being allowed to disintegrate
all over the world, and there is no one to take care of the arts, to the
great ruin not only of the German country, but also of the whole of
common Christendom, and God has sent E. C. F. G. a letter from the Holy
Father. C. F. G. this grace before other princes, that it has almost
alone grace and favor to preserve the Studia, which should be the
noblest work of all princes: we humbly request and urge once again, E.
C. F. G. may you have a gracious understanding of this university and
direct the prebendary pension, which now has so much to do to praise God
and to raise the dear youth, to proper lessons, so that this few
Christian schools may remain a salutary example in the Schwang and the
world, so that the gift of God, E. C. F. G. so mercifully given, may be
the more richly put to work and bear fruit, for which it has been given,
that E. C. F. G. may be praised before God and the world as father and
patron of the poor abandoned youth in German lands. This Christ will
undoubtedly recognize more abundantly with temporal and eternal grace,
which E. C. F. G. may mercifully bestow upon him, Amen. At Wittenberg,
on Friday Kiliani 1524.

E. C. F. G.

understated

Hieronymus Schürf and Mart. Luther.

**No. 749.**

Colditz. July 10, 1524.

**Prince Frederick to Luther and Hieronymus Schürf.**

(Regest.)

The Elector rejects the request made in the previous number with regard
to the three canons, because in accepting the office, even though it was
based on

mcrksam made, would have been obliged. He had committed the canons to
read mass, but they did not do so afterwards. With regard to the
transfer of the income of the prebendaries to the university, he is not
yet decided; but if it should happen and the canons are sent to lection
before others, he does not want to prevent them from receiving a
provision through the university.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg.* N. 109, H. 42. 2.
B. Printed in Burkhardt, Luthers Briefwechsel, p. 73 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 364.

**No. 750.**

Wittenberg. July 10, 1524,

**To Spalatin.**

About the collection of the money Christoph von Bressen owes to the
monastery; about Nesen\'s death; about the provision of the three canons
and the occupation of the parish in Belzig.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 171 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 189. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 220b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 530 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 365; German at. Walch, vol. XXI, 908. the
postscript is found only in Burkhardt, p. 74 and in Erl. Briefw.

. To the highly esteemed man, Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of
Christ, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! Here comes Hans Lufft, my dear Spalatin, who will
demand our money from Christoph von Bressen in our name, although there
is little hope that we will achieve what is necessary. For I do not see
how it could be possible for us to get rid of our debts, since it is
already the third year in which he is supposed to pay us 90 florins for
the third time; but where can he get such a large sum?

I am sending Osiander\'s letter: Capito\'s is not at hand. Satan has
taken away the Nesen, while his three companions are miraculously
preserved, so that he would not want to corrupt them as well. The Lord
has grieved us greatly by this case and opened the mouths of the
blasphemers, but he will turn this to his glory after the Amorites will
be hardened and blinded by this weakness of his people Israel. Fare well
and pray for me.

You, too, work to ensure that the three canonists obtain another grace
instead of this one. For it is unworthy and unjust.

**636**

Letters from 1524. nos. 750 to 753.

**637**

that those who had previously been given salaries for the lections now
have neither canonries nor lections and are to be deprived and punished
twofold. Wittenberg, on the Sunday after St. Kilian \[July 10\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

There is a certain Johann Boldewan, to whom the pastor in Belzig
(*Peltitz*) has given his parish, and he pleases the people. But the
council refers the matter to the prince; if he should appoint him, they
will take him all. Now he asks through me that this be obtained from the
prince. However, he is a learned and good man, who in Pomerania has been
cast out from his abbey 1) and has suffered many things in bonds for the
sake of Christ. He is worthy that mall demand and set him up like this.
I ask you to answer this.

**No. 751.**

Wittenberg. July 17, 1524.

**To Johann Steenwyck, Augustinian prior at Sternberg.**

Luther sends Jerome of Enkhnsen as a preacher of the gospel and
expresses his joy that they have thrown away the old superstition.

The original is in the state archives in Schwerin. Printed in the
Jahrbücher des Vereins für mecklenburgische Geschichte, 12th volume,
1847, p. 274; in Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 22 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. IV, p. 366.

To the ill Christo highly venerable father Johann Steeuwyck
(*Sternwich*), Augustinian prior at Sternberg, his \[friend\] in the
Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord. My most esteemed father! We send here the
brother Jerome full of Enkhusen with another, when the Lord has done
what we hoped. I therefore recommend to you, dear

1\) Boldewan had been abbot of the Belbuck monastery near Treptow in
Pomerania since 1517, joined Luther\'s teachings as early as 1520 or
1521, called Bugenhagen from Treptow to the monastery to teach theology
in the Collegio he had founded, but was imprisoned by Duke Boguslaw in
\'1523 because of his evangelical sentiments, and when he was released,
had to vacate the land. He then went to Wittenberg and received the
parish in Belzig. In 1528 he was active for a time as pastor at St.
Peter\'s with Bugenhagen in Hamburg in the introduction of the Gospel.
His successor was Johann Aepinus on October 17, 1529.

Father, the good people, and through you to the prince. I would have
written to the prince himself, but some matter intervened that I did not
dare, lest I arouse suspicion and fall under suspicion myself. I am glad
that you have stopped superstition and have renounced your ungodly food
2). May the Lord grant that the knowledge of Christ may grow to
perfection among you, and that the word of grace may reign among you in
all the fullness of the Spirit, amen. Greet my brothers and friends and
pray for me. Wittenberg, Sunday after Margaret \[July 17\] 1524. Martin
Luther.

**No. 752.**

Tetschen. July 27, 1524.

**Wolfgang von Saalhausen to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2181 ff.

**No. 753.**

Wittenberg. July 31, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther indignantly sends back one of Münzer\'s writings. Ueber die Sache
der Hanna von Spiegel (No. 689).

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 172 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 190. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 221; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 531 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. IV, p. 371. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 909.

To the godly and learned man, Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at
the court of Saxony.

Grace and peace! I send you the All-City Frenzy, 3) which is worthy 4)
that it should even be honored with any benefice, let alone that it
should be cherished and cultivated in the country. Thus it has pleased
Christ that we should not be worthy of the

2\) Because of \"the holy blood\" Sternberg was a popular place of
pilgrimage.

3\) A sermon by Münzer, which he had delivered in Allstädt before the
dukes Johann and Johann Friedrich, in which he called on them to
eradicate the idolatry of the papacy and to kill its adherents. The
castle Zeis had sent it to Spalatin on July 20, and he sent it to
Luther. It also appeared in print.

4\) Walch assumes: *indignam* and De Wette is inclined to agree with
him. But it is obvious that this is irony.

**638**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 753 to 756.

639

to recognize and take care of what is God\'s, who until now have taken
care of what is Satan\'s in such a way that we always cherish the same.

I cannot give any advice about Hanna Spiegel, because the court does not
follow the advice of God, and perhaps cannot do so; human law and human
wisdom are sufficient for it, and it has enough of them without me.
Farewell. Wittenberg, Sunday after Jacobi \[July 31\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 754.**

(Wittenberg.) July 1524.

**To Elector Frederick and Duke John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 4, no. 763.

**No. 755.**

Wittenberg. August 3, 1524.

**To Wolfgang von Saalhausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2182.

**No. 756.**

Wittenberg. August 6, 1524.

**To some convent virgins.**

Luther instructs them about the permitted withdrawal from the monastery.

From the original (formerly) in the Elisabeth Library in Breslau printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 36; in Walch, vol. XXI, 74; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 534 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 251.

To the free convent virgins, my dear sisters in Christ, kindly written.

Grace and peace in Christ our Savior! Dear Sisters, I have received your
writings that time and that time, and have heard your request, and would
have answered long ago, if I had been inspired and if there had been
voices, for I have much to do otherwise. First of all, you have
understood quite well that there are two reasons for leaving the
monastic life and vows: one is where the law of man and monastic work
are demanded by force, and the other is where the law of man and
monastic work are demanded by force.

If they do not let you go free, but want to burden your consciences with
it, it is time to leave and let the monastery and everything go. If it
is so with you that they do not want to let you go free of the monastery
works, but force your consciences with it, then call your friends all,
and let them help you out, and provide for you in their house (if the
authorities want it) or elsewhere. If your friends or parents do not
want to help you, let other good people help you, regardless of whether
your parents should be angry about it, die or recover. For the salvation
of souls and God\'s will should be above all, as Christ says: \"Whoever
loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me. But if the
sisters want to leave you free, or at least let you read or hear the
word of God, then you must remain in it, and do and keep the monastery
work with them, just like spinning, cooking and the like, so that you do
not put any trust in it. The other cause is the flesh: although in this
the womenfolk are ashamed to confess it, yet Scripture and experience
show that among many thousands there is not one to whom God gives grace
to keep pure chastity, but a woman has not herself in the image. God
created her body to be with a man, to bear children and to draw them, as
the words clearly state in Genesis 1, and the members of the body,
ordained by God Himself for this purpose. For as eating, drinking,
sleeping and watching were created by God, so naturally He wills that
man and woman should be married to each other; therefore this is
sufficient, and no one should be ashamed of what God created him for and
made him for, where it is, 1) that he does not have the great strange
grace to go out and do what he finds himself created for. These things
ye shall read and learn abundantly and sufficiently, when ye come forth,
and hear right preaching. For I have now proved and demonstrated it
superfluously in the book of monastic vows, 2) item, to avoid the
doctrine of men, item, in the sermon on conjugal life, item, in the
postilla, which, if you read, you will learn all things, there

1 ) Added by us.

2\) See Kirchenpostille, vol. XI, 391 ff, §§ 253-312; vol. XIX, 598;
vol. X, 638.

**640**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 756 to 759.

641

be it confession 1) or other things, you will find instruction enough
that it is much too long and not necessary to write, because I am sure
you will move to the monastery if these two causes or one hits you, as
you complain in the first. If it is the case that the monastery once
comes to right freedom, then whoever has the grace and desire to do so
can move in, just as now the Council of Bern in Switzerland has handed
over the most famous monastery of Königfelden,2) and let go out freely,
stay and move in whichever virgin wants to, and give her what they have
brought in with them. Hereby God commands and prays for me. Given at
Wittenberg, on the day of Sixti Martyris \[Aug. 6\] 1524.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 757.**

Orlamünde. August 16, 1524.

**Council and congregation of Orlamünde to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2037, no. 683.

**No. 758.**

Weimar. August 21, 1524.

**To the town council and municipalities of Mühlhausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2, no. 762.

**No. 759.**

Wittenberg. September 1, 1524.

**To Bartholomew of Staremberg.**

Luther consoles him for the loss of his spouse and admonishes him from
the papal masses, Vigils 2c.

The first printing has the title: \"Am senndbrief Martini Lutheri an den
Wolgebornen Herren Herren Bartholomen von Staremberg ausgegangen. 1c. Im
jar MDXXIIII.\" 3 leaves in 4. without indication of the place. Then in
the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 201; in the Jena edition
(l585), vol. II, p. 453; in the Altenburg edition, vol. II, p. 803; in
the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p. 353; in Walch, vol. XXI, 79; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 396 (under your year 1523); in the Erlanger, vol. 53,
p. 202 (1523) and in the Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 10.

Grace and peace in Christ. Gracious Lord! This writing E. G. asked
Vincenz Wernsdorfer, out of Christian cause and loyalty.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 814 ff.

2\) November 20, 1523.

That is why I ask E. G. first of all to grant me this.

He reported to me how E. G., after the departure of her dear husband,
was almost making an effort, especially with much divine service and
good works, especially with masses and vigils, to do good to her soul,
as she had shown her love and faithfulness to E. G. and well deserved it
in her life; in addition, he asked that I turn to E. G. with writings.
To whom I did not know how to refuse, considering that E. G.\'s best is
sought therein. So I now humbly ask E. G. to accept my admonition as
good.

And only then shall E. G. remember that Job 1:21 says: \"God has given,
God has taken away; as it pleased the Lord, so it has been done.\" So
shall E. G. also sing to your faithful dear God, who has given such a
dear, faithful spouse to E. G., and now has taken her again. For she was
his before he gave her; she was his when he gave her; she is still his
after he has taken her, as we all are. Therefore, though it grieves us
that he takes from us what is his, yet let the heart take higher comfort
in his best will, more than in all his gifts. For how immeasurably
better is God than all His gifts. So also here his will is better to
keep than the very best and noblest4) woman. However, one cannot feel
this like this, but faith feels 5) it.

Therefore, E. G. God cheerfully gives His own, and accepts this rich
exchange and immeasurable usury, that you now have for a tender, dear
wife a tender, dear will of God, yes, in addition to God Himself. Oh,
how blessed and rich we would be if we could make such a change with
God! Yes, we could do it, if we understood it. For God meets us with it
every day, but we cannot greet Him.

On the other hand, Gn. Lord, my request is that Your Grace refrain from
masses, vigils and daily prayers.

3\) In the first print: \"an\" instead of: \"nun\".

4\) \"and noblest\" is missing in the first printing.

5\) \"feels\" is missing in the first print.

6\) In the first print: \"right\" instead of: \"rich\".

7\) In the first print: \"inhuman\".

**642** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 759. 760. **643**

prayer for their souls. It is enough if God prays for them once or twice
with earnestness, because God has promised us: \"Whatever you ask,
believe that you will have it, and you will surely have it\" \[John
15:7\]. Otherwise, when such prayer is always urged for one thing, it is
a sign that we do not believe God, and thus only enrage Him more with
unbelieving prayer. For what is it different if I often ask for one
thing, but so much that I have not been heard in the previous prayers,
and thus have asked against His promise. One should always ask, it is
true; but in faith, and always be sure that one is heard: otherwise the
prayer is lost. So there is always something else and something else to
ask for.

In particular, however, I ask your Lord to refrain from the vigils and
masses for the souls, for this is an unchristian thing that greatly
angers God. For in the vigils one can see that there is neither
earnestness nor faith, but only useless murmuring. Oh, it must be asked
otherwise, if one is to obtain something from God. The work of such
vigils is only God\'s mockery. In addition, because God has not
instituted the Mass for the dead, but for the Sacrament for the living,
it is a horrible, frightening thing that people approach and change
God\'s institution,1) and make a work and sacrifice for the dead out of
the Sacrament for the living. Let our Lord beware and not make himself a
party to this abominable error, which the priests and monks have brought
up for the sake of their bellies. For a Christian should do nothing
unless he knows that God has so commanded. Now they have no commandment
of such masses and vigils, but their own little bundle, which carries
money and goods, and helps neither the dead nor the living.

Further, E. G. can well find out about all this and report it to the
above-mentioned Vincenz Wernsdorfer, who of course favors E. G. and has
moved me to write about this. Please, let E. G. please her, and do not
err in those who, without God\'s word, speak against her own deeds and
human statutes. Christ enlightens and strengthens E. G. in the right
way.

1\) In the first printing: \"make of these: and other GOD\'s
appointments a work\" 2c.

Faith and love towards one\'s neighbor, Amen. At Wittenberg, on St.
Egidio\'s Day \[Sept. 1\] Anno 1524. E. G. williger

Martinus Luther.

**No. 760.**

Wittenberg. September 1, 1524.

**To Heinrich von Zütphen.**

Luther informs him of various news: about appeals to Magdeburg and
Hamburg, from Duke George and the Landgrave of Hesse. The pope, in order
to encourage Ferdinand and the dukes of Bavaria against the Lutheran
cause, has assigned them large revenues from the ecclesiastical estates.
About the situation in Strasbourg and Augsburg.

The original is in the Imperial Library at Leiden, *CoII. Riveti* XVIII,
No. 293 R. Printed by Kolde, Xnnleetu, p. 55, for whom the
difficult-to-read letter was deciphered by *D. du Rieu* at Leiden.
However, there seem to us to be several reading errors; according to
this, in Bremisches Jahrb., 1885, Ser. 2, Vol. I, p. 250, No. 5 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 14.

To S. Sudphen (*Sudpha*), evangelist of the Bremen church, his brother
in Christo.

Grace and peace! That I am writing to you, my dear Heinrich, has almost
no other reason than that I finally wanted to greet you with a letter
written in my hand, so that this messenger would not come to you empty.
There is a lot of news with us. The licentiate Amsdorf has been called
to Magdeburg and he is going there to care for the church of St. Ulrich.
Melchior Mirisch has thrown off his habit and is serving St. John\'s
there. At St. Catharinen they appoint Andreas Kaugsdorf, 2) I do not
know if he will go. At St. Jacob\'s, Doctor Wiedensee, provost at
Halberstadt, who takes a wife; at the Church of the Holy Spirit, Joh.
Fritzhans, who has a virgin for a bride, the only daughter of her
father. Thus Magdeburg has the gospel and will grow in Christ. The
church in Hamburg is crying out for Johann Pommer; if I cannot drive him
there, I will drive Jacob, yours of Ypres, 4) there, if I can

2\) In the transcript: *Campsdorfium*.

3\) *evangelium* is Conjectur of the Erl. Briefw., the transcript
offers: *dum*.

4\) The original should read: *nigrum*. Kolde suggests

for it *magistrum* before. We would like to assume *Iperen*.
(*Yperensem*, from Ypres), as Probst is otherwise also called, which has
even already been read in.

**644** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 760. 761. 645

can. The cruel mandate of the emperor has been published by Duke George,
but not much has been done yet, although two or three have been killed,
who admittedly challenged it themselves. It is said that 72 1) cities at
a convention held at Speier and at one to be held again, 2) are dealing
with it, that they do not want to accept this mandate and others. At
least the Landgrave of Hesse has given freedom to the Gospel by his last
edict. The Count Palatine lets everything go, since he is dirty 3) and
stalks the estates of the popes. The pope gave Ferdinand the third part
of all ecclesiastical revenues in all his lands, so that he would be an
enemy of the Lutherans, and he arouses the hatred of the priests against
himself, who suffer this extremely unwillingly. It is said that he also
gave the fourth part to the dukes of Bavaria, and the princes and
bishops are so senseless that it seems that they no longer want to rule
4) or live, since the spirit of deceit that God has sent below compels
them to do so. The bishop of Strasbourg summoned the council and ordered
them to expel the evangelists (among whom four are outstanding, Martin
Bucer, Fabricius Capito, Caspar Hedio, Matthias Zell, among others). The
latter, however, promised that they would gladly carry out this
commandment. By the way, they wanted to admonish him, 5) that he himself
would leave the city within 24 hours with the whole clergy and the court
and all his people, so that they would save their lives; if they would
perish, they wanted to be excused. When the bishop heard this, he freely
demanded a truce until the feast of Michaelmas. Since it had been
planned at Augsburg to expel an evangelist, in a few

1\) The number \"LXXII\" in the text is in any case wrong. There were
only 61 imperial cities, of which 28 were represented by envoys at the
Speier Convention on July 18.

2\) On December 13, another town meeting was held in Ulm.

3\) *sordens*. Instead, the Erl. Briefwechsel soeors proposes.

4\) Instead of *principare* should probably be read *principari,*
because it is a deponens.

5\) In the original: *monerent*, for which the Erl. Briefw. has assumed
*monuerunt.*

hours, more than four thousand armed men 6) gathered in front of the
town hall and demanded that the cause of the expulsion be reported to
them. When Fugger heard this, he was the first to flee secretly,
followed by the entire clergy. Thus the whole town and even the council
were in arms all day. Finally, on the next day, Fugger was admitted at
his request and on acceptable conditions, and the people were pacified,
but the clergy had not yet returned to the city. This shows God and
warns the princes, but they continue to rage blinded 7) so that they
perish. And we have heard what your Bremer has committed in Friesland.
8) Another in the letter to Jacob. See also that you first pray for us
with your church, then also write of your affairs and condition. Greet
all brothers in the Lord. At Michaelmas my little German Psalter 9) will
be published, then the other part of the Bible, 10) which is under the
press. Now the merchants are strengthened by the printing. Christ
strengthen them in faith and in their work, amen. Fare well in the Lord.
Wittenberg, the first of September 1524, Martin Luther.

**No. 761.**

Wittenberg. September 13, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther expresses his displeasure at the arrogant behavior of the bearer
of the letter. He speaks of Leimbach\'s affair; of Melchior Lotther\'s
slander to the prince; of the sad events in Orlamünde and Carlstadt\'s
obduracy,

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. \^,No. 173 and in *Cod. Jen*. u, fol. 190. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 2336; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 550 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 22. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 914.

6\) In reality it was only 1800 who prevented the expulsion of the
former Barfüßermönch Joh. Schilling by force on Aug. 6 and 9. Fugger
escaped to Biberach on the 9th.

7\) *excoecati* is a conjecture of the Erl. Briefw., in the copy and in
Kolde: *excecrati*.

8\) This probably refers to the victorious campaign of Archbishop
Christian of Bremen against the Wurst Frisians on the Lower Weser in May
1524, in which 700 Wursters were slain and the country devastated by
murder and plunder.

9\) St. Louis Edition, Vol. IV, 1.

10\) Das Dritte teyl des alten Testaments. Wittemberg. M. D. xx IIII.\"
Folio. Containing Job, Psalter and the Writings of Solomon.

**646** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 761. 762. **647**

To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the faithful servant of
Christ, his exceedingly dear \[friend\] in Christ.

Grace and peace! I have sent the messenger you sent with the glasses
back to you empty, my dear Spalatin. If you should send him again, then
show at the same time from the blood of which kings he sprang, or what
kind of kingdoms such a great man possesses, so that I know with what
kind of latrine 1) I must honor such a commanding and imperial man. What
is it necessary to ask for advice about the publication of the bull 2)?
He is allowed to publish it wherever he wants; for even the bull does
not require that he be defended by the princes. If they want to be
ridiculed with their bulls, who prevents them? yes, we rather want to
contribute to it.

The Leimbach have demanded an answer. I have told them what I heard from
you, namely that the prince has decreed that the matter should finally
be brought to an end. I see that they are oppressed by lack, although
they are righteous people. Especially the wife is excellent, and it is
worthwhile that this service be rendered to her, also for the sake of
the many children. Therefore, help them not to be abandoned like this,
or to put the matter on the back burner.

I hear that Melchior Lotther has also been badly reported to the prince;
I ask you, what is it necessary that the afflicted be given new
affliction? Let us finally spare him, he has enough punishment and
misfortune. Therefore, be a good mediator, and if it is necessary that I
write for him myself, I will do it gladly.

I believe that you have read enough of the younger prince\'s tragedy at
Orlamünde.

1\) Mockingly, Luther wrote *latrina* (cloake, resignation) instead of
*latria* (worship).

2\) In 1524, Bishop Adolph of Merseburg carried out a visitation in the
Chur Saxon lands, during which several pastors, priests and preachers
were cited, deposed and banished, but his decrees were not obeyed
(Förstemann, Neues Urkundenbuch, p. 109). Now, by showing a new papal
bull, which he had sent to the Elector on Sept. 8, he appealed to the
secular sword for help. The Elector refused.

because it cannot be written in a short letter. Carlstadt has finally
fallen into a hardened mind, so that I despair of his return. He has
always been far from the honor of Christ, and will perhaps always be so,
for that is where the senseless desire for honor and praise has driven
him. He is more hostile to me, or rather to us, than any enemy has ever
been, so that I believe that this wretched man is not merely possessed
by a devil. May God have mercy on his sin, with which he sins to death.
Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, September 13, 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 762.**

Wittenberg. (mid-September) 3) 1524.

**To Wolfgang Stein.**

What to reply to Carlstadt\'s letter to Duke Johann zu Sachsen.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 1048, fol. 74. Printed from the Kraft
Collection at Husum by Schütze, vol. I, p. 387; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
549 f. and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 268.

*VoIkgango Steyn, ecclesiasti ducali Wy*

*mariae, suo in Domino fratri*. \[To Wolfgang Stein, ducal
ecclesiastical priest at Weimar, his brother in the Lord\]. *Gratiam et
pacem! Scripsi et dixi juniori Principi, quid vocato Andreae Carlstadio
objiciendum esset. Nunc ad istas quoque literas vel vocato eo vel
scripto ad eum in hunc modum respondeat*: \[In German: Gnade und Frieden
! I have written to the younger prince and said what would have to be
held against Andreas Carlstadt, because he would be called. Now he may
also answer to this letter, if it is either called or written to him, in
this way:\] Dear Doctor! Before you asked us, you started the matter and
received the florin from D. Martin. What is the matter now, that you
should give us last, when you have done before what you desire?

3\) De Wette and after him the Erlangen edition put this letter too
early: \"Anfang Septembers\", because this is a reply to be given to
Carlstadt to his letter to Duke Johann of Saxony of Sept. 11, which is
printed in the Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 20.

**648** Letters from the year 1524. no. 762. 763. 764. 649

for mercy or favor? If you do it well, you will find it good.

On the other hand, that he has been summoned to Wittenberg for
interrogation and debate should be said: My most gracious lord is almost
surprised, since Carlstadt is so often required to go to Wittenberg to
speak, read, and preach according to his office, as he is obliged to do
by princely fief, and now first of all blows up his speaking, as if such
things had been taught or barred to him, which he nevertheless knows, as
no one has yet been able to force him to do, that he should henceforth
leave my most gracious lord satisfied with such mirror fencing, and act
as he should be responsible for it. *Quia stulta sunt illa, quae de Deo
praesumit, primo Principes consulit. Si Deo inspirante facit, quod
facit, cur moratur? cur differt? cur homines requirit? Vides hic, quam
certus ille nequam spiritus sit1 ) sese Deo pellente agi. 0 furor! Sed
sine, ut veniat. Vale cum omnibus. Velociter* \[In German: Denn das ist
thöricht, was er sich voll GOtt vermißt er zieht zuerst die Fürsten zu
Rathe. If he does what he does on God\'s inspiration, why does he
hesitate? why does he postpone it? why does he consult men? Here you see
how certain this shameful spirit is that he is led by God\'s impulse. In
haste 2c.\], *Wittenbergae*. MDXXIV.

*Martinus Luther.*

**No. 763.**

(Wittenberg.) September 18, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

(Fragment.)

This letter was in handwriting in the library in Strasbourg, but was
destroyed by fire in 1870. Only this fragment is preserved in Röhrich,
Gesch. der Ref. in Elsaß, 1831, Vol. I, p. 299.

\... It is to be wondered at how much I desire to write to your
Strasburgers, especially to the evangelists; but briefly and from the
impromptu I do not want to, but at length and carefully I cannot before
the too great tyranny of my many affairs.

1\) *sit* Put by us instead of: *sic*, which in the editions is after
*sese.*

**No. 764.**

(Wittenberg.) September 22, 1524.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Intercession for the newly elected pastor of Orlamünde, D. Caspar Glatz,
that he be allowed to postpone taking up his office until Carlstadt has
been forced to leave Orlamünde.

According to a copy in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Abth. Cöthen C.
18, No. 34, fol. 280 printed in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 25.

To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord Johans Fridrich,
Duke of Saxony, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen 2c., my
gracious lord 2c.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! Our
Rector, Doctor Caspar Glatz, elected pastor of Orlamünd, has been
advised by some great people that he should first ask E. F. G. humbly
that they want to see to it that Doctor Carlstadt is removed, and also
that they consider it good that he not remain in the place on the Saale,
for the sake of his troubled, restless head. For this reason, he has
asked me to send an interpellation to E. F. G.. Now, at that time, when
I was with your F. G., I told2) and also reported to the chancellor
\[Brück\] with what pieces D. Carlstadt would have deserved, that he
invaded behind E. F. G.\'s knowledge and will, and took the parish, and
in addition did not express his murderous spirit, nor did he act against
it, as he should, if there were a good spark in him, that it is to be
feared, even with his spirit, where he had room and air, he would do
little good. I promise 3) that E. F. G. will know how to keep this
seriously, so that the above-mentioned Rector will have peace and quiet,
because I do not know how to refuse him such a regulation. May Christ
strengthen and enlighten E. F. G. to His praise and salvation, Amen. On
Thursday after Matthew \[22 Sept.\] 1524.

E. F. G. subservient

Martinus Luther.

2\) Luther was in Weimar on August 21, on his journey through Thuringia.
See No. 758, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Eint. p. 20.

3\) Transcript: \"understand\".

**650** Letters from the year 1524. No. 765 to 768. **651**

**No. 765.**

(Wittenberg.) (September or October 1524.) 1) To Spalatin.

Intercession for Melchior Lotther. Melanchthon refused to give
theological lectures. (Cf. *Corp. Ref.*, vol. 1, 676.)

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 180 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 247. Printed in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 508 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 27.

I beg you for the sake of Christ, see to it that Melchior Lotther does
not have such a bad reputation with the prince. You would not believe
how frightened a man is because he has heard that he has been reported
to the prince in the worst way. He is certainly a good man and has been
punished more than enough for his offense. There is also some
consideration to be given to his wife, who is a very good woman and
should not be so troubled, since she is already troubled enough both by
many children and by many debts. I beg you, obtain something with which
I can comfort him.

Philip, who has become obstinacy itself, refuses the theological
lecture, and I (as you know) am overwhelmed, - but I am perhaps guilty
of this for the monastery of which I am in use, - and the students
extraordinarily persist and demand it. You therefore create council. It
is really not good that this school, which has such a great name and
produces so much fruit, is so mutilated and disordered.

**No. 766.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. October 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2036, no. 681.

**No. 767.**

(Wittenberg.) October 8, 1524.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Expert opinion on how to punish adultery fei.

From Sintenis\' 1846 memorandum, p. 26 reprinted in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 56, p. 167 f.

1\) That this letter, which is perhaps only a postscript to another (but
not to No. 724, where De Wette has placed it\], belongs to this time,
results from the comparison with No. 761.

To the honorable and wise,, mayor and councilmen of the town Zerwest, my
dear lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear hervens! I have talked
with my lords and doctors about your writing concerning adultery, and
answer thus: Although according to the law of Most \[Deut. 20, 10. Deut.
22, 22.\] such were stoned, yet such law is not given, except to the
Jews; and we, who are among the Gentiles and have Gentile authority, are
obliged to keep and punish ourselves according to the same law.
Although, unfortunately, the same law and rule lies 2) and is little in
use. Therefore we in Wittenberg let the honorable council punish such
with distemper to the city, as with lighter punishment, because the
righteous does not go in the custom, which gives imperial law. May now
E. W. follow the same Wittenbergers, or, so it loved, undertake the
strict punishment 3) of the imperial law. Hereby commanded by God. On
Saturday after Francisci \[October 8\] 1524. Martinus Luther.

**No. 768.**

(Wittenberg.) October 11, 1524.

**To Wolfgang Stein.**

Luther recommends a preacher, and acknowledges receipt of Carlstadt\'s
sent writings and the *Acta Jensia.*

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. V 1048, fol. 74b and in the Wittenberg
Seminary Library. Printed in Niedners Zeitschrift für hist. Theol.,
1861, p. 618 (wrong: Oct. 13) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 33.

*D. Wolfgango Stein, servo Christi in aula ducis Saxoniae, Vimariae.*

Grace and peace in Christ. My Lord! I wanted to add a preacher to Rall4)
from here. But because this man Lorenz, who was able to help our
Brigitte 5) out of her torture, is available, it seems best to me that

2\) The original should read \"lugt\". Erl. Briefw., vol. 5, p. 33.

3\) namely the death penalty.

4\) In Ms. \"Rall\" or \"Stall\", but such a place name is not provable.
Perhaps: \"Kahla\" ?

5\) According to this, the occupation seems to have been to a Brigitten
church.

**652** Letters from the year 1524. No. 768 to 771. **653**

he will take testimony from the Schösser and Rath zu Eisenberg, and in
addition to this my writing by your means to my lord. Lord by your
means. For he does not displease me, if I know him. But if it will not
be, I will procure a good one Your writing together with the writings of
Carlstadt and the Orlamuder I have received, also the decorative booklet
2) *de actis* zu Orlamünde 2c. It does not hurt; search for them, but
God will find them. You do not believe how the man Carlstadt in
Schmelzen, Prussia, Bohemia and all places strikes and seeks nest, as I
will write you another time. There you see what spirit and belly is.
Give my regards to your rib (*Costa*), and pray for me. On Tuesday after
Dionysius \[Oct. 11\] 1524. Martinus Luther.

**No. 769.**

Wittenberg. October 12, 1524.

**To Hieronymus Baumgärtner in Nuremberg.**

Luther recommends a young man to him. He asks him to hurry if he wants
to hold on to Catharina von Bora, lest someone else beat him to it.

Printed from the original by Christian Gottlieb Schwarz, in the
Osterprogramm 1727; in the Unschuldige Nachrichten 1730, p. 529; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 105; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 553 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 34. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 916.

To Hieronymus Baumgärtner, the young man from Nuremberg, who is
distinguished by piety and scholarship, his extremely dear \[friend\] in
Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! With the multitude of the poor, I am
compelled to make use of you as well, my dear Jerome. This young man,
Gregorius Keser, desires a position somewhere, and has requested a
letter from me to some Nuremberg resident. Although I gave him little
hope, because I knew that everywhere everything is full, I nevertheless
let him go in God\'s name, who also feeds the ravens \[Ps. 147, 9. Luc.
12, 24.\]. By the way, if you want to hold on to your Käthe von Bora,
hurry up.

1\) Eisenberg, town in Saxony-Altenburg. - The name of the castle was
Weyd.

2\) \"Schmuckbüchlein\", because in it her thing was decorated. See St.
Louis edition, vol. XV, 2028 ff, no. 680 ff.

with the deed, before it is given to another who is at hand. 3) She has
not yet overcome her love for you. I would certainly be happy if the two
of you were connected to each other. Farewell. Wittenberg, Oct. 12.
1524.

**No. 770.**

(Wittenberg.) October 17, 1524.

**To Otto Braunfels in Strasbourg.**

Otto Braunfels, school rector in Strasbourg, later a physician in Bern,
published some of the writings of John Hus in 1524 and wrote a citation
to Luther. Luther responded to this in these! Letters, praises his
enterprise, encourages him to continue, and thanks him for the honor
done him. - Braunfels placed this letter instead of a preface before the
second volume of the writings of John Hus.

This letter is first printed in *loannis Huss Locorum aliquot ex Osee &
Ezechiele prophetis, cap. v. & viij. etc.. Tomus secundus. Commendatitia
brevis M. Lutheri ad Othonem Brunnfelsium etc.* on the back of the
title. Then in *Monum. Joh. Hussi etc.*, p. 423. The other locations are
given in the 14th volume. In the address there, the following is missing
at the beginning: \"Martin Luther.\"

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 264, no. 10.

**No. 771.**

Wittenberg. October 17, 1524,

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends him a new school plan; he has not yet decided on the change
of the ungodly ceremonies in the All Saints\' Monastery.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 246. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 235 b; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 554 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 37. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 917.

To Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the court of Saxony, who is
extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I send you back your booklet, my dear
Spalatin, and at the same time also the establishment of the school,
which is to be presented to the prince, not with great hope, but it must
be tried in the name of the Lord. About the Aende

3\) Luther wanted to marry her to Caspar Glatz, pastor in Orlamünde, but
Catharina refused. See Köstlin, Martin Luther (3.), Vol. I, p. 763.

**654**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 771 to 776.

**655**

I have not yet decided anything about the godless ceremonies in the
castle, which are maintained by money in an unjust manner; it will be
time, if God wills it, to consult about these as well. Meanwhile, be
well in the Lord. Wittenberg, Monday after Gallus \[Oct. 17\] 1524.
Martin Luther.

**No. 772.**

Wittenberg. October 22, 1524.

**All Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis edition, Vol., XV, 2045, No. 687.

**No. 773.**

Wittenberg. October 27, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2625, annex, no. 117.

**No. 774.**

Wittenberg. October 27, 1524.

**To Burian von Kornitz.**

Luther consoles him in his tribulation and speaks out about the
faithlessness and deceitfulness of Gallus Czahera. Cf. no. 779.

Printed by C. Höfler, Des Bartholomäus von St. Aegidius Chronik von Prag
im Reformationzeitalter. *Chronica de seditione et tumultu Pragensi*
1524-1531. Prague 1859. p. 107, and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 40. The
Bohemian translation in: *Bartos* Präger Chronik, edited by I. K. Erben,
Prague 1863, p. 122.

To the imprisoned and faithful servant of Christ, Mr. Burian von
Skornicz, 1) secretary at Prague, my extremely dear \[friend\] in the
Lord.

May grace and peace in Christ be with you, who will strengthen and
fortify your mind in your sorrow and grief, my dear Burian. The quick
departure of this messenger and his haste to Bohemia has caused that I
could hardly write this note to you. O beloved in Christ! How great
things I hear about Gallus, such that he

1\) Burian von Kornitz came from an old Silesian family, was wealthy
near Chrubim and was a member of the Bohemian Brotherhood. He was a
learned and well-educated man, became chancellor of the Old Town of
Prague, and was imprisoned with other town councillors during an
uprising in 1524. In May 1525 he was freed again, but banished from
Prague.

has deceived and nullified all our trust and good opinion. For since he
was so respectable, he was also considered respectable by me. With how
much force did he urge me, with how much ardor was I incited to send my
booklets quickly to Bohemia! Finally, all the exhortations that are
given in these booklets 2) in several places, I had from his hands. He
had drafted the things I wanted to send you, but I could not find him
already. But you do not doubt, although he is not only the cause, but
rather also urged that these booklets are written by me. Thus I poor man
have been deceived by his faithlessness. And nothing in these little
books is mine, except the manner, the doctrine, and the proof of the
Scriptures (*scripturae discursum*); everything else belongs to Gallus.
But Christ lives and reigns; at another time I will write more about
this 2c. The HErr JEsus be with you, Amen. Given at Wittenberg, on the
day before Simonis and Jude \[27 Oct.\] 1524. Martin Luther.

**No. 775.**

(Wittenberg.) October 30, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2626, annex, no. 118.

**No.776.**

Wittenberg. October 30, 1524.

**To Gottschalk Crusius in Celle.**

Luther is pleased that Crusius is active for the gospel in Celle and
complains about the persecutions in Bavaria and Carlstadt\'s rage.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 236; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 559 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 43. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 918.

To Mr. Gottschalk (*Gotsaligo*), Christ\'s faithful servant in Celle.

Grace and peace in the Lord! At last I am answering your three letters,
my dear Gottschalk, which I received, the first from Hoya Castle, the
others dated from Celle. But it has always been the case that the
messengers have not received my letter.

2\) In the writing *De instituendis ministris Ecclesiae*. St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 1548.

**656** Letters from the year 1524. No. 776. 777. 778. **657**

because they were sent elsewhere, and I could not reach you in any other
way. I am indeed glad that you are in Celle and that my recommendation
has been of use to you. 1) Margaretha is a very good old lady, who has
also been strongly admonished by her brothers,2) our princes, and not
only by me, but the woman has such a shattered and fearful conscience
due to the long tyranny of the monks that this cannot be repaired in a
short time. Meanwhile, it is enough that she has come to tolerate the
word and not to persecute it, so you may bear her pusillanimity.

In Bavaria, there is a lot of cross and persecution of the word, even
though it is not sown publicly. Thus those swine rage, but the spilled
blood will suffocate them. Carlstadt boasts that he was made a martyr by
me and chased away. The wretched man rages completely against us and
prepares new monstrosities. What he has long nurtured and cared for, he
has finally begun to give birth to; but they have to be gangs. I believe
that you have heard of Thomas Muenzer. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, on the Sunday after Simonis and Judä \[Oct. 30\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 777.**

Wittenberg. November 1, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1982, annex, no. 7.

1\) In Celle, on Luther\'s recommendation, Crusius became the successor
of Wolf Cyklops from Zwickau, who since 1518 had been the personal
physician of Henry the Middle, who had gathered a small Protestant
community. Crusius was born in Braunschweig in 1499, entered the
Aegidien Monastery of the Benedictine Order there as early as 1508,
attended the University of Erfurt in 1518, Wittenberg in 1519, where he
became Baccalaureus on Oct. 17, 1521. He then returned to his monastery,
but was challenged for his evangelical convictions and transferred to
Volkmeroda. Here he was to be attacked by Duke Henry of Brunswick on 17
March 1523, so he escaped to Hoya. Then he came to Celle around Easter
1524 and carried out the Reformation there with Heinrich Bock and Joh.
Matthäi.

2\) Margaretha, wife of Duke Henry the Middle, sister of Prince
Frederick the Wise, turned to the Gospel only towards the end of her
life. In 1524, she took her daughter out of the convent. She died in
Weimar on Dec. 7, 1528.

**No. 778.**

Wittenberg. November 6, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Hermann in Joachimsthal.**

On his question whether he should leave Jáchymov because of a
disgruntled trade, Luther advised him to stay.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 393 d, and *Cod*.
*Aug.* 10, fol. 169. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 238 d; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 561 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 47. German -in
Walch, vol. XXI, 919.

To Nicolaus Hermann,3) the godly and learned man in Joachimsthal, his
\[friend\] in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! M. Stephan4) has asked me for advice on
your behalf, my dear Nicolaus, whether you should leave the valley after
the deal and the matters have been settled. But I judge, since the Lord
has already given you grace, that you have overcome the past case
through patience, that you must persevere, especially since they are
already showing themselves friendly, as you write, until you finally
overcome everything. Who knows what God thinks about you or what he will
do through you. You know the word of Solomon \[Prov. 16:7\]: \"If a
man\'s ways please the LORD, he also makes his enemies content with
him.\" Overcome therefore evil with good, and make thyself and thy
guarantors free by goodness, leaving off (as mau saith) stern justice
and severity. I recommended you to Frau Hauptmann 5) when she was here;
if you wish, you can remind her of my recommendation and make use of it;
she seemed to me to be favorable to you and Stephan anyway. However, I
have not only complained to her orally about the letter, which was
forcibly and fraudulently stolen and published.

3\) Nic. Hermann, the poet and composer of several church hymns, took up
the cantor\'s office in Jáchymov in 1518 and died there on May 3, 1561.

4\) Stephan Noth, later town clerk in Zwickau, was Rector of the Latin
school in Joachimsthal from 1520 to 1522. In the winter semester of
1523, he studied again in Wittenberg.

5\) In 1517 the Counts Schlick had appointed a mountain captain in
Jáchymov; this was Heinrich von Könneritz from 1519 to 1545, his wife
Barbara, née von Breitenbach. Both were devoted to the evangelical
doctrine.

**658**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 778. 779. 780.

**659**

I also wrote to the centurion, pointing out that I was extremely
displeased with this and that a great injustice had been committed in
it, and I led your cause very vigorously, so that there is hope that
everything will finally be better through Christ\'s help. In him be well
and pray for me, a sinner. Wittenberg, November 6, 1524, Martin Luther.

**No. 779.**

Wittenberg. November 13, 1524.

**To Gallus Czahera. 1)**

Luther exhorts him to repent of his ungodly behavior, otherwise he will
be subject to divine judgment.

Printed by C. Höfler, Des Bartholomäus von St. Aegidius Chronik von Prag
2c., p. 108 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 49. The Bohemian translation
in: *Bartos* Prager Chronik, edited by Erben, p. 124.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I think, dear Gallus, that my letter
of exhortation will be too late and in vain to dissuade you from the
undertaking you have begun, since you have long since ceased to conceal
that with which, as you know, you have unduly deceived us, since you
have publicly departed from the truth you have recognized.

1\) Czahera, the son of a butcher in Saaz, after his studies in Prague,
first became a pastor in Leitmeritz, where he fell out with the
congregation and then went to Wittenberg in 1523. Here he won Luther\'s
trust and prompted him to write to the council and congregation of the
city of Prague on how to order and appoint church servants (St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 1548). After a three-month stay, he returned to Prague
and was elected administrator by the Utraquist Estates on August 23 and
became pastor of the church of Yours. At first he praised Luther in the
pulpit, but since he did not succeed with his reformatory ideas,
especially the abolition of celibacy, he turned to the opposite party,
and, violently reviling Luther and persecuting his former friends,
sought to bring about the rapprochement of the Utraquists with the Roman
Church. His compatriot Palacky (V, 2, 515) passed judgment on him: \"His
whole conduct revealed in him such a degree of unworthiness as is seldom
found in Bohemian history.\" The negotiations failed, however, although
he assured the pope of his obedience. He remained in his position until
1529, but allowed himself many arbitrary acts until Ferdinand expelled
him from the city and his hereditary lands on Sept. 5. He went to
Nuremberg, but had to leave this city as well, because he went out
against the preachers, and after he had married, he ended his life as a
gift host in Ansbach.

I have nevertheless wanted to try to show you one last friendship.
Return, my dear Gallus, and come back as long as you have time; stop
setting yourself against God and Christ; you are a man who has no time
to live, and perhaps at this time, when you lie about these things and
want to brood about others, your downfall will approach all the more
quickly, and it will not be necessary to hasten it of your own free
will. Servant of God, what do you have to do with wars, bloodshed and
captures? My dear Gallus, do you not believe that Christ is also God,
who looks upon you and will finally judge you? \"It will be hard for you
to lick against the sting\" \[Apost. 9, 5.\], it is not easy to get over
the voices of so many good people against you. If you will follow my
words and obey me, I will rejoice over the newborn brother; but if you
are obdurate and stubborn, you will throw your work 2) and your burden
yourself, and I will be excused. But I, by God\'s gift and grace, will
not conceal your works from the descendants. God change and convert you
in a short time, amen.

Given at Wittenberg, on the Sunday after the Feast of St. Martin \[Nov.
13\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 780.**

Wittenberg. November 14, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends some Bohemian refugees.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 246. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 34; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
564 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.50. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 926.

To the highly esteemed man, Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of
Christ at the Court of Saxony, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Here comes the Bohemian baron,3) even
equipped with my letter to you, my dear

2\) Instead of *corpus,* we have adopted *opus.*

3\) His name, as indicated by Spalatin\'s inscription, was Wilhelm
Carowsky.

**660** Letters from the year 1524. No. 780 to 783.

661

Spalatin. The secret, however, of which they ask that it be concealed as
much as possible, is this, namely that they want to approach the prince
with the request to advance them some sum in their need. Perhaps you
will hear everything. They first wanted to receive a hope from me. But I
had nothing to give them in the way of hope except to say that the
prince was very kind and gracious, but that I did not know what he had
or what he could do. This is the reason why they induced me to write to
you, so that you too might support their cause.

One of them is Martin, 1) preacher at Prague, who was expelled for the
sake of the word; he is already sufficiently known to me from letters.
The baron\'s father, however, is also recommended by the fact that he
not only indicates good barons as guarantors, but is also a protector of
the expelled preachers. His father is extremely favorable to the word of
God. You will do what is necessary according to your wisdom and skill.
Fare well. Wittenberg, Monday after Martinmas \[Nov. 14\] 1524. Martin
Luther.

**No. 781.**

Wittenberg. November 17, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1984, annex, no. 8.

**No. 782.**

(Wittenberg.) November 17, 1524.

**To the Chapter at Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1190, no. 143a.

**No. 783.**

Wittenberg. November 18, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends D. Thomas Eschhaus in place of D. Stagmann, who
intends to move away.

1\) Palacky calls him Martinach, pastor of Bethlehem Church. He was
expelled from the city by Czahera and his followers after a bloody
tumult at the election of the new council on Aug. 10, 1524, along with
others. On Aug. 22, 1524, Laurent. Campegius wrote to Sadolet from
Vienna that he had heard from Prague that fifteen Lutheran priests had
been expelled from there.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten un *Cod.
Dessav*. X, No. 176 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 192. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 243 V; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 566 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 55. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 927.

The Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the Court of
Saxony, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I would like you, my dear Spalatin, to take care of
what I am writing to you now with your usual fidelity and care, I beg
you for this most earnestly and urgently. It is said that D. Stagmann is
about to move away, either because he has been called elsewhere or
because he cannot support himself on his salary, as is easy to believe.
He is followed by D. Thomas Eschaus, a man who is already very old and
who, due to an illness that has befallen him, has lost his audience. He
begins to become seriously worried, having to beg at his age, which must
be credited to the weakness of old age. Now, however, since he has
rendered outstanding services to the Academy and has practiced the
medical art quite happily before others, and is still the best and first
among us, he is also forced by necessity to remain here, and especially
for the practical art of medicine, which should be assigned to him,
There is no doubt that he will be demanded and requested by the audience
for this, if he should leave, that he, if he cannot do it in the
college, at least lectures in his house to the whole number of students
of this subject: He is worthy that we also ask for him, and you may
faithfully strive that he, honored and supported by this grant, will be
kept with us in an honorable manner until his end, which will perhaps
come sooner than one thinks, especially since he does not ask for this
in vain, and can repay it by creating benefits. Since I could not refuse
him this service of intercession, I entrust it to your care, since I
hope that you will do whatever you can. Fare well in Christ. Wittenberg,
Friday after Martinmas \[Nov. 18\] 1524, Martin Luther.

**662**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 784 to 787.

663

**No. 784.**

Strasbourg. November 22, 1524.

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2053, no. 689 a.

**No. 785.**

Strasbourg. November 23, 1524.

**The Strasbourg Preachers, Capito, Zell 2c., au Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2055, no. 689 b.

**No. 786.**

Wittenberg. November 24, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a letter to Argula von Staufen for forwarding. About an
ecclesiastical matter in Kemberg. He complains about the poor supply of
the pastor in Leisnig and the pastors in general.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 177 and in *Cod. Jen.*

a, fol. 193. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 244; in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 567 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 72. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 929.

To the godly and sincere man, Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of
Christ at the court of Saxony, his superior.

Grace and peace! When you answer our Argula, my dear Spalatin, I ask you
to send this letter of mine to her at the same time, because you can do
what I cannot.

I also commend the Kemberg matter to you. The small priest\'s office is
for the most part arranged from the goods of the citizens; now that the
masses have fallen away, they intend to turn this over to the common
treasury and want to pay the salary of the schoolmaster from it. This is
a godly thought, a holy and necessary work, that schools should be
established, as you know. Now the cunning,1) who, according to vicariate
law (*vicario jure*), alternate with the council of Kemberg in
conferring the small priest\'s position, is resisting. But they have
given it to a certain person who otherwise already holds three parishes,

1\) *Listani*, that is, Christoph and Heinrich List, provosts of Rakith.
Christoph was provost of Kemberg in 1500.

then does not live there, nor does he do anything, except that he does
not consume the income, either by right or by necessity, while leaving
the work to be done that can be supported with it, especially since it
is the property of the citizens. Therefore do what you can, and prosper
in the Lord.

Those at Leisnig will finally drive out the Tilemann 2) through hunger.
The good man complains very much; why does the prince stand still there?
3) But we may believe that after such examples good men will give up
their pastorate, who will be left like this afterwards; or will they not
rather be driven into the monasteries again? I am very much troubled by
this exceedingly evil example, which, as it is the first, should also
have been the best. 4) The care for this matter will be yours first and
foremost. Again, be well. Wittenberg, Thursday after Elizabeth \[Nov.
24\] 1524. Martin Luther.

**No. 787.**

(Wittenberg.) November 27, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther complains about a vehement letter from Spalatin in which he has
wronged Jonas. In this way, he fears, he and Jonas will be forced to
leave. The matter concerns the abolition of the mass in the monastery,
against which the Dean Beskau, Georg Einer von Staffelstein and Johann
Volmar from Billingen, canons, sat down and slandered Jonas.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p.245d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 568 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 74. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 932.

2\) Tilemann Schnabel, Augustinian, was already Luther\'s \"schoolboy\"
in the Erfurt monastery, in 1512 in Wittenberg, on Oct. 4, Baccalaureus.
Under Luther\'s decanate he received his doctorate on Sept. 9, 1515,
became a provincial in 1520 as Gerhard Hecker\'s successor, and preached
the gospel in Alsfeld even before Landgrave Philip of Hesse was won
over. When the latter forbade him to preach, he went back to Wittenberg
in 1523. In 1526 he followed the call of the people of Alsfeld, whom the
landgrave had allowed to ask for a reprieve because of their faithful
service in the Peasants\' War. He remained in Alsfeld until his death in
1559.

3\) The Elector had still not confirmed the order of the common caste at
Leisnig, but did so only in 1529. The council withheld the income from
the common caste and the preachers were not paid.

4\) The opinion is: as the order of the common chest in Leisnig is the
first of its kind, by which the church foundations were put into the
service of the Gospel and the poor, so it should also have been executed
in the best way.

**664** Letters from your year

1524\. no. 787. 788. 665

Grace and peace! What has befallen you, my dear Spalatin, that you
yourself write so threateningly and imperiously? Is Jonas not yet
despised enough by you and your prince, unless you continue to pierce
this very good man so often? It is certainly not necessary that you
chase away good men, who are held in such low esteem, in such a hopeful
manner; it may happen that they are chased away too much elsewhere. If
my testimony is valid, he is innocent in this matter. But I roll this
stone. But you, because you harbor an old grudge (*monstrum*) against
him, immediately believe the lying and god-robbing canons in everything
they write and turn your suspicion against him, and you accuse me of
sedition. But the prince\'s way is known to disrespect men. So we honor
the gospel that we cannot grant his servants a pittance for their
living, while we give others the abundance without difficulty, so that
they may blaspheme our God. Then this is by far the most unjust and
hateful thing that you call to proceed in such a way that you do not
want to be considered less than if you had commanded it, and think that
Christ does not see such mischievousness. Why don\'t you either command
it outright, or just let it go? Just show it, and we will immediately
heal your resentment if we are so spiteful or obnoxious.

Jonah is such a man, who should be bought with great money and kept in
the country, but to you he is less than stubble and seaweed. 1) But God
is just, who forces you to feed the most ungrateful boys and the most
harmful hypocrites in the most delicious way for such injustice. Then I
believe that we have not been or are not to the prince\'s detriment, to
say nothing of the advantages; unless you think that the gospel that has
risen again through us is not an advantage by which your souls are made
blessed, and that not a little money and goods have begun to flow into
the prince\'s purse and are flowing into it more every day, so that if
we deserve hatred from those who have changed us.

1\) Virg. Ecl. 7, v. 42. *Horat. Sat, lib*. II, 5, v. 8.

we should at least have deserved better thanks from you than this.
Unless this word be fulfilled \[Ps. 35:12\], \"They have done me evil
for good,\" or this \[Luc. 4:24\], \"No prophet is pleasant in his
father\'s country.\" But the Lord will still feed us, that we lack
nothing \[Ps. 23:1.\], if ye deny us sustenance and the accursed little
money. But if you intend anything in this matter, you may wish, but you
must not and must not hope for anything.

If the Lord wills, I will abolish these masses or do something else. If
you want to protect them, let them be protected; 2) I can no longer
tolerate the deceit and deceitful violence of the third and a half
canons against the unity of our church. I know what they are dealing
with, while you are claiming what has happened to the one female. 3)
Therefore, my dear Spalatin, I ask you to treat us, the poor and exiles
of Christ, more mildly, or to speak your mind roundly, so that we know
where to turn, only so that we are not forced to disgrace ourselves at
the same time by this ambiguous (*obliqua*) order, which you want to
make use of in the future, so that when we are forced to leave, we can
call no other kennel but ourselves, and you may remain with honor both
expellers and preservers. Farewell and pray for me. First Sunday of
Advent \[Nov. 27\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 788.**

Wittenberg. November 30, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther resisted his request to leave the court and his position, unless
his marriage required him to do so. He declares of himself, with
reference to a statement by Argula von Staufen, that he is not willing
to enter into marriage.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 1048, fol. 179, No.220; in Wolfenbüttel,
II, 10, fol. 231; in Copenhagen, alte

2\) Instead of *tuetor* may well be read *tuentor* (*tuetor*).

3i Namely, the dean Beskau had given the sacrament to a woman outside
the church under one figure.

**666** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 788. 789. 667

Library, Ms. 1393, p. 107; in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 332 (without the
postscript) and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 66. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 245 (without the postscript); in De Wette, vol. II, p. 569 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 76. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 930. The
postscript alone in *Buddeus, p.* 35.

Grace and peace! About your asking me for advice, my dear Spalatin,
whether you should leave the court and your office, 1) this is my
opinion. It is certainly a significant cause if the word is not heard,
as the wise man says \[Sir. 32, 6. Vulg.\]: \"Where there is no hearing,
do not throw away your speech.\" But if some hear, there is no need to
desist, or I, too, would have been silent long ago in the face of so
great a contempt for the word. If, therefore, there is no other cause
for you which weighs on your conscience, it is not enough for you to
leave your place or your profession or to do anything for the sake of
it. For if marriage did not drive you away from this place, I could not
even think of any cause that should move you. But since you now know the
court completely from experience and can be of use to many at the
prince\'s: if a newcomer enters, what will he be able to do before he
gets to know this court? Even if everything is done in the same way,
when will it happen that he will gain such great confidence and such a
high opinion from the prince as you have, and which is brought about by
long trial? So either stay, or, if you leave, you may go, because the
need of marriage compels you. Perhaps, however, you are afraid to cite
this cause, and instead of it you would like to use another as a reason.

1\) The people at court found fault with Spalatin in many ways, as he
wrote to Warbeck on Sept. 24: to some he was not tall enough in stature,
to others not strong enough; he did not have a pleasant voice, was not
short enough in speaking 2c. Furthermore, Seckendorf reports, *Hist.
Luth*. *lib.* I, p. 314, add. II, that Spalatin wrote to the Elector on
Nov. 25, requesting that he be dismissed from the office of a preacher
at court and given permission to marry, because \"he could no longer
stand the unpleasantness in his conscience. The name of Spalatin\'s
chosen one was Catharina Heidenreich. The Elector will have given his
answer orally. Through his request, Spalatin did not fall out of favor
with the prince, but the wedding was postponed until the following year
and was not consummated until after the prince\'s death. Then Spalatin
also left the court and became the successor of Wenc. Link in Altenburg.

I don\'t see what use that could be, since it must finally be given by
the deed itself all day long, if you do it.

I thank Argula for writing to me about taking a wife, and I am not
surprised that such things are gossiped about me, since many other
things are also gossiped about. But you thank her on my behalf and say
that I am indeed in the hand of God as a creature whose heart he can
change and change again every hour and every moment, kill and make
alive; but with the attitude that I have had and still have, it will not
happen that I marry. Not that I do not feel my flesh and my sex, since I
am neither wood nor stone, but my mind is far from marriage, since I
daily expect death and the deserved punishment of a heretic. Therefore,
I will not let GOtte set a goal of his work in me, nor will I rely on my
heart. But I hope that he will not let me live long. Farewell and pray
for me. Wittenberg, St. Andrew\'s Day \[Nov. 30\] 1524. Martin Luther.

I would like to know which people will be sitting in the Imperial
Council at Esslingen in the name of the Prince, because I have been
asked to intercede for the imprisoned Lord Mantel, whether he could be
freed by them; as is written from Esslingen, a promise has been made by
Ferdinand\'s supporters. I also recommend this last petition of poor
Sophie to you, if you can do something for her. Farewell and pray for
me. Wittenberg, on St. Andrew\'s Day \[30 Nov.\] 1524. M. L.

**No. 789.**

Wittenberg. December 2, 1524.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther complains about Amsdorf\'s silence, complains about the spread of
Carlstadt\'s error about the Lord\'s Supper, asks him to take care of
the Augustinians in Magdeburg, and reports that finally the mass in the
monastery has been abolished.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 246 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 571
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 80. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 935.

2\) The Elector\'s envoy in Esslingen was Dietrich von Techwitz.

**668** Letters from the year 1524. no. 789. 790. 791. 669

Grace and peace! It is certain that you have become 1) even a Crösus,
such an evangelist, who has converted all at once, my dear Amsdorf, how
else would it be possible that you would be so proud and write to us so
seldom. But we don\'t begrudge you having something to be proud of; we
have nothing but such things to be humbled by. For Carlstadt\'s poison
creeps around far and wide, Zwingli at Zurich and Leo Juda (*Judaeus*)
have fallen for his opinion and many others who constantly claim that in
the Sacrament there is only bread, like on the market 2c.

But I ask you to help faithfully so that the Augustinian brothers are
not treated so fraudulently among you. It was determined in my presence
2) that those who wanted to leave would be given a small sum so that
they would not go out empty-handed, about which they will report to you
themselves. Now both the council and the prior 3) seem to refuse.

We finally got our canons to agree that the masses should be abolished.
4) Now this house of abominations has been negotiated; what will happen
you will know. Farewell and greet all of our people. Wittenberg, Friday
after St. Andrew\'s Day \[2 Dec.\] 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 790.**

Wittenberg. December 12, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther repeats to the council that Spalatin should remain in office.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 1048, fol. 179, No. 219; in Wolfenbüttel,
11,10, fol. 231; same *Cod*. *Helmst*., 108, fol. 459; in Copenhagen,
old library, 1393, fol. 103 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 65. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 280; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 572 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 81 (with the wrong date: \"December 2\"). German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 936.

1\) Amsdorf had been in Magdeburg since the end of September.

2\) Luther was in Magdeburg on June 24, 1524, and negotiated with the
council about the conditions under which the monastery should be handed
over. Only on November 6, 1525, the monks left the monastery and handed
it over, after it was determined that the income should be used for
charitable purposes.

3\) The prior since 1523 was Udalricus Müller, previously prior in
Zerbst.

4\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1196.

Grace and peace! About leaving the preaching ministry, my dear Spalatin,
I still have no other opinion than before. For your reason does not
satisfy me that others are more knowledgeable in languages or adorned
with greater gifts. I know of none, unless you want even Philip or
Pomeranian or Jonas to be your successor; I have none in all our company
whom I could prefer to you. But see to it that it be not a temptation
which afterward, when thou hast resigned, deceiveth thee with
irremediable repentance; Satan is a mischievous man. Therefore I counsel
thee even more now to persevere, that the spirit may be tested, whether
it be of God, or whether thou be tempted. For why do you want to leave
the prince, who is perhaps very close to the grave, and disturb his last
days with a new minister? For if, on your resignation, it should happen
that he should soon pass away, you would always suffer for not having
persevered until that time. That is my opinion, therefore take it to the
best. Farewell. Wittenberg, Monday after Nicolai \[Dec. 12\] 1524,
Martin Luther.

**No. 791.**

Wittenberg. December 14, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends letters from Strasbourg to Spalatin, in which Carlstadt\'s
arrival and activities there are reported. He immediately wants to send
a letter to the Strasbourg people.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. \[4, No. 178 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 194. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 247; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 573 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 82. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 936 f.

To the servant of Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, servant of the words at
the court of Saxony, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Today I received letters from friends 5) in Strasbourg,
my dear Spalatin, about Carlstadt, who travels from there to Basel and
has finally spit out five books, two others he still burps. In it I am a
twofold papist, a brother-in-law of the Antichrist and what else. It is
too

5\) No. 784 and 785.

**670** Letters from the year 1524. No. 791 to 795. **671**

I am surprised how he rages against me; he leaves nothing good about me,
so that he also annoys his own with this rage. He has taken Otto
Braunfels (*Brunfeldium*), whom he also addressed there alone.
Therefore, a new conflagration breaks out. I am issuing a letter to the
Strasbourg people in two days from now and have tasted them until Christ
grants me to answer completely. Send the letters back, you will soon see
the books of this Satan.

I have spoken to the man you recommended. But pray for us that the glory
of Christ may triumph, and fare well. I have indeed answered your last
letter; I believe you received it today. Wittenberg, Wednesday after St.
Lucius \[Dec. 14\] 1524. Martin Luther.

**No. 792.**

(Wittenberg.) , (December 15, 1524.)

**To the Christians of Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2047, no. 688.

**No. 793.**

Wittenberg. December 17, 1524.

**To Catharina Zell, née Schütz, in Strasbourg.**

Luther wishes her happiness in her knowledge of the Gospel and in her
marriage to a man from whom she can learn it better and better.

Printed from Luther\'s manuscript in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p.
196; in the Altenburg, vol. II, p. 855; in the Leipzig, vol. XXII, p.
548; in Walch, vol. XXI, 83; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 580 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 277.

Of the virtuous women, Katharin Schützin, my dear sister and friend in
Christ, at Strasbourg.

Grace and peace in Christ! My dear, that God has given you His grace so
abundantly that you not only see and know His kingdom yourself (so
hidden from many people), but have also been given such a man, from whom
you may learn better daily and without ceasing, and always hear, I well
grant you, and wish you grace and strength for this, that you may keep
this with thanks until that day, when we shall all see and rejoice, God
willing.

Now nothing more, pray GOD for me, and greet me your Lord, Mr. Matthias
Zell. 1) Hiemit GOtt befohlen, am Sonnabend nach Luciä \[17. Dec.\] Anno
1524.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 794.**

Wittenberg. December 21, 1524.

**To Johann, Baron von Schwarzenberg.**

Luther wishes him luck on his daughter\'s departure from the convent.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 185; in the Altenburger,
vol. II, p. 515; in the Leipziger, vol. XIX,p.324; in Walch, vol. XXI,
83; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 581 and in the Erlanger Ausg., vol. 53, p.
277.

Grace and peace in Christ. Gracious Lord! I have received your Grace\'s
letter and history concerning your daughter with joy. I was pleased to
learn of your daughter\'s letter and story, and because Doctor
Franciscus has been here, I cannot refrain from wishing her salvation
and grace in writing, with thanksgiving for the divine goodness that has
so abundantly befallen her. Grace so abundantly that she not only
recognizes the truth, but also has the courage and sense to prove it by
deed and to carry it out without a trace, in the comforting hope that it
will serve as a strong example for many other gentlemen to also help
such poor, imprisoned children, and to confirm the truth of the Gospel.
I hereby command E. G. in God\'s grace, together with your dear
daughter, the new creature of Christ, and wish her much good in Christ.
Given at Wittenberg, on the day of St. Thomas \[Dec. 21\] Anno 1524.

E. Gn. Servant

Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 795.**

(Wittenberg.) (Before December 24, 1524.)

To the Elector Frederick of Saxony. Luther asks that the Elector take
the goods of the monastery, in which he and the prior alone were still
warm, and which the latter also wanted to leave, to himself.

1\) Zell was the first evangelical preacher in Strasbourg in 1521. In
December 1523 he married Catharina Schütz, 46 years old, He died in
1548. His wife survived him, because in 1562 she was still alive.

**672** Letters from the year

1524\. no. 795. 796. **673**

In the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 197 b; in the Jena double,
namely (1585), vol. II, p. 509 and (1556), vol. Ill, p. 436; in the
Altenburg, vol. II, p. 854; in the Leipziger, vol. XIX, p. 353; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 78; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 581 and in the Erlanger,
vol. 53, p. 278.

Grace and peace to Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! Your
Lordship has given us some grain this year. G. has given us some grain
this year through the locksmith; now the locksmith reminds us strictly
every day, and we still cannot pay it, because our interest is not
falling, nor has it fallen so far: for this reason, we humbly request
that E. churfl. G. will absolve us of the same grain at the
aforementioned locker for the last time. For I trust and hope that it
will no longer be necessary.

Also, most gracious Lord, because I am now alone in this monastery with
the prior (because of Christian love we keep with us some who have been
driven out \[by the enemies of the Gospel\]), and I have now kept the
same prior longer than a year to serve me, which length I cannot nor
will not endure, because his conscience demands of him to change his
life; 1) to the fact that it will not do with me to have such misery
daily, with the interest to be collected: we are minded, Ew. churfl. Gn.
the monastery with all that belongs to it, as the youngest heir. For
where the prior leaves, my work is no longer there, I must and will see
where God feeds me.

But so that we, as the last ones, do not leave so much as bare-handed, I
humbly ask that Your Eminence, the Holy Father, will graciously grant
and let occupy either the same prior or me in my name. Your Grace will
either graciously grant to the same prior or to me in my name and let us
occupy the space that our monastery has purchased next to the hospital
tower 2) for N. florins. Not that I want to receive a public favor or
writing from E. churfl. Not that I want to have a public favor or
writing for it, because I know well what your churfl. Gn.\'s interest in
this, but that Ew. churfl. Gn. see through their fingers, so that we may
take it with a good conscience and secret favor to reject it, or to

1\) The prior Eberhard Brisger married in the next year.

2\) In addition to the large space in front of the monastery, the
Elector donated the monastery house and the monastery garden, and this
donation was confirmed in documents by the following Electors in 1532
and 1536. Brisger received a building site on the space in front of the
monastery, on which he built a small house.

to protect with my name against the N., if they want to be a bit too
clever or otherwise too clever in this, that we then want to refer to E.
churfl. Gn. as a means of acquiring future favor and leave. However, God
will also advise a public favor.

Such a request is forced upon me by guilt and love, because the prior
must do without his paternal inheritance, which lies under the bishop of
Trier, for the sake of the pursuit of the Gospel, in which he would
otherwise be rich enough. May the grace of God protect E. churfl. Grace
keep you, Amen.

Ew. churfl. Gn.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 796.**

Wittenberg. December 24, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a married monk from Nuremberg. In the postscript, he
complains that Spalatin sent him a different form of petition requesting
the surrender of the monastery than the one in the previous letter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 247. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 35; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
583 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 86. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 937.

His in the Lord exceedingly dear M. Georg Spalatin, the servant of
Christ, evangelist at the court.

Grace and peace! This Jodocus Kern, a newly married monk from Nuremberg,
has asked me, my dear Spalatin, to recommend him to you; he was
recommended to me by Hector Pömer (*Behemo*), the provost of St.
Lawrence in Nuremberg. Although it would not have been necessary for me
to recommend him to you, because you will do what you can of your own
accord out of love for your homeland, for the sake of Christ, I
nevertheless recommend him, so that I may also serve him, if you are
able to do something. He is praised to me as good and learned. Fare well
in the Lord. Wittenberg, Saturday after St. Thomas \[Dec. 24\] 1524,
Martin Luther. The form in which the petition you sent to the prior is
to be written puts me in a difficult position.

3\) Spalatin was a native of Eichstadt and had attended school in
Nuremberg.

**674** Letters from the year 1524. No. 796 to 799. **675**

in amazement; I don\'t like it either, since it tastes of something and
contains something in it, I don\'t know what. Also, I do not think that
it matters much whether one makes his request this way or the other.
Therefore, you may either reveal if there is something hidden here, or
be satisfied with the previous petition. I will not be tempted against
my will, and you know, I think, that I cannot take much notice of any
thing, especially such a thing as is calculated to tyrannize me. If I do
not have meat dishes and wine, I will also be able to feed myself with
bread and water. Therefore, I do not want anyone to be troubled on my
account.

**No. 797.**

(Wittenberg.) (After 24, Dec. 1524.)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther explains himself in more detail about the postscript to the
previous letter and complains bitterly about the economic embarrassment
in which he is left.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 329. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 36; by
De Wette, vol. I I, p. 584 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 88. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 938.

To the man of proven godliness and faithfulness, Mr. Georg Spalatin,
court evangelist to the Elector of Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Mercy and peace! If I did not respect or despise friends or friendship,
I would not have written to you so freely, nor would I have poured out
the suspicions of my heart into your bosom, but would have eaten them
into myself. Therefore, you wrongly interpret the proof of my trust and
friendship towards you as the opposite. Even hypocrites are not in the
habit of revealing their suspicions to those of whom they know that they
are sincere. By the way, the reason for my suspicion was the manner of
this court, then also the monstrosity that was shown in the idol\'s
house with us, because I know the prince\'s mind, since he does not care
if one lets the interest go, and everyone goes his own way. I cannot
doubt that among their number are also those who, having left the orders
of the monastery, \[still\] consume something.

\[want\]. 1) In addition, we have still not received the interest on our
many requests. In the past year Christoph Bressen has paid nothing, 2)
and still owes the whole, namely 90 guilders. 3)\... Likewise, St.
Martin\'s Day 4) has arrived. Meanwhile we live full of debts and pay
with it. 5) This way of living cannot last long. Shouldn\'t this
hesitation of the prince rightly arouse suspicion? I would certainly
have left the monastery long ago and turned elsewhere to live from my
work (although I do not live without work here either), if the shame of
the Gospel and even of the prince had not kept me, so that malt could
not say that I was expelled and the enemies of godliness could rejoice
in what they hope for. For my change could not happen without a great
stir. Therefore I would like nothing better than to know whether we have
to torment ourselves in such a way or not, although I wish this in vain.
But I will not be burdened further with requests, and the Lord will give
what may be necessary. 1524.

Martin Luther.

**No. 798.**

Wittenberg. December 29, 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2627, annex, no. 119.

**No. 799.**

Wittenberg. 1524.

**To Spalatin.**

On a sermon by Jakob Strauß on the purchase of interest. On the
often-touched economic matter. Finally, news from Switzerland.

1\) Here a gap is indicated in the editions, which we have tried to fill
in with the words *jam aliquiä volunt.*

2\) Instead of *pendit* we have assumed *pependit.*

3\) Gap.

4\) Instead of *those* we have adopted *this.*

5\) The Latin text offers: *Item Martini die ingressus est. Interim non
alieno aere et v\.... impendimus.* Walch translates: \"Likewise he has
entered Martini. Meanwhile, with quite a bit of gusto, we \...
applied.\" We have assumed: *Interim nos alieno aere et v\[ivimus et\]
impendimus*. Cf. De Wette vol. II, p.424: *aere alieno vivimus. -* Walch
reads like the other editions also: *non alieno aere* and translates:
\"at quite air\".

**676**

Letters from the year 1524. No. 799 to 802.

677

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 248. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 38; by *Schlegel, vita
Spalatini,* p. 213; by De Wette, vol. II, w. 585 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. V, p. 94. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 940.

To Georg Spalatin, the man of God and servant of Christ, his friend in
the Lord.

Grace and peace! The sermon of Strauß pleases me more than his booklet
before, because he has softened this point that one must also pay
usurious interest. The only thing missing is that he condemns the
interest of repurchase without distinction as usurious; for if they were
brought into proper order (although they are abused everywhere), they
could not be censured.

Bressen has paid 120 florins, which have been used almost entirely for
debts; there are still 60 in arrears, of which we have forgiven him
thirty, because of his exceedingly great complaint that it is difficult
for him to pay 6 per 100, although this is not our fault, but that of
those who have ruined that estate, from which one could have taken more
than 6 per 100, or it could have been sold for hundreds more. But he
also got into this trouble without any fault. We would rather suffer
this double damage than he would suffer the single one. Finally, he
asked me to ask the prince to allow him to pay 5 per 100 forever, which
we will do in due time. Farewell and pray for me.

I am sending you the decree of the Swiss in Bern about the nuns, 1)
which must be returned to me. It has brought me this, together with a
nun sister from the same place, that noble woman in Christ, Magdalena
\"von Heylnitzen\", who is the victress in the Mark (*Marcia*) over
Wimpina and all Sophists. Wittenberg, Monday 1524. 2)

Martin Luther.

1\) See No. 756 towards the end.

2\) With regard to the dating of this letter, we agree with Erl. Briefw.
The same says: \"We refrain from wanting to determine the date of this
letter in more detail. De Wette places it at the end of December after
No. 800, in any case, moved by the fact that in No. 800 Luther complains
that Bressen has not paid anything yet, while here he reports about a
partial payment. But apart from the fact, that the numbers of the debt
appearing in both letters

**No. 800.**

(Wittenberg.) 1524. 3)

**Marriage certificate for Johann Gülden (*Aureus*).**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 730.

**No. 801.**

(Wittenberg.) (1524?) 4) \[After June 25, 1535.\]

**To Spalatin.**

Request safe conduct for Johann Gülden.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 234. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 40; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
588 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 96. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 943.

To hoods of Mr. Georg Spalatin, court evangelist in Saxony.

Mercy and peace! I beg you to have mercy on this Johann Gülden and to
provide him with peace and safe conduct for his cause through this
petition. For I believe that this can be done by the prince in a general
form, so that everyone may obtain his right. You see his plight and that
of his wife and two children. Fare well in the Lord.

Martin Luther.

**No. 802.** 1524.

**Concerns about whether a forced marriage was valid.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 710.

do not correspond to each other, \*) the dating of the letter would be a
conspicuous one. The only Monday that was left after the letter No. 800
is December 26, and Luther has hardly called the second Christmas day
simply a Monday, also he would have written then probably, according to
the custom of that time to begin the new year with Christmas Day,
already in 1525\".

3\) This writing is probably to be moved to the time before Pentecost,
because Jakob Probst was present, who left Wittenberg around this time.

4\) This time determination, which is found in the editions, is not
permissible, because Gülden married in 1524 (as the previous document
shows), but here it speaks of his wife and children. We assume that this
letter is to be placed after Luther\'s letter addressed to Aureus on
June 25, 1535. Cf. no. 583, note.

\*) We cannot admit this, since there is a gap in the debt amount in No.
800.

**678**

Letters from the years 1524 and 1525. No. 803 to 806.

**679**

**No. 803.** 1524.

**To the Christians in Riga and in Liefland.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1284.

**No. 804.**

(1524 or later.)

**Book inscription about Joh. 12, 32.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. IX, 1830.

**No. 805.** (1524.)

**To Urban \[Rhegius?\]**

Luther is said to have written this warning against trusting in the
saints in a copy of Carlstadt\'s book: \"Ein Frage ob auch jemand möge
selig werden ohn die Fürbitt Maria 1524\" and addressed it to Urban
Rhegius in Augsburg. Doubts about the authenticity of this document have
been expressed several times, so by Uhlhorn, \"Rhegius\", p. 85, and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 99. \"Luther\'s name,\" says Masch, \"has stood
at the end of the first letter, but the hand of the bookbinder has left
only a few traces of it.\" On this the Erl. Briefw.: \"From these
\'features\' Luther\'s name will probably only be guessed. Masch also
provides no evidence that the letter was addressed to Urban Rhegius.\"
However, we also share this letter, despite all justified doubts.

From Masch\' Beiträgen zur Geschichte merkwürdiger Bücher, 8. st. 1774.
Also in *G. G. Kohlreif, diss. de literis D. Lutheri biblicis. Rost*.
1731. 4th ; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 593 and in Erl. Ausg., vol. 53, p.
280.

(On the back of the first sheet:)

Dear Mr. Urban, I beg you to read this present sermon diligently for my
sake and also for your instruction, so that you may later turn
completely from the departed saints to Christ, who alone is our
mediator, consolation and salvation, in whose name alone all believing
people must be saved. *Non enim est aliud nomen sub sole, in quo nos
oporteat salvos fieri.* Neither Mary, nor John, nor Peter, nor
*Franciscus, nor Benedictus* helps here. It is the only Christ who
remains, who is the cornerstone and foundation of our salvation.
*Fundamentum aliud nemo potest ponere praeter id quod positum est, quod
est Christus Jesus*. Therefore, I ask you to stay with your conscience
and let go of what is uncertain. Saints to, saints to, we are all saints
in Christ, if we believe otherwise. For

In Christ nothing can be unclean or unholy; all things are sanctified
through him. He will not be alone; for he speaks through the prophet:
*Honorem meum alii non dabo*. Do now what is dear to you. Farewell.

Mart. Luther.

(At the end:)

How now, dear sir, do you not think he has hit it? Therefore, be careful
not to make an idol for yourselves. Take care that you do not rely on
the prayers of others, much less on the saints who have died. For
*tempus acceptum* is over with him. So it is written 2. *ad Corinth:
Tempore accepto audivi te*. And Paul admonishes us not to let the grace
of God fall away.

**No. 806.**

Wittenberg. January 11, 1525.

**To Johann Brismann in Königsberg.**

Several fleeting remarks and news. Luther is busy with the second part
of the writing \"Against the Heavenly Prophets\" against Carlstadt,
about which he expresses his entire displeasure. On the martyrdom of
Heinrich von Zütphen, by Thomas Münzer 2c.

The original is in the Rathsschulbibliothek in Zwickau. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 63; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 611 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 100.

To the extremely dear brother in Christ, Johann Brismann, the servant of
Christ at the Gospel of God in Prussia, his \[friend\] to be highly
honored in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I answer late, my dear Brismann, through
the fault of the messengers, but even this one almost passed by.
Carlstadt, who is completely given over to the devils, rages against us
with many published books, which are full of poison of death and hell.
He denies that the Sacrament is the Body and Blood of Christ, to which I
now reply, 1) although he has deceived many of the common people with
hidden plots in various places.

1\) Now Luther was busy with the second part of the writing \"Wider die
himmlischen Propheten\" 2c., the first part had already gone out in
1524. - This is in answer to the question of the Erl. Briefw.: \"How
does it relate to the fact that Mel. on Jan. 2 wrote to Thom. Blaurer
writes: *Lutheri responsio edita est?*\"

**680** Letters from the year 1525. no. 806. 807. 808. **681**

has. Erasmus will be answered 1) as soon as there will be leisure. I
hear that Amandus 2) has departed from you, and I am not very sorry,
rather I am glad; he seems to have Carlstadt\'s spirit. In Ditmarschen,
our Heinrich, the evangelist at Bremen, was killed and burned with cruel
fury. Deuteronomy 3) is held up by the wickedness of these prophets.
Apart from that, everything goes its usual course. We gladly accepted
Peter Weller, 4) who is recommended to us. Thomas Münzer wanders around
and is uncertain where he should stay. In Mulhouse he had caused a great
and dangerous uproar. Several other prophets are also rising up, so that
those who are faithful may be proven. The papists are happy about our
disunity. But God will find Carlstadt in his time, who I believe is
sinning to death. For it seems that, despairing of the kingdom of
Christ, he has given himself up to it, that he also wants to corrupt as
many as possible against the known truth and hurry to hell with a great
multitude with will and knowledge, as some once heard something like
that from his mouth. You pray for us and respectfully greet the Lord
Bishop. 5) I am very busy and suffering from a painful ulcer on my
thigh.

If dll don\'t know it yet: Hanna *Grauschwitz* (*Graswitzinne), who*
escaped from the gangs in Seußlitz 6), lived with us and married Johann
Schneidewind, and told me to greet you kindly in her name, and with her
three others, Barbara Reckenberg, Catharina Taubenheim and Margaretha
Hirstorff. The Duke George has

1\) By the writing: \"That free will is nothing\" on the diatribe of
Erasmus. See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1688 and 1600.

2\) Compare No. 746.

3\) Luther had promised in No. 746 that he would dedicate it to the
Bishop of Samland.

4\) Peter Weller von Molßdorf, born in Freiberg in Saxony in 1503, was
very friendly with Luther. He studied law in Wittenberg at the expense
of Duke Albrecht of Prussia, received a scholarship from him in 1534 to
attend the Italian universities, but made a pilgrimage from Italy to
Jerusalem, where he died in 1536. *Bindseil, colloquia, tom*. I, u. 418.

5\) Georg von Polenz, Bishop of Samland.

6\) In Seußlitz near Großenhain (district of Dresden) was a
Clarissinnenklofter.

personally bribed the monastery, and found shameful abominations, and
removed the brothers and fathers, those bridegrooms or rather
brothers-in-law of the nobles, from the place. Farewell. Wittenberg,
Wednesday after Epiphany \[Jan. 11\] 1525, Martin Luther.

**No. 807.**

Wittenberg. January 11, 1525.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther declines the commission to examine a Hebrew book and reports that
he is working on the second part of his writing against Carlstadt
(\"Wider die himmlischen Propheten\").

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 268d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 612 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 102. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 944.

Grace and peace! I will hand over the Hebrew booklet to Aurogallus when
he has returned, my dear Amsdorf, because it is beyond my strength. If
you send the prophets written, perhaps we will be able to help them. I
have little interest in Coppius\' 7) sophistical remarks and slanders. I
have answered Carlstadt in part, now I answer with a second part. 8) I
believe that you have seen the book. He is completely possessed, not
just by a devil. Besides, there is no news, except of the future war of
the Emperor with the King of France. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Wednesday after Epiphany \[Jan. 11\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 808.**

Wittenberg. January 13, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends back one book and one letter, and asks for the carriage of
another. News from Basel, where Carlstadt\'s books were banned but his
opinions were applauded.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 181. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 269 ; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 613 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 103. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 945.

7\) Probably the Magdeburg city physicist Gregor Coppius, also called
Calvus.

8\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 22 a. - \"The
Book\" is the first part of the writing \"Wider die himmlischen
Propheten\".

**682** Letters from the year

1525\. no. 808. 809. **683**

To Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ, evangelist at the court of
Saxony, his extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I am finally sending you back the Urban
Rhegius 1) with the letter of Matthes Busch (*Matthaei Puschii*). I have
added a letter to Hartmann Jbach 2) (*Hypachium*) which you can easily
send to him; I have no messenger. Jodocus 3) Kern has gone to Alstädt,
also recommended by me through letters, and will not return yet; what he
may do or suffer, I do not know.

Friends write to me from Basel that Carlstadt\'s printers have been
punished there with imprisonment, and it would have been little missing
that his books would have been burned; he had been there himself, but
secretly. But they write that they agree with his opinion, Oecolampad
and Pellican, Annemundus Coctus 4) but so stubborn that he threatens me
that if I do not depart from my opinion, he will write against me.
Behold the monstrosities of Satan. But, as far as I understand, they are
not caught by his reasons of proof, but by their own sense; because they
have before already thought the thing so themselves, they now dare to
come forth more freely, having obtained an author of their opinion, and
a guide. Christ upholds me and all those who are his. Just as I am not
caught by his evidence, but rather strengthened, so I am not stuck in
that error by my own opinion, even though I have been strongly
challenged. It is certain that our opinion is the true one, even if I,
or that one, or all of them fall away. Fare well and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Friday, the eighth day after Epiphany \[Jan. 13\], 1525.

Martin Luther.

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2628, note 1.

2\) Jbach was first Hartmuth von Kronberg\'s preacher, then in 1522
briefly in Frankfurt a. M., then on Amsdorf\'s recommendation in late
1522 preacher with the knight Joh. von Minkwitz in Sonnenwaloe (Lower
Lusatia). Later, in 1529, as a Zwinglian in Marburg.

3\) In Latin: *Justus* from the shortened: Jost.

4\) Aurifaber and De Wette read: *coactus* instead of: *Coctus*.

**No. 809.**

Wittenberg. January 18, 1525.

**To Amsdorf.**

All sorts of news, including that a Polish Jew had been sent to poison
him. Amsdorf should ask the Elector of Mainz to keep his people from
rebellion.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 270; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 616 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 105. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 950.

Grace and peace! I have given the small booklet to Aurogallus, my dear
Amsdorf. You will find out what will happen. I cannot be present at the
wedding of Melchior Mirisch, you may tell him that. For I suffer from a
bad leg, but for the health of my body. I also do not have any money to
send him, and it is also needed for our family, if it comes in. Staupitz
has passed away, 5) after having administered his position of power for
a short time. Our Leonhard, who was imprisoned in Munich and has been
freed by the Lord, is now with us. I will not answer Erasmus yet until I
have finished with Carlstadt, who has aroused and is still arousing
extraordinary unrest in Upper Germany. One thing is desired of you, and
I would not have you despise it, namely 6) that you write to the
Archbishop of Magdeburg, the Cardinal, and admonish him to keep his own
from rioting and unrest. This is advised by the friends for the sake of
it, because by this evidence it is more testified that only peace is
sought by you and ours, then also the bishop gets the opportunity to do
something with greater activity, who is otherwise not hostile to the
Gospel. There is a Polish Jew here with us, who was hired for the sum of
2000 gold florins and sent to kill me by poison; he was betrayed to me
by friends through letters. He is a doctor of medicine and is ready to
dare and do anything with unbelievable

5\) Staupitz died on December 28 in Salzburg, where he had become abbot
of the Benedictines in 1522. \"Leonhard\" is Leonhard Beier. (Erl.
Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 221, note 1.)

6\) Instead of *sed* in the issues, we have adopted scil.

**684** Letters from the year 1525. No. 809 to 812. 685

Cunning and skill. I have let this one take hold at this hour; I don\'t
know what else will happen. This is the news. Greet all brothers and
friends, and you pray for me and be well. Wittenberg, on the day 1)
after Antoni \[January 18\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 810.**

Orlamünde. January 18, 1525.

**Caspar Glatz, preacher in Orlamünde, to Luther.**

(Regest.).

Glatz reported to Luther about the situation of his enthusiasts in
Orlamünde and the deceptions Carlstadt had used to seduce the people.
Luther\'s writings on the Sacrament and the heavenly prophets were
treated extremely shamefully, for they said that everything in them was
written against the Son of Nazareth. They did not want to hear about
baptism, sacrament and obedience to the authorities. Shortly after
Luther\'s departure from Kahla (where he was on Aug. 23, 1524),
Carlstadt had preached that Luther was not faithfully using his pound,
given to him by God; he was pushing the gospel under the bench and
perverting the Scriptures as he saw fit. The spirit of which Carlstadt
pretended that he had it with him was his chaplain, a monk, a bad boy.
He had caused all kinds of hauntings by throwing stones, boards, etc. in
the house. Then Carlstadt said (among other big lies): Luther\'s
teachings were not from God, therefore one should beware of them, as the
spirit says, as of a pestilence. Often this spirit hid itself in the
church and rang at unusual times with the big bell. Carlstadt, asked by
the people what this meant, then answered: \"the spirit can have no
rest, unless the images, altar, sermon seat, baptismal font, sacrament
are even taken away and burned to powder\". Carlstadt also translated
several psalms from Hebrew (in the most miserable way) and taught the
people to sing them in German.

Transcript in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Abthlg. Cöthen, 618, Xo.
34, fol. 280. Printed in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. V, p. 107.

**No. 811.**

Wittenberg. January 22, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

After answering quite a few exegetical questions, some news.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in Cod.
Jen. a, fol. i99. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 2695; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 617 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 109. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 946.

1\) Here, what is otherwise unusual, *feria is* written without an
attached number. Should the same have failed, the date would fall one or
two days later.

To the man of God, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the
court of Suchsen, his dearest \[friend\] irr dem HErrn.

Grace and peace to your Lord! I have answered that Swabian nothing, will
also not answer. That the Lord created the heavens and the earth in six
different days, Genesis 1, as the text itself reads, I have taught and
kept, and the transcripts of some from my mouth are available; then that
the serpent was a real serpent, through which Satan spoke, using it as a
tool. For one must not do violence to the revealed words of Moses
without cause. Rebecca undoubtedly, according to that ancient custom,
asked the Lord for counsel in Shem the high priest, or one of the
fathers of that time, who was in charge of the service, who was full of
the spirit. Thus the Lord also spoke to Cain through a priest who was in
charge of the sacrificers, namely through his father Adam, just as
Christas Matth. 19 \[v. 5\] says that God said: \"They will be one
flesh\", while Adam said this in Gen. 2, 24. This custom was later
transferred under Moses to the mercy seat and the prophets and the
publicly appointed priests, therefore they are called Elohim, that is
gods, because they answer the word of God. But in the New Testament
every Christian is such a one.

I am sending the letter that was sent to me from Austria. Our Joachim 2)
writes that Carlstadt has gone to Nördlingen, likewise that a child with
a lion\'s head was born in Bamberg, which soon died. Some crosses have
also appeared over the city, but the rumor is suppressed by the priests.
Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Sunday after Antony \[Jan. 22\]
1525, Martin Luther.

**No. 812.**

Wittenberg. January 22, 1525.

**To Johann Lang.**

Luther recommends a young man to him and reports that his writing
against Carlstadt will go out this week.

2\) Camerarius, then in Bamberg.

**686**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 812. 813. 814.

**687**

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 293; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 618 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. III. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 977.

Grace and peace! I commend this young man, Andreas Landauer, 1) to you,
my dear Lang, that he, if you can, may earn his living somewhere through
service. Here, although we are poor, we are overrun daily, and our
church is weighed down by foreign poor, while we cannot do justice to
the local ones. Erfurt, however, the great and immense city, which is
situated in a fat place and is richer than we are, and more fertile, can
feed more, if only the power of the word goes in some measure. I have
refuted Carlstadt\'s nonsense about the Sacrament; this week the booklet
will go out. Greetings to your wife, who, I pray, may make you a father
through beautiful children. All of us greet you. Fare well in the Lord,
and in him greet all yours. Wittenberg, Sunday after Antony \[22 Jan\]
1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 813.**

Wittenberg. January 29, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recalls the request for remission of the monastery\'s debt to
Korn and sends the letter from Orlamünde.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 249. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 40; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
618 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 111. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 952.

To Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the Court of Saxony, his
extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I thought that this had long since been achieved, my
dear Spalatin, that we would be forgiven the debt of all the wheat that
we owed to the Wittenberg locksmith 2) as the last bell, since we must
leave shortly thereafter, especially since we asked you as a mediator,
since you would be present. But the locksmith lets

1\) Aurifaber: *Laudauer*. The above is a Conjectur of the Erl. Briefw.

2\) Gregor Bürger.

He does not cease to press us, and says that he cannot desist until he
sees (to use his words) \"the red wax of the court. Therefore, I still
ask you, if it is possible, to obtain this indulgence for us and to free
him from the danger. If it cannot be done, let it be known, and we will
see to it that by selling what is ours (all that we have left) we can
satisfy him. For I do not want him to be in danger any longer, nor do I
want us to be inconvenienced.

I am sending the letter of our Glatz,3) so that you may see what
monstrosities D. Carlstadt has dealt with and is still dealing with,
which I have always feared. \"There is nothing hidden that will not be
revealed,\" says Christ \[Luc. 12:2\]. Fare well and pray for me.
Wittenberg, 1525. Sunday after Paul\'s conversion \[Jan. 29\].

Martin Luther.

**No. 814.**

Wittenberg. (Beginning) 1525.

**To the Christians of Bremen,**

**With interpretation of the 9th Psalm, as a dedication of the story of
Henry\'s martyrdom.**

**from Zütphen.**

Luther asks the Christians of Bremen to praise and thank God for the
martyrdom of Heinrich von Zütphen, therefore he interprets the 9th Psalm
and sends them the story of the martyr\'s death.

This writing appeared in many individual editions, of which the Erlänger
edition, vol. 26 (2.), p. 400 f. lists seven, mostly under the title:
\"Von B. Henrico ynn Diedmar Verbrand, sampt dem zehenden Psalmen
ausgelegt durch Mart. Luther. Wittemberg.\" Several of them without
indication of the place of printing and the year (1525). Only one gives
the place Breslau (printer Adam Dyon); one is in Low German and offers
various additions that seem to be taken from the acts, also some
omissions. In the collective editions: in the Wittenberg (1553), vol.
VI, p. 398 b; in the Jena (1556), vol. Ill, p. 32; in the Altenburg,
vol. Ill, p. 32; in the Leipzig, vol. XIX, p. 324; in Walch, vol. XXI,
94; in the Erlangen, 1st ed, Vol. 26, p. 314 and in the second edition,
Vol. 26, p. 400. The letter with the Psalm interpretation, without the
history, in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 65 and in the Erlanger (1st), Vol.
53, p. 347. - In Latin translation (which was first published in the
*Farrago of Vincentius Obsopoeus* at Hagenau by Johann Sece

3\) No. 810.

**688**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 814.

rius appeared in 1625) in the Latin Wittenberg edition, tom. VII, fol.
492 b and in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 252b. - In any case, Luther will
have compiled the story of the martyrdom of Heinrich von Zütphen
according to information that he received from Jakob Probst in Bremen,
and which is probably based on information from the priest Boye (because
only a resident there could report the details except for the names), of
which, however, the letter that Probst sent to Luther at the end of 1524
contains only an infinitesimal part. It was originally written to the
Augustinians in Antwerp, but because the messenger had left without
taking the letter with him, he sent it to Luther and added the request
that Luther comfort them with a letter addressed to the whole church in
Bremen. Luther complied with this request by the present writing.
Probst\'s letter is printed in Erl. The history contained therein takes
up not quite one and a half pages, the one given by Lnther, however, ten
whole folio pages in the Jena edition. Therefore, we did not consider it
necessary to include Probst\'s letter.

Martinus Luther, Ecclesiastes zu Wittenberg, allen lieben GOttes
auserwählten Freunden in Christo zu Bremen. .

Grace and peace from God our Father and Lord Jesus Christ. Dearest in
Christ! I have not let the story and torture of the blessed Brother
Henry of Sudphen, your evangelist, which I have had investigated and
actually experienced through trustworthy pious people, lie hidden in
darkness or doubt, but have intended to bring it to light in praise and
honor of the divine graces, which at this time are so abundantly given
to us who are damned, lost and unworthy, lost and unworthy, that we not
only have, hear and read the clear Word of God, and also see it rising
in many places like the bright sun, but also feel and sense the Spirit
of God beside it with powerful and mighty deeds that prove and confirm
His Word as He has cultivated it from the beginning. Especially in that
he makes such courageous and free hearts that both, preachers and
hearers, in many places make the number of the saints daily more and
greater, since some shed their blood, some are imprisoned, some are
driven from their homes, and all of them bear the reproach of the cross
of Christ, and now come back is the form of a right Christian life,
which with suffering and persecution is horrible to look at in the eyes
of the world, but delicious and precious in the eyes of God, like the
Psalter. Psalter \[Ps. 116, 15\] says: \"Delightful in the sight of the
Lord is death.

**689**

of his saints,\" and again Ps. 72:14: \"Their blood is precious in his
sight.\"

Among them, of course, your Henricus Sudphen shines the brightest, who
suffered such a? shameful torture for the sake of God\'s word in
Diedmar, and so powerfully confirmed the Gospel with his blood. Although
the two, John and Henricus in Brussels, 1) the first, also became two
fine lights, by such beautiful deaths, in which they were sacrificed to
God for the sacrifice of a foot odor. Here also belongs Caspar Tauber,
burned in Vienna, and Georg 2) Buchführer in Hungary. And now recently,
when I am reporting, at Prague in Bohemia one was burned because he left
his order of impure chastity and entered the divine marriage state and
order of pure chastity. These and their like are the ones who will drown
the papacy and its god, the devil, with their blood. They are also the
ones who will keep the word of God against the impure defilers, the new
false prophets, who are now stirring up and tearing themselves down
everywhere, pure and loud. For God, by grace and without doubt, allows
them to die and shed their blood at this time, when all kinds of error
and corruption are rising up, so that He may warn us and testify through
them that this is the right doctrine, since the right spirit will be
given within, which they have taught, kept, died over, and testified to
with their torture; just as in the past the holy martyrs died for the
sake of the gospel, and sealed it to us with their blood and made it
certain.

Such glory has never been enjoyed by those who have taught and seduced
the world with works, human righteousness and free will. For the sake of
such teaching the devil kills no one, can suffer them well, yes, gives
them great wealth, honor and power of this world, so that they have
peace and lead a sweet life. And even if they die, they are not God\'s
martyrs, but their own and the devil\'s, just as the pagans are for the
time being.

1\) See No. 637.

2\) In De Wette, vol. II, p. 563: *Joanni*, perhaps more correctly.
(Against Erl. Ausg. \[2.\], vol. 26, p. 403, note d.) Compare St.
Louiser Ausg., vol. XVIII, 1985, note.

**690** Letters from the year 1525. No. 814. **691**

For justice, good and honor have died, as St. Paul says in Romans 5:7:
that for the sake of good 1) someone might die, that is, for the sake of
all the things that the world calls good, such as wealth, honor and
power. For for the sake of right hardly anyone 2) dies. But to die for
the sake of God\'s word and faith is the noble, precious death that
belongs only to God\'s spirits and children. For such death entails that
one dies for the unrighteous and for those who put on death, and prays
for them in death, as Christ did, according to the saying of Isaiah:
\"And he prayed for the transgressors\" \[Isa. 53:12\]. Therefore, we do
not read any example that a Christian ever died for the sake of the
doctrine of free will and works or anything else, but for the sake of
the word of God.

Since the merciful God has so graciously visited you in Bremen and is so
close to you, and has so apparently shown His spirit and power among you
in this Henrico, that you may grasp it, I have deemed it good to write
and omit his story and suffering to you, that I may exhort your hearts
in Christ, that ye be not grieved, nor speak evil of his murderers in
Diedmar, but be merry, giving thanks and praise to God, who hath made
you worthy to see and have such his wonders and graces. For his
murderers have already been repaid too much and too greatly, that they
have so miserably stained their hands with the innocent blood, and have
indebted themselves so highly and terribly before God, so that it is
much more necessary to weep and lament over them than over the blessed
Henricum, and to pray for them, that not only they, but the whole
Diedmarian land be converted and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Which fruit is comforting to hope that it will follow from this
suffering of Henrici, especially because many in the same country are
eager for the Gospel, and they are sorry for such murder committed among
them. For God, who wanted the blessed Henric to suffer, certainly has it
in mind that he does not only want to punish the wicked who do not
convert, but that he also wants to punish the wicked who do not convert.

1\) Erl. (2.): \"GOttes\". The same error also in Latin: *pro Deo*. In
the Vulgate: *pro bono*.

2\) Erl. (2.): \"jdermann\".

The first step is to make the murder of many in the same country
salvific, and thereby help them to eternal life.

For this reason, I ask and command you to sing and read the 9th Psalm in
this case, which actually belongs here, so that I will not be saddened
by the martyrs, but will happily praise God for the fruit that God works
on earth through their suffering. And I shall not be displeased to sing
over the same together with you at present in the spirit and to
interpret it recently.

**A brief interpretation of the ninth Psalm by the martyrs of Christ,**

who thus sows:

A psalm of David high to sing, of the youth of the Son.

This title indicates what the psalm sings about and how it should be
sung. It is to be sung high, that is, joyfully and with pleasure, and of
the youth of the Son, that is, of the martyrs of Christ, the Son of God,
who are his young, strong people, who have become complete through faith
in death.

**V. 1. I thank the Lord with all my heart and will tell your wonders.**

These miracles are, as it follows, that God compels and converts the
world, not by force, but by the blood and death of His saints, and
overcomes the living by the dying and the dead; this is a wonderful
victory.

**V. 2. I rejoice and am glad, and praise your name, O Most High.**

His name is also strange, like the work; because from the work he has
the name, that he promotes life through death, and thereby proves
himself a Lord over life and death (Rom. 14, 9.).

**V. 3. that thou hast driven mine enemies behind thee; they are fallen
and perished before thy face.**

O a blessed activity, falling and coming about, which from God\'s face
(that is) through his

3\) In all individual editions, also in Latin and in the Wittenberg:
\"tenth\".

**692**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 814.

**693**

The knowledge of His grace comes when the wicked fall so that they rise
and are saved.

**V. 4. for you have executed my right and my cause; you sit on the
throne a right judge.**

The matter is the word of God, over which the wicked are hostile to us.
But God leads it out, that our doctrine may remain right, and that they
may be put to shame. For he is a righteous judge; of this we take
comfort, that he cannot leave our righteous cause.

**V. 5 You rebuke the nations and destroy the wicked; you destroy their
name forever and ever.**

So you bring my things to pass, that by your word you punish them and
convert them, and bring all their things to nothing, so that they are no
longer respected.

**V. 6. the swords of the enemy are ended, the cities you turn back,
their memory is gone with them.**

That is, they cease from persecuting and become believers, so that they
no longer praise or remember their former nature.

**V. 7. But the Lord abides forever; he has his throne ready for
judgment.**

That is, his word and kingdom exist, condemning all the ungodly with
their being.

**V. 8. He judges the earth rightly, and rules the Levi uprightly.**

That is, by his word he guides and teaches the world rightly and well.

**V. 9. The Lord is the shelter of the poor, a shelter in time of
need.**

For even though he allows us to be challenged and some to be killed, he
protects them spiritually so that they will be courageous and not fear
death, but overcome it. He also keeps us from all perishing, as the
wicked would have us do. And so his multitude remains forever and
increases.

**V. 10 Therefore they that know thy name hope in thee: for thou
trustest not, O Lord, they that seek thee.**

This is a great defiance and comfort that God promises us that He will
not abandon those who ask for Him, that is, those who have His word, in
which His name is recognized and praised, not our deeds or name, as the
works saints do.

**V. 11: Praise the Lord who dwells in Zion, proclaim his deeds among
the people.**

That is, only seek and praise his name, and preach his word, and he will
in turn seek and praise you, as follows:

**V. 12: For he remembers and asks for their blood; he does not forget
the cry of the poor.**

He causes them to be killed and blood to be shed, as if he had forgotten
them; but he remembers them powerfully and causes their blood to be
smelled, so that the faithful become more and more, and the wicked less
and less, the more they shed blood.

**V. 13. Be merciful to me, O Lord, behold my misery among the enemies,
who lift me up to the gates of death.**

That is, continue as thou hast begun, and keep on helping, that through
death we may become more. For thy way is to help out of the gates of
death, that is, out of the power of them that kill, and to subdue them.

**V. 14 That I may tell all thy glory in the gates of the daughter of
Zion, that I may rejoice in thy salvation.**

That the more you help, the more I have to praise you, so that your name
and glory may be greater and greater among the faithful, as follows:

**V. 15: The Gentiles are sunk in the pit they have made, their foot is
caught in the net they have set.**

That is, with their killing and persecuting, they are killing themselves
and killing themselves. For God makes His word stronger by this, so that
it converts more people than otherwise.

**V. 16. The LORD is known to do right, the wicked1) is entangled in the
work of his hands, sela.**

1\) Erl. (2.): \"Gottlob\", probably a misprint.

**694** Letters from the year 1525. No. 814. 695

He does not forsake his word, but at the last makes it manifest that it
is right, and the wicked are caught with their own words and sayings.

**V. 17. The wicked must be turned to hell, all the heathen who forget
God.**

So let us pray against them, that God may stir them in conscience, and
by our word make them afraid to come.

**V.18. For he does not forget the poor, and the hope of the wretched
will not be lost forever.**

This is what the wicked would like, and God allows it to be seen as
such, and the wicked are subject to it. But he comforts us here, that we
should not judge ourselves according to appearance, but according to his
word.

**V. 19. Arise, O Lord, lest men get the upper hand; let all the
Gentiles be judged before you.**

This is as thou hast spoken, so do, and let thy word be heard far and
wide among all the Gentiles, that they may be condemned and terrified in
conscience.

**V. 20. Set them, O Lord, a teacher, that the Gentiles may know how
they are men, selah.**

He who knows a man knows that he is nothing and vain in the sight of
God; therefore he leaves off his boasting and presumption, and is humble
to learn from anyone. But such knowledge is brought by the word,
preached outwardly. Therefore he calls for teachers, as Christ says:
\"Ask the householder to send laborers into his harvest\" \[Matth. 9,
38\]; he does not want to deal with us with spirits without doctrine or
outward word, as some mad prophets are fooling us now.

So you see here, my dear lords and friends, how this psalm comforts us
and gives us hope that through the precious blood of Henry God will
create much good and benefit; therefore let yourselves be comforted by
such divine comfort, and help to pray with this psalm that his name may
be sanctified and his kingdom increased, amen.

I ask you for God\'s sake, let the people in Diedmar be commanded to
you,

comfort them kindly and help them to come here as well. For I hear that
many are extremely sorry about such misfortune caused by the monks in
their country. This is a good spark, lit by God; there will be a good
fire, where you act with a kind, gentle spirit, so that it will not be
extinguished.

Let Jacobum Probst, your preacher, and the others be in your charge,
whom God will strengthen with you all and give grace that you may abide
by the doctrine sealed by Henrici\'s blood, and where God demands it,
cheerfully follow him. Amen.

All our brothers in Christ greet you. Pray for us. May the grace of God
be with you, Amen.

**The story of Brother Henrico Sudphen.** 1)

In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and twenty-two,
Henricus came to Bremen, not that he wanted to preach there, for he
wanted to go to Wittenberg, as he had been driven from Antorf 2) by the
tyrants for the sake of the Gospel. But he was asked by some pious
Christian citizens to preach a sermon, which he did not refuse after
Christian love, but did the first sermon on the Sunday before Martinmas
\[Nov. 9\]. Since the people heard him teach the Word of God, he was
diligently requested and demanded by the entire congregation in the same
parish,3) to preach the Word of God to them, and thus to remain with
them, which he accepted for a time, to try this with them. But when
those who are called the clergy, by name the priests, together with the
monks and priests, became aware of this, they made every effort to
restrain and expel him with the word of God, for the sake of their
avarice, as is the custom in all countries. Therefore they asked the
honorable wise council to expel such a wicked heretic, because his
teaching and preaching would be against the holy Christian church. At
such a request, a wise councilor ordered the following to be done

1\) We give this story after the Erl. Ed. (2.), vol. 26, p. 409 ff. -
The family name \"Müller\" or \"Moller\" is not historically verifiable,
but un, known (Erl. Briefw.).

2\) That is,-Antwerp. .

3\) probably the church of St. Anschari.

**696** Letters from the year 1525. No. 814. **697**

The builders 1) and rulers of the same parish demanded that Henricus
preach and reproach them with the complaint of the chapter along with
all the priesthood. The builders of the parish answered that they knew
of no other way than that they had accepted a pious, learned preacher
who taught them the word of God purely and loudly. But if the chapter or
anyone, small or great, could prove that he had taught or preached
something against the word of God, or otherwise heresy, they would not
suffer or hold him in any way, but would help to persecute him together
with the chapter. If, however, the lords of the chapter and other clergy
could not bring anything upon him that he had taught against God\'s
word, and intended to force him out without any guilt, they would not
suffer this in any way. For this reason, they asked an honorable
councilor with all humility not to encourage them to do so, but to let
them do what was right; they would also be inclined to keep their
preacher right at all times. Such an answer was sent by an honorable
council to the chapter through their envoys. But when the clergy noticed
that they could not achieve anything with good words, they began to be
angry and angry, and from hour to hour they ran to their bishop 2) and
showed him how the people of Bremen had become heretics, did not want to
be obedient to the clergy, with many complaints, as it was to be feared
that the whole city would be seduced.

Then the bishop sent two of his councilors to Bremen and asked them to
send the monk to him. 3) But when they asked why he should be sent to
Bremen, they answered: he preaches against the holy church. But when
they asked for what reason they should send him, they answered: he
preaches against the holy church. If someone asked: in what and what
articles? they did not know how to answer. Among them was the suffragan
bishop of the Order of Preachers, who made every effort to catch the
pious Henricum, fearing that his craft would perish. Finally they were
answered by an honorable council: According to

1\) The church builders Heinrich, Esch and Arend Wittelob. both at the
same time Rathsherren. Iken, p. 50.

2\) Archbishop Christoph (1511-1558), from the Brunswick - Lüneburg
house of princes, who at that time stayed in his episcopal city of
Verben.

3\) That is, to solicit, desire, demand. Latin: *postulans*.

If the preacher, accepted by them, would not be overcome by any
scripture, and also no one could indicate any article in which he
preached unjustly, they would not be able to bring about in any way with
their citizens that the citizens would let him follow. Therefore, it
would be their humble request that the bishop, their gracious lord, 4)
procure his scholars to Bremen to debate with their preacher. If he
would be found wrong, they wanted to get the preacher away with quite a
punishment; but if not, they would not know how to leave him. But the
suffragan bishop answered and asked most earnestly, for the sake of the
peace of a whole country, that the preacher be handed over to him, and
protested most earnestly, as he sought nothing else but the salvation of
their souls; but he could accomplish nothing, for the people of Bremen
persisted in their first answer.

Because of this, the suffragan bishop was angry and departed from
Bremen, and out of great anger, he did not want to fermelize the
heretics\' children. When the suffragan bishop returned to his lord, he
showed him this answer and what he had heard from the priests and monks.
After that, as new newspapers came daily, showing how the preacher was
preaching angrier and angrier against the clergy, they found another
council, and sent excellent people to warn the people of Bremen about
the damage the city would suffer because of the preacher, since he was
preaching against papal holiness and imperial majesty\'s command; they
also showed how he was a prisoner of Frauen Margrethen, which would
cause them great damage. They also brought urging letters from Frauen
Margrethen, that she demanded her prisoner; but all this did not help
her. For an honorable wise council always gave an answer in writing and
orally to everyone. Then the bishop and his group devised another
council to muffle the word of God, and held a provincial council, not at
Bremen, as is customary, but at Buxstede, 5) so that they would have
room to act with Brother Henrico as they wished. For this purpose

4\) Thus the Jenaer. Erlanger: \"wöllt ihrer gnädiger Herre seine\" 2c.

5\) That is, at Buxtehude. It took place on March 10, 1523.

**698**

Letters from the\" year 1525. No. 814.

**699**

The prelates and scholars of the entire diocese were called upon to act
on what they believed and held to be true.

The preacher was also called to the council, but with the difference
that they wanted to proceed with and against him as with a heretic,
since he was unconquered and unheard. For this reason, the rulers,
together with a whole congregation, kept their preacher with them,
because their wickedness was in the day. But Brother Henry summarized
his sermon, what he taught and believed, in short articles, and sent
them in a letter to the archbishop, and showed his innocence, along with
the articles, and offered, where he was mistaken, that he could be shown
from Scripture to desist from such error and to recant. But he should be
shown his error from the Scriptures, because he would know how to prove
his teaching or preaching from the Scriptures 1). But such an offer,
together with the articles, was despised, for he received no answer.
What the verdict was, however, may be seen from this: for immediately
thereafter they had the Pope\'s Leonis of the tithe, together with the
imperial mandate, written at Worms, proclaimed and posted. Therefore,
the pious preacher always continued his sermon and did not cease;
besides, he always stipulated that he wanted and would be ready to give
everyone an answer to his doctrine and sermon. The papists, however, had
no peace, and daily sent their chaplains into the sermon to catch him in
his words. But God showed His wonders and converted some of them, so
that most of the chaplains they sent there confessed that such teaching
and preaching was the truth and from God, which no one could resist,
because they had not heard such teaching from any man all their lives.
Therefore, they should renounce their evil and not pursue the word of
God, but believe that they would be saved. But their wickedness had
blinded them and hardened them with Pharaoh, so that they became worse
according to their merit. To this day, no one of all the monks has been
able to raise a word, 2) even though they daily cry out heresy, heresy,
and are still unable to do so.

1\) Erl. (2.) \"knew\".

2\) Erl. (2.): \"could\".

Since God Almighty saw the time that the good Henricus should testify
with his blood to the truth preached by him, he sent him among the
murderers whom he had prepared for this purpose. For it happened in the
24th year of small number 3) after Christ\'s birth that he was called by
Nicolao Boye, pastor, and other devout Christians of the same parish at
Meldorf in Diedmar, to proclaim the word of God to them, and to bring
them out of the Antichrist\'s night, for he ruled mightily there, which
calling he accepted as from God, and for this reason promised them that
he would come to them. After that, on St. Catharine\'s Eve \[Nov. 24.
1524\], he summoned six pious confreres and citizens, told them how he
had been called to Diedmar, and indicated to them that, since he was not
alone obliged to proclaim the word of God to them alone, but to anyone
who desired it, he intended to go to Diedmar and wait to see what God
would do with him; Therefore, he asked them to give him good advice on
how he could most easily get there, so that the whole community would
not become aware of it and would not prevent his journey, as had
happened. The devout Christians answered and asked that he stay with
them and see how the gospel was still almost weak among the people,
especially in the surrounding towns, and the persecution was still
great, and see that he was called by them to preach the word of God. But
if the people of Diedmar wanted a preacher, he sent another one there,
because they knew what kind of people the people of Diedmar were. They
also told him that they would not let him go without the consent of the
whole parish.

Good Henry answered: although he knew that he had been called by them,
they would otherwise have enough pious, learned people to preach to
them. The papists would also be partly overcome, so that henceforth
women and children would see and judge their foolishness. I had also
preached to them for two years; but the people of Diedmar had no
\[preacher\], so he could not refuse them such a request with a clear
conscience. That they

3\) \"smaller number\"; usually \"of the smaller number,\" that is,
omitting the larger number of centuries.

**700**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 814.

**701**

but that they could not leave him without the knowledge and will of a
whole congregation, did not conclude anything with him, because he did
not want to leave them altogether, because he intended to preach in
Diedmar only for a short time, namely a month or two, as long as he
himself laid a foundation orally, and then to come to them again.
Therefore, his opinion and request would be that after his departure
they would inform the congregation of his profession, which he could not
resist, and at the same time excuse his secret departure, because he
would have to go secretly for the sake of his enemies, who would want to
harm him, who were striving day and night, as they themselves well knew
how they would kill and slay him, and also indicated how he would soon
be with them again. With these words he satisfied them that they would
allow him to go, because they hoped that the people of Diedmar would
come to the right knowledge of the word of God, who otherwise are almost
burdened with idolatry before other people.

After that, on Monday of the first week in Advent \[Nov. 28,1) 1524\],
Henricus went through the middle of the monastery of Bremen in Diedmar,
and came to Meldorf, where he was called, and where he was received with
great joy by the pastor and other pious Christians. As soon as he
arrived, although he had not yet preached a sermon, the devil became
angry with his limbs, and in particular he aroused Augustinum
Torueborch, prior of the black monastery, which is called Jacobite or
preacher, who ran from hour to hour to his companion M. Johann Snicken,
the official of Hamburg Vicarien or Commissarien, and held council, what
to do, so that their kingdom would not fall. Finally they decided that
they would have to make sure that he did not preach, because if he
preached so that the common man heard him, their mischievousness would
come to light and they would not be able to do anything about it. For
they knew well how things had gone in Bremen. On this decision, the
Prior of the Order of Preachers set out early in the morning, for he had
not slept much during the night due to great worry, and came to the
Heath on the Saturday before the other Sunday of Advent \[Dec. 3\].

1\) In Latin: *octobris*.

48 regents of the whole country, and complained highly and indicated how
the monk of Bremen had come to turn the whole country of Diedmar, as he
had done to those of Bremen; also had to help M. Günter, the country\'s
common chancellor, and Peter Härmen, 2) both great enemies of the Word
of God. These two helped the prior with all diligence, and held up to
the other 46 unlearned, simple-minded ones, how great praise they would
receive in the whole of the Low Countries, and how great thanks they
would earn especially from the Bishop of Bremen, where they would put
this heretic monk to death. When they heard this, the poor unlearned
people, they soon wrote, 3) and decided to kill him, whom they had not
seen, much less heard, nor overcome. Finally, the prior issued a letter
or command to the parish priest of the 48 regents to expel the monk
before he preached, with the highest penalty according to the custom of
the land. Immediately the prior went with haste to Meldorf with the
commandment, and delivered it to the pious parish priest during the
night, for he hoped to prevent Henricus from preaching, for he knew well
what was in it for him. When the priest read this letter or commandment,
he was very surprised by such a commandment, since it was unusual that
the 48 regents were concerned with the churches, when according to the
old custom of the country the regiment belonged to the whole parish. For
it was decided by a whole country, in long use, that any parish church,
according to its good will, had the power to appoint and dismiss a
parish priest or preacher. The parish priest showed this letter to
Henrico, and showed him what the custom and usage of the country was.
Henricus answered: after he was called by a whole parish to preach the
word of God, he wanted to comply with the same calling, as long as it
pleased the whole community, because one had to obey the word of God
more.

2\) Here all editions have: \"Härmen\", and so it is called in Latin
throughout; the German editions offer after: \"Nannen\",

3\) \"They soon wrote,\" according to all German editions; it is not
expressed in Latin. Shouldn\'t \"schrieen\" perhaps be read, since
[writing]{.underline} is spoken of immediately afterwards?

**702**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 814.

**703**

than man. If God wanted him to die in Diedmar, heaven would be as close
there as elsewhere; he would have to shed his blood once for the sake of
God\'s word. With such courage he stood up the following Sunday and
preached the first sermon from the saying of Paul, Rom. 1, 9: \"God is
my witness\" 2c. and from the Gospel of the same day. As soon as the
sermon was over, the entire congregation of the parish was called
together, and there the previous prior delivered a letter from the 48
regents of the country, that they should not let the monk preach under
penalty of a thousand Rhenish florins, and that they should also send
their legates to the heath with authority, because there a whole country
would come together for a great reason.

When they heard this letter read, they were almost angry that against
all national custom such a commandment had happened to them, when any
parish church had power to choose a preacher whom it wished, and with
one accord they decided to keep and protect the pious Henricum as a
preacher, for they were completely inflamed by the first sermon they had
heard. After noon, Henricus preached another sermon, on the saying of
Paul, Rom. 15:1: \"But we who are strong\" 2c. On Monday after that, the
people of Meldorf sent their messengers to the Heida, and offered
themselves justly before everyone of the whole country, showing what
Christian sermon they had heard from Henrico. At the same time the
priest wrote to the 48 rulers of the country how neither he nor Henricus
were of the opinion to make rebellion, but to teach the pure, clean word
of God; he claimed that he wanted to stand right with brother Henrich
before everyone. Therefore, his humble request would be that they would
not give credence to the monks who, for the sake of their hatred and
avarice, thought to suppress the truth, and \[that they\] would not
condemn the word of God, but would investigate the truth completely
\[for\] the first time, and would not condemn anyone unheard. If it were
the case that they were found wrong, they would be ready to suffer their
punishment.

This offering, together with the testimony, they despised, and gave no
answer to it, but everyone talked, one this, the other that, in

the other that. Lastly, Peter Dethleves, as one of the elders, answered:
\"Although there was almost great discord in all the lands because of
the faith, and they, as the most unlearned and unintelligent, could not
judge, it was their serious opinion to postpone such a matter until a
future concilium, which, as reported by their country clerk M. Günter,
should be held shortly. What their good neighbors would hold and
believe, they would also think of accepting. But if the word of God (as
they say) \[so far\] 1) had not been taught clearly enough, and if
someone could teach it more clearly and more purely, they would not
think of forbidding it, because they would not think of suffering any
uproar in the lands. 2) Therefore, everyone should be satisfied and let
the matter rest until the next Easter; in the meantime, it would become
clear what was right or wrong. Everyone was satisfied with such an
answer, and the envoys went home from Meldorf and showed such an answer
to the whole community with great joy, hoping that the matter would
become good.

On the day of Nicolai Episcopi \[Dec. 6\] he preached two sermons, the
first on the Gospel \[Luc. 19:12 ff.\]: \"A nobleman went far away into
a country\" 2c.; the other on the saying \[Heb. 7:23\]: \"There are many
who became priests\" 2c., with such spirit that everyone marveled, and
asked God with diligence to let them have such a preacher for a long
time. On the day of the Conception of Mary \[Dec. 8\] he also preached
two sermons on the Gospel \[Matt. 1:1 ff.This is the book of the
Nativity\", in which he showed the promise made by Christ to the
fathers, and what faith they had, and how we also with such faith should
be saved, without any merit on our part; and all this with such spirit
that everyone marveled and diligently thanked God that he had sent them
such a preacher, for they now clearly saw how they could be saved by
monks and

1\) Inserted by us after the Latin, for easier understanding.

2\) This is more clearly expressed in Latin as follows: the rulers only
wanted to prevent that a window would be opened by anyone to arouse a
riot.

**704** Letters from the year 1525. no. 814. **705**

They were seduced by the priests. They also asked him with diligence to
stay with them during Christmas and to preach every day, because they
were afraid that he would be called to another place. In the meantime,
the prior and M. Johann Snicken did not rest. For when the prior saw
that his wickedness could not go away, he went with Doctor Wilhelm of
the Order of Preachers to Lunden to the gray monks, who are called
Barefoot or Minores, to seek help and advice on how he might accomplish
his will, for these same monks are almost adept at seducing the poor
wretches with their legerdemain.

Immediately the gray monks sent for some of the regents, named Peter
Rannen, Peter Swyn and Claus Rodeun, and showed them with great
complaints, as it is their custom, how the heretic preaches and seduces
the people, which is partly dependent on him; if they would not see to
it and kill the heretic, Mary\'s praise would go down together with the
holy two monasteries. This was the scripture, 1) when they intended to
kill the heretic as well; when it happened. When the poor, unintelligent
people heard this, they became angry, and Peter Schwyn answered that
they had written to the priest and Henrico about what they should do; if
it were necessary, they would write again. The prior answered: No,
because you have to deal with the matter differently. For if you begin
to write to the heretic, he will answer you, and you will undoubtedly
come into heresy with him before you know it; for if he were to speak,
nothing would be done to him. Then they decided that he should be caught
secretly in the night and burned immediately, before the country would
know and he would speak. Such advice pleased them all, and especially
the gray monks. On such advice Peter Rannen, as a special friend of the
prior, wanted to earn the gratitude, and drew to himself several Ammeral
2) from other villages, with the help and advice of M. Günter. One
should spare the names here; however, after they had sought honor

1\) That is, the scriptural evidence.

2\) This word is missing in Grimm and also in Dietz. According to the
explanatory addition of the Low German edition: \"große Hansen\";
*Obsopoeus: praefectos*.

have, it is not necessary to deprive them of their honor. These are the
names of the captains:

Peter Rannen, Peter Swyn\'s sons, Hennick zu Lunden, Johann Holm, Lorenz
Hanneman, Ludwick Hanneman, Bastel Johann Bren, Claus von Weslingburen,
Brost Johann von Workenhausen, Marquard Kremer zu Henstede, Ludecke
Johann zu Welsing, Peter Groß, Vogt zu Hemmingstet. These captains,
together with the others they had with them, were summoned to the parish
of the New Church, and met in M. Günter\'s, the scribe\'s, house, and
held council, as they sang and did not let him get a word in edgewise,
for the verdict was that they wanted to burn the good Henricum. They
decided to go together to Hemmingstet, half a mile from Meldorf, the
next day after Conceptionis, so that no one would warn them. They were
also ordered to gather in all the villages when the night came and the
Ave Maria was rung. And they came together by the five hundred peasants.
When they were gathered together, it was publicly shown for what cause
they had been summoned. For no one, except the captains, knew the cause
and what they should do. When the commoners heard this, they wanted to
retreat and not commit such an evil deed. But the captains commanded
them, body and soul, to go away. They had also drunk three tons of
Hamburger Four there, so that they would be all the more courageous.
They arrived in Meldorf at midnight at 12 a.m. with their hands armed.

The Jacobite or preacher monks gave them light and torches, so that they
could see and the good Henricus could not escape. They also had a
traitor with them, named Hennig\'s Hans, who had betrayed all things;
they forced their way into the parish, smashed everything that was
there, as is the custom of full, foolish peasants: pots, kettles,
clothes, cups; but what they found of silver and gold, they took with
them. They also attacked the priest by force, cutting and stabbing him
and shouting: \"Hit him dead, hit him dead! Some of them pushed him
naked into the dirt on the road and took him prisoner, telling him to go
with them. The other part shouted that they should let him go, because
they had no order to let him go with them.

**706** Letters from the year 1525. No. 814. **707**

to catch him. Afterwards, when they had exercised their courage with the
priest, they invaded the good brother Henrich, and took him naked out of
bed, beat, stabbed, like the senseless full peasants, and tied his hands
almost hard on the back, pulled and pushed him so long that \[it\] also
moved Peter Rannen with mercy, who was otherwise a poisonous enemy of
the word of God, and said that they let him go, he would probably
follow; ordered him to lead Balke Johann, who dragged him more than he
led. When they brought him to Hemmingstet, they asked him how he had
come into the country and what he was looking for. He answered them
kindly with the truth, so that they were also moved, and called out:
Only away with him; where we heard him long, we would become heretics
with him! Then he asked to be put on a horse, because he was very tired
and weary, and his feet were sore to him, for he had walked and led
barefoot and naked all night in the cold and ice. When they heard this,
they mocked and laughed at him, saying, \"Should your heretic be kept on
horseback, for he must be able to walk? There they brought him to a
man\'s house, named Raldenes, 1) and wanted to put a stick with iron
chains on him. But the father of the house had compassion, and would not
suffer such things. Since he would not permit their courage, they
brought good Henrich to a priest\'s Hans, named Mr. Reimer Hozecken, a
servant of the official of Hamburg, locked him in a cellar, and gave him
to the full peasants to keep, who mocked and jeered at him all night
from then on. Among others, Mr. Simon, pastor of Altenworden, and Mr.
Christian, pastor of the New Church, both almost unlearned persecutors
of the Word of God, came to him and asked him for what reason he had
taken off the holy garment, to which he answered kindly from the
Scriptures; but they did not understand what he said.

M. Günter also came to him, asked him whether he preferred to be sent to
the Bishop of Bremen or to receive his wages in Diedmar? Answered
Henricus: I have what

1\) So the German editions; in Latin: *Caldenes*.

If I have taught or acted unchristian, they could well punish me for it;
God\'s will be done. M. Günter answered: Listen, dear friends, he wants
to die in Diedmar. But the people in general waited the whole night of
their drinking. In the morning, at eight o\'clock, they went to the
market to discuss what they should do. Then the full peasants shouted:
Always burn! to the fire! so today we will win honor from God and from
the people; for the longer we let him live, the more he consorts with
his heresy. What is the use of much long misgivings? He must die! So
good Henry was condemned to the fire without being heard. Then it was
announced that all those who could have helped to catch him should go
out to the fire with their weapons. There were also the gray monks or
barefooted men, who strengthened the poor people and said: Now go after
the matter,\" and they incited the poor, miserable, drunken people. Then
they took him and bound him neck, feet and hands,2) and led him with a
great shout to the fire. When this happened, a woman stood in the
doorway of her house and saw this misery and wretchedness and began to
weep bitterly; good Henry said to her, \"Dear woman, do not weep over
me. When he came to the place where the fire was ready, he sat down in
great weakness. Then came the bailiff, the bailiff Maes, bought by
money,3) as it is said, condemned the good brother Henrich to the fire
with this sentence or judgment: \"This wicked man has preached against
the Mother of God and against the Christian faith, for which reason I
condemn him to the fire on account of my gracious lord, the bishops of
Bremen. Answered the good brother Henry: I have not done so; but, Lord,
thy will be done! cast upon his eyes toward heaven, and said: Lord,
forgive them, for they know not what they do; thy name alone is holy,
heavenly Father! There went along a good Christian woman, Claus boy\'s
wife, with woman\'s name 4)

2\) So all the issues. Maybe: \"with hemp, feet and hands\" ?

3\) Probst in his letter gives as the sum ten guilders.

4\) The editions have no comma before female names, but after them. This
has already been conspicuous to Walch and he offers: \"Jungenfrau, mit
Namen [Wibe]{.underline}\". Also Jken, p. 77, has: \"Frau Wiebe
Jungen\".

**708**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 814. 815.

**709**

a sister Peter Nannen, living in Meldorf, before the fire, and offered
to have her beaten to distemper, so that her wrath would be atoned for;
for this she wanted to give a thousand guilders, 1) only to reinstate
the man until the next Monday, so that he would be interrogated by the
whole country, and then burned. When they heard this, they became
furious and insane, and beat the woman to the ground, trampled her
underfoot, and violently beat the good martyr of Christ. One of them hit
him in the skull with a rapier, but Johann Holm of the New Churches hit
him with a hammer; the Audern stabbed him in his sides, in his back, in
his arms, wherever they could reach him; and not once, but as often as
he began to speak.

Then the people admonished and incited M. Guenter, and called to them,
saying: Free, dear fellows, here dwells God! Then the same M. Guenter
brought an unlearned gray monk to him to confess, but the martyr of
Christ said to him, \"Brother, have I ever harmed or angered you?
Answered the monk, No. Said the good brother Henry to him, What then
shall I confess unto thee, that thou shouldest forgive me? Then the gray
monk was ashamed and stepped back. But the fire would not burn, no
matter how often they lit it. Nothing less did they exercise their will
of courage on him, and beat him with halberds and spears. This went on
for about two hours, during which time he stood naked in front of the
banners in his shirt with his eyes raised to the sky. At last they got a
big ladder, on which they tied him almost hard, so that they threw him
into the fire. Then the good martyr of Christ began to speak his faith,
but one of them struck him in the mouth with a fist and said to him:
\"First he should burn, then he may pray,2) whatever he wants. Then one
of them stepped on his chest with a foot, and tied him so hard to a
sprout on his neck that his mouth and nose bled, so that he might
\"suffocate\"; for he saw that he could not die from so many wounds.

After that they raised him up with the ladder.

1\) Probst also reports this in his letter.

2\) Thus the Low German edition; the others: \"read\".

Then one of them put the halberd on the ladder to help raise it, because
the country has no executioner. The whisker slipped off the ladder and
pierced the holy martyr in the middle. So they threw the \"good man\"
with the ladder onto the wood, but the ladder jumped off to the side.
Then Johann Holm ran to him and took the hammer and hit him on his
chest, so long that he died and did not move after that. So we roasted
him on the coals, because the wood would not burn.

This is the recent true history of the suffering of St. Martin Henrici
full of sudphen.

**No. 815.**

(Wittenberg.) (January or February) 1525.

**To Hans von Minkwitz, Lord of Sonnenwalde.**

Expert opinion on the church order to be introduced in Sonnenwalde and
on the use of an endowment from the father of Minkwitz.

From a manuscript in the archive at Weimar in the supplement to the
Leipzig edition, p. 42; in Walch, vol. XXI, 137; in De Wette, vol. II,
p. 619 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 281.

Grace and peace in Christ. Strict, firm,3) dear Lord! I hereby send you
both notes, one full of your father\'s foundation, the other of the
order, so far kept at Sonnewalda, as I have received it. And it is my
opinion, as best I understand it, that the first three pieces in your
father\'s endowment, namely that a chaplain is to be appointed to the
altar of the Holy Trinity, item the two priests with the pupils at Our
Lady\'s Tide, item the pageantry with the annual service, 2c., are to be
completely off, as I have indicated, that they are of no use at all. But
the persons, who are endowed thereon, I wanted to let them use such
interest annually throughout their lives, and after their death to
invest and endow the same interest elsewhere to poor people or a pious
child for marriage.

The fourth piece with the \"gray cloths\", to be healed under the arms,
remains cheap and fine.

3\) \"best\" at De Wette, which the Erl. Edition reprinted, will
probably only be read from \"Bester\".

**710** Letters from the year

1525\. no. 815. 816. 711

The fifth piece with the soul bath 1) also pleases me, without wanting
it to be not a soul bath for the souls, but an example of Christ, when
he washed the feet of his disciples in the Lord\'s Supper, as also such
washing is taught by St. Paul, and is an old custom of Christianity; so
that such a bath of the same example and old Christian custom would mean
an advertisement and likeness, and be held in honor of Christ, your
pious bather and foot washer.

The sixth piece, of the four masses, is also to be taken off and given
to poor housewives and brides, because the masses are no good.

The order, which is set in the other note, does not please me badly, and
where it would be in the swing, I would let it remain so, namely:

That on Sunday morning a short mass be sung with the students and the
other priests, because they are alive, so that the young boys remain
with the psalter and chant, and the other priests have something to do.

However, I did not want to take all Sundays in the same way, but always
to continue that the whole Psalter and Biblia and chant remained in use
throughout the year, and the students were used to it all.

Mass to German I let go, I also do not refuse to give Latin Mass.

But I hope to arrange a German one in Wittenberg with the time that has
the right kind, but that the Canon remains outside in all cases, and
where there are no communicants, that one may not consecrate, but sing
the chant of the Mass. The sermon has its own order, the vespers are
also pleasing to me, as they are recorded, without always using other
and different psalms and chants, as is found in books of the time, for
the sake of the boys\' training.

I do not consider it necessary to have a lesson every working day, but
it is enough on three days a week, but that the boys are nevertheless
practiced daily, early in the morning and in the evening, with psalms
and singing; no saint should be sung or celebrated without the feasts
that concern our Lord Christ.

1\) \"Seelbad\" is a foundation of baths for the poor, where the same
were sometimes given food and money, for which it was hoped relief in
purgatory.

I consider this to be enough for worship in the place, and it is well
answerable to God, but how it is to be answered for before the world, I
do not know; even where there is more to be ordered, the preacher can
well provide for himself, or where he is loved, through our assistance.
An. 1525.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 816.**

Wittenberg. (First months) 1525. 2)

**To Count Albrecht von Mansfeld.**

Luther gives his opinion on two questions posed by Chancellor Müller: 1)
whether the count should yield in the collegiate church and in the whole
country to those who want to resist the sacrament under both forms and
other innovations; 2) whether it is permissible to enter into an
alliance.

In the Wittenberg (1569), vol. IX, p. 225; in the Jena (1556), vol. Ill,
p. 165; in the Altenburg, vol. Ill, p. 99; in the Leipzig, vol. XIX, p.
354; in Walch, vol. XXI, 122; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 71 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 354.

To the noble and well-born Lord, Lord Albrecht, Count of Mansfeld, and
Lord of Schruppe! 2c., my gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Gracious Lord! Caspar Müller, by E. G.\'s
order, has asked me to answer two questions. The first, how far E. G.
should go and how far he should vacate the monastery church in the
castle to prevent the sacrament under both forms and other innovations,
as they call them. It is my humble opinion that, because God knows that
it is God\'s word and will, and they insist on it, not a hair\'s breadth
nor a moment must be yielded, as St. Paul boasts that he would not have
yielded for an hour in Jerusalem to allow Titum to be circumcised \[Gal.
2, 3\]. For one does not have to suffer any opposition to God\'s word.

2\) On Nov. 24, 1524, Count Albrecht of Mansfeld gave an expert opinion
to Duke John of Saxony on the question of whether, in the event that
force should be used to suppress the divine word as a result of the
Regensburg Convention, the Elector Frederick and Duke John, together
with other princes adhering to the evangelical doctrine, should make an
\"understanding\" as to how such action should be resisted. This opinion
did not yet fully convince the duke, and he asked for a further opinion
from the count. Inspired by the count, Luther also discussed this
question at that time. Therefore, this expert opinion probably dates
from the first months of 1525.

**712** Letters from the year 1525. no. 816. 713

However, because the dispute is over the collegiate church, the church
may be taken as an external thing, which they take by force and outrage,
and they may stipulate that this is not done with the will or full
consent of the church\'s conscience, but that they charge such outrage
and the theft of other people\'s rights and property to their
conscience. The G. must do no more than suffer such outrages without
consent.

Apart from that, the Gospels may still keep the Gospel in the castle, in
the hall or in the parlor in God\'s name, and leave the monastery church
to them as an outrageous robber with the devil inside; it will probably
be different in ten years.

However, it cannot be that in the common dominion, the law should also
be so soft. For here the matter concerns not wood, stone or space, but
conscience. Because the people recognize themselves as subjects of the
King, they would refer to the King as a natural ruler, and without the
King\'s consent and full word, they would not want to create a rivalry
among the people. Again, the governor cannot allow such common subjects
to give way to the other lords, for this would make the governor herself
guilty, as if she had given way herself. However, if some of these
common subjects want to give way of their own conscience, the
authorities cannot do so. For she can neither drive anyone to faith nor
keep him in it, as little as she can allow anyone to step away from it.
Therefore, let him who is weak depart, and let him who is standing
remain; so the LORD cannot permit them to depart, or to say, Behold, our
hereditary lord has decreed it, and will have it; therefore we do it,
and would not do it otherwise.

But that God should hand over the rule is not yet time; it is only a
temptation and a dispute for a short time, in which God wants to prove
and strengthen God. G. and strengthen him. But E. G. only hold fast to
the poor common man, do not give in, and command the matter to Christ,
who will do it well, as the 37th Psalm \[v. 5\] teaches, which I command
E. G. to read for comfort and strength.

The devil cannot do all that he would have us do, and God boasts that he
is pleased to destroy princes and rulers, and has pleasure in doing so,
Ps. 33:10.

He has soon strangled a lord at Mansfeld if he wants to make it too much
for him, or he can well ward him off before such a thing is understood.
If God wants E. G. out of power, he will probably attack it differently;
they will have to use other force. But there we have one who boasts:
\"The earth is the Lord\'s, and all that dwell therein,\" Ps. 24:1.
item, Ps. 76:13: \"He taketh away the courage of princes, and dealeth
strangely with the kings of the earth.\" Therefore be E. G. only fresh
and confident, and learn in this also spiritual warfare, as the 31st Ps.
\[v. 25\] says: \"Be of good cheer, and hold fast, all ye that wait for
the Lord.\"

The other is whether one should unite under, behind, or against the
authorities, or how to resist such tyrants. In the first place, E. G.
well knows that no union is valid against the overlords. For God wants
to honor the overlords, be they evil or good, Rom. 13,1. and 1 Petr. 2,
13.

On the other hand, it is also forbidden that one should avenge or defend
oneself, as Paul Rom. 12:19. says: \"Dear brethren, do not defend
yourselves, but give place to wrath.\"

As for the third, that you otherwise make a union on a free, unnamed
accident, neither of which is intended, I do not consider it
unreasonable, although the appearance would remain, since the wicked
would have to fear as if it should apply to them. For since they hear
and see that one does not want to grant them, and yet they see a
connection arising, it is probable that they would worry and become
suspicious. Otherwise, one must give way to violence and sacrilege, and
let go of the earth for the sake of heaven, of the temporal for the sake
of the eternal, just as the princes of Saxony have so far sat completely
silent, and would not have had to defend themselves over the matter if
they had taken it up. Nevertheless, the appearance has remained, as if
they will and want to defend themselves. However, God has made the
tyrants\' defiance stupid, so that they have

1\) \"made\" put by us instead of: \"would like\" in the editions.

**714** Letters from the year 1525. no. 816. 817. 818. **715**

must not dare anything. Who knows where we believe and ask God that God
will also be a shy, be it through the appearance of a covenant or
otherwise, that they will not be so defiant as they threaten. The bow
does not hit everything it aims at, indeed, it rarely hits it.

I have indicated this to your humble opinion, at your request, and
command the same in God\'s grace, mercy, protection and consolation,
amen. At Wittenberg, An. 1525. E. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 817.**

Wittenberg. February 2, 1525.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther has finished writing against Carlstadt and is now busy with the
Postilla and the 5th Book of Moses,

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
20. Handwritten in the Franciscaneum at Zerbst, LIs. 26, fol. 15.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 270 b; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 621
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 115. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 953.

To the Lord Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of the Church at Zwickau, his
Superior in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I am glad that you have returned home safe
and sound, my dear Nicolaus. I have answered Carlstadt\'s devil in two
books, in which the Pickards will also see our opinion sufficiently. I
have not yet read through their writings, since I was busy with other
things. I have met Gallus,1) the monster of the Bohemians; may God
destroy his nobility, since he has deceived us so. We have assigned to
some of our scholars the task of collecting not only what Tertullianus,
but also what all the ancients have held of this sacrament, 2) so that
the mouths of lies may be stopped up \[Ps. 63, 12\]. Jonas and Eisleben
have been instructed to prepare a catechism for the children. I have set
myself to\'

1\) Czahera. See No. 779.

2\) In this sentence the construction is broken: *ut..*. *colligendi*
instead of: *ut* \... *colligerent*. Now *ut* is too much.

I have put the Postil and Deuteronomy, on which I will have enough to do
for a while. You pray for me bravely. There is nothing new with us. Fare
well in the Lord. Wittenberg, on the day of the Purification of the
Virgin Mary \[Feb. 2\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 818.**

Wittenberg. February 4, 1525.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

Luther complains that fanaticism has also crept into Nuremberg, but does
not want the erring ones to be punished unless they do not want to
recognize and obey the authorities.

The original is at the Coburg fortress. Printed in the Leipzig
Supplement, p. 37; in Walch, vol. XXI, 85; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 622;
in the Erlanger Ausg., vol. 53, p. 283 and in the Erl. Briefw., vol. V,
p. 116.

To the careful and wise Lazaro Spengeler, Syndico of the city of
Nuremberg, my favorable master and good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. More careful, more favorable, dear Lord and
friend! From your letter, sent to me next, I have received joy and
displeasure: Joy that Christ is so bravely with you, and looks to the
wolves; displeasure that the disaster has already come so far through
the messengers of the devil, that such articles are held in doubt and
denial under the Christian name. For although I have always suspected
the All-City Spirit 3) that he will send it out,4) I do not think that
\[it\] should already have happened. But it is good that such an
abomination comes to light, so that such spirits\' foolishness and
arrogance become known and disgraced. But that you ask how they should
be punished, I do not yet consider it *blasphemous,* but consider them
like the Turks or disowned Christians, whom secular authorities do not
have to punish, especially on the body. But where they would not confess
and obey the temporal authorities, all that they are and have is
forfeited; for there is surely sedition and murder in the

3\) After his expulsion from Allstädt, Münzer came to Nuremberg, had an
invective against Luther printed and gained many followers, but the city
council confiscated the books and expelled Münzer from the city, as well
as Pfeiffer and Reinhard of Jena, who had come from Thuringia.

4\) lenden == to turn.

**716**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 818. 819. 820.

717

Hearts, it is the duty of the worldly authorities to see that your
masters know how to keep without doubt. Pray God for me, and grace be
with you all, amen. At Wittenberg, on the Saturday after
*Purificationis* \[4 Feb.\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 819.**

Wittenberg. February 4, 1525.

**To Johann Brismann in Königsberg.**

Some news.

The original is in the Wallenrodt Library at Königsberg. Printed in the
Vogler Collection; in *Acta Borusslca*, 1730, vol. I, st. 6, p. 799; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 112; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 623 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 117.

To his extremely dear brother in the Lord, Johann Brismann, servant of
God at Königsberg.

Mercy and peace! I, too, have been deceived by the messenger\'s
unexpected departure, in that he left at the same time and requested
letters, and I have not yet heard everything from Christian. Therefore,
my dear Brismann, I could only write you a very short greeting.
Greetings, I beg you, the Lord \[Bishop\] of Samland. Deuteronomy goes
forward (*currit*). What I answered to Carlstadt, you see. That Amandus
has gone away, I am glad about that. For here, too, Satan is making such
progress through these prophets that already in Nuremberg some citizens
deny that Christ is something, deny that the word of God is something;
they deny baptism and the sacrament of the altar, deny civil authority,
confess only that there is a God, and for this reason they are
imprisoned in the dungeon. Namely, that is where Satan, the spirit of
Allstadt and Carlstadt, goes.

Farewell and pray for me. Greetings to Speratus with his family
(*carne*), 1) The brother Leonhard, who was formerly imprisoned by the
Duke of Bavaria, is now, after two years, finally freed by Christ and
with us. Wittenberg, on the Saturday after \[Mary\'s\] Purification \[4
Feb.\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

1\) Specatus had married Anna Fuchs, probably a relative of the canon
Jakob Fuchs, during his stay in Würzburg in 1520.

**No. 820.**

(Wittenberg.) February 7, 1525.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Altenburg.**

Luther refuses Link\'s request to give a manuscript to his bookseller.
Of a writing by Staupitzen; of Carlstadt and Orlamünde and the
establishment of a parish in Altenburg 2c.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 272; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 623 f.
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 122. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 956.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I received the glass, which is healing for
the eyes, with thanks, my dear Link, although it would not have been
necessary for you to deprive yourself of it. By the way, I cannot
promise a copy to your bookseller, both because I cannot fill my
pockets, and elsewhere the same is desired by many, to whom I would also
owe it, and also because you too are teachers of novices and readers at
table, who know how to write books, even if you do not change the names.

I am sending the Staupitz 3) back; it is quite cold, as it always was,
and not strong enough. Do what you like; the booklet is not unworthy of
light and publicity, since so many monstrosities come out and are sold
every day.

I have answered Carlstadt, as you see. At Basel, he turns many, the
Oecolampad, the Pellican and others, who were otherwise already
inclined, likewise at Strasbourg, the Otto Braunfels and others, so that
they laugh at us; so certain are they of their opinion. The peasants of
Orlamünde wipe their butts with my little book, 4) so the devil rages.

Why are you consulting me about the establishment of the parish in the
city? 5) Since the matter

2\) Gabriel Kantz.

3\) Probably the writing that was finished in the fall of 1524: \"Of the
holy, right, Christian faith\", which was not pure in doctrine, since
such passages occur in it as: \"The evil spirit gives the carnal
Christians the idea that one is justified without works\" 2c.

4\) Glatz had written this to Luther. See No. 810.

5\) Link planned to divide the city of Altenburg into two parishes, each
with a church; ordinary clergymen were to be employed at these churches,
and one was to be superior to them as pastor. He had communicated this
plan to Luther. However, since he left Altenburg in August, he could not
carry it out, but immediately after his departure, two full clergymen,
Spalatin and Brisger, were appointed to Altenburg.

**718** Letters from the year 1525. no. 820. 821. 822. **719**

is in your free will, only that this either increases or awakens the
appearance of ambition, if you alone claim to be the one pastor. But it
would be nice and proper that in one city one would be the bishop, and
the others presbyters, as Paul ordains in Titus 1. It would please me if
silence were imposed on the Minorites by the authorities, and I do not
believe 1) that the prince will be repugnant to them in this, since he
always wishes to be neutral 2) in such matters. Farewell and greet your
rib and pray for me. Tuesday after Dorothea \[Feb. 7\] 1525. Martin
Luther.

**No. 821.**

Wittenberg. February 10, 1525.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther jokes about the nativity notes (*schedas natales*) sent by Jonas
to Amsdorf; he indicates that the Hebrew book contains only little
prayers; he tells him what Glatz has written to him (in No. 810) about
the alleged ghost in Carlstadt\'s house; finally, a joking greeting to
Melchior Mirisch.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 271; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 624 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 123. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 954.

Mercy and peace! I do not take paper from the secret chamber, like our
Jonas, -who does not esteem you higher than that you are worthy to read
*schedas natales*, that is, from the wiped butt (*de natibus purgatis*).
By the way, as I also wrote before, the little booklet you sent contains
nothing but little prayers (Aurogallus is witness to this), but I have
instructed him to look at it even more carefully, after which it will be
returned.

There is nothing new here, except that Carlstadt\'s Satan will come to
light. For our Glatz has his own to witness how Carlstadt had a monk as
a chaplain, whom he used as a spirit in his house, who penetrated him
and revealed secrets; thus he deceived the poor common people. You will
see miraculous things in the near future.

1\) Instead of *hic* (which is expressed by in *hoc* once again) we have
assumed nee.

2\) Instead of *venter* in all editions we have adopted *neuter*, which
will be read in *uenter.*

See where this wretched hopeful spirit has gone, where he has been
carried away! Pray for him, whether he can still be healed. His disgrace
is at the door. Whoever is subject to such things, what do you think he
thinks of the cause of godliness? Farewell and greet the fat husband
Melchior, to whom I wish an obedient wife, who will pull him around the
market seven times a day by the hair, and during the night will pamper
him three times with conjugal words, as he deserves. Wittenberg,
\"Friday after\" Dorothea \[February 10\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 822.**

(Wittenberg.) February 11, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports that the Jews who tried to poison him have confessed
nothing, but he has worked for their release, although there is urgent
suspicion. All kinds of news.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 182 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 199. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 271 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 625 and in Erlanger Briefw.,
vol. V, p. 124. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 955.

His \[friend\] in the Lord, Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of
Christ in His Gospel.

Mercy and peace! Tomorrow you will hear the news, my dear Spalatin,
which you desire to know, namely what those imprisoned Jews,3) who
prepared poison for me, would perhaps betray, by whom they had been
sent. Since they did not do this voluntarily, I did not want them to be
martyred, but worked to have them released, although I am firmly
convinced that it was the one whom my friends have indicated to me: all
the characteristics are so true.

I cannot understand or explain the passage Joh. 1, 51. of the ladder any
better than Philip did in his notes, 4). I also hold this way.

Erasmus will be answered as soon as there will be a little leisure. For
I

3\) Compare No. 809, where, by the way, only One Jew is mentioned.

4\) Melanchthon in the Notes on the Gospel of John, 1523 (*Corp. Ref.*,
vol. XIV, 1076) says: \"Christ is the ladder\" 2c.

**720** Letters from the year 1525. No. 822 to 825. **721**

I am forced to finish Deuteronomy so that the printers do not suffer
damage.

I am glad that Christ is so supportive of Jodocus Kern and that Allstädt
is getting along again. What the pastor of Orlamünde writes, see in
these letters of his, so that you may recognize that I prophesied
clearly about Carlstadt when I said that he had been handed over to the
devil. O about the wretched misery of men when Christ leaves us. He
yesterday, I today (said that one). Who should not fear this life, which
Satan so mightily and wickedly possesses? Fare well and pray for me. On
the Saturday after Dorothea \[Feb. 11\] 1525. Martin Luther.

What you write about the Carmelite Bernhard seems to have happened by a
mistake in the name, because it is about the same with the story of our
Heinrich von Zütphen.

**No. 823.**

Wittenberg. February 16, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Invitation to an Actus of Young Poets and Speakers at Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen.* a, fol. 250. Printed in *Buddeus, p.* 41; in
De Wette, vol. II, p. 626 (with the wrong dam: 17 Feb.) and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 125. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 958.

Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at the court of Saxony, his \[friend\] in
the Lord.

Grace and peace! And also I invite you in place of our whole famous
poetic empire and kingdom, my dear Spalatin, that you disguise yourself
next Sunday, in the evening, to see and hear our poets and orators
growing up in Wittenberg, at the same time both to a comedy to be played
and to the songs to be sung; finally, to the food and drink to be
devoured in honor of the poetic kingdom, but in such a way that you, if
it can happen, send ahead or bring along some venison. Everything will
be arranged in our former monastery, as befits such guests. Other things
orally. Farewell. Wittenberg, Thursday after Septuagint \[16 Feb\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 824.**

(Rothenburg an der Tauber.) February 18, 1525.

**Carlstadt to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Carlstadt responds to a letter from Luther dated Dec. 23, 1524 (which
does not exist), which he received only on Feb. 18. 1) He urgently asks
for a safe conduct letter promised to him by Luther and assures in the
most effusive terms his willingness to be guided by the truth. He says:
\"I will be softer with the bright speech of Christ and the clear
judgments of the Lord than the snow with the hottest fire, and run
faster than the lightest particle to the amber warmed by rubbing.\" 2)

**No. 825.**

Wittenberg. February 20, 1525.

**To Paul Lemberg, abbot in Sagan.**

A joint marriage memorial issued with the other Wittenberg theologians
and the jurist Benedict Pauli.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, Cod. 31. 4 Aug,

Printed in De Wette, vol. II, p. 627; in *Corp. Ref.*, vol. 1,723 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 129.

To the venerable father, Mr. Paul Lemberg, abbot in Sagan.

Hail! Venerable Father! We, Martin Luther, Jodocus Jonas, Johann
Bugenhagen Pommer, Benedict Pauli, Philipp Melanchthon, 3) declare to
you and your church that we have heard the case of the woman Hedwig and
Erasmus Hertzog and have read the public acts. Accordingly we judge thus

1\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 22 d f. -Carlstadt
received this letter at Rothenburg a. d. T., where, however, by a town
council edict of Jan. 27, it had been forbidden to \"house, harbor, drag
under, etch, water or fart\" him, but protected by the old mayor
Ehrenfried Kumpf, he remained there until his public appearance, without
ever leaving the city in the meantime, as Kumpf confessed in the council
on March 27.

2\) Thus, also according to Spalatin\'s translation: \"und will ehr
zulaufen, denn ein tayle zu einem erwermten ecsteyn, Wenn er geriben
wird\", these words are to be understood. By \"a tayle\" he seems to
have rendered *particula for* us (for so it will be read instead of
*stipula,* which the Erl. Briefw. has placed in the text, but doubts by
a question mark; or instead of *stigula at* Kolde; the Conjectur of the
Erl. Briefw.: *tegula* \[brick\] may have come from misunderstanding of
the word \"ecsteyn\" for cornerstone); \"ecsteyn\", however, is to be
resolved by \"Agtstein\", which is [amber]{.underline}. See St. Louis
edition, vol. VIII, 1788 ; ibid. vol. XXII, 1333.

3\) Melanchthon was the writer of the letter. He also signed it with
Luther, but did not co-sign it.

**722**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 825. 826. 827.

**723**

about the case of conscience: If the woman confirms with a good
conscience that the husband was not wealthy or could not have performed
the marital duty, then he was not her husband, and she is free. However,
it shall not hinder the weakness and conscience of the wife that Erasmus
Hertzog denies that he is not wealthy, if he does not prove or has not
proven the opposite. And because the woman Hedwig has been living with
the magister Balthasar Jugel for a long time, and he assures that he had
her as his wife, it is reasonable that he keeps her. For since he has
taken the one who has fled from the impecunious man, he has clearly
bound his conscience. You will do right if you confirm the marriage with
the lawful customs. We also bear witness to this judgment of ours with
our seals. Farewell. Given at Wittenberg, February 20, 1525 by Martin
Luther.

J. Jonas.

Johann Bugenhagen Pommer. Benedict Pauli.

**No. 8 26.**

Wittenberg. 22. 1) February 1525.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

Recommendation of a young person and some news.

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 293; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 628
(datirt: 20. Febr.) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.130. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 958.

Grace and peace in Christ! The bearer of this letter has requested, my
dear Lang, that I give him a letter of recommendation to you, since he
wanted to go to Erfurt and look for some place to live. Since you are
not only rich in body, but also in advice, I recommend him to you, if
you can give him some advice.

Here there is nothing new, only that it is said that a certain Carmelite
Bernhard was burned at Mecheln for the sake of the word of God 2).

1\) This date is derived from the day of the birth of Melanchthon\'s
little son, namely Feb. 21.

2\) This report seems, as Luther has already noted in the postscript to
No. 822, to be based on an error, because the text by Spalatin (*ap*.
*Menck*., tom. II,

as also our Henry in Ditmar. God gave Philip a little Philip yesterday,
and I wish that God would give you one too. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Wednesday after Sexagesimä \[22 Feb.\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 827.**

Wittenberg. February 25, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of a Danzig preacher and his request that Bugenhagen be
allowed to accept a call there.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 183 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 200. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 279; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 641 (with the date: April I)
and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 131. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 966
f.

To Magister Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant, his extremely dear
\[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! A preacher of the people of Danzig comes
here to the prince, Mr. Johannes,4) to ask the prince\'s consent that
they may call our Pomeranian there; I therefore ask that you assist him
as you can. For although I would like this man \[Bugenhagen\] to remain
here, I still think that in such a great matter and for the sake of the
word, one must give way, who knows what God wants to work through him
there, so that we do not fail to recognize and hinder such a glorious
call from God. Dll will hear miraculous things from him, which Christ
worked in Danzig. If I were so called, I would not dare to oppose it,
but would leave immediately.

The rumor has come here that the King of France has won the victory
against the Emperor. Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, Saturday
before Quinquagesimä 5) \[Feb. 25\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

p\. 640) about this martyr\'s death correspond almost completely with
the history of Heinrich von Zütphen.

3\) In Aurifaber and De Wette, the number 4 is missing after *feria.*

4\) Johannes Bacholt.

5\) In the original: *sabbato L.*, which Aurifaber wrongly resolved by
*saddato [post]{.underline} Laetare.* De Wette has followed him.

**724** Letters from the year 1525. no. 828. 829. 830. **725**

**No. 828.**

Wittenberg. March 4, 1525.

**To the Elector Frederick of Saxony.**

Luther presents Carlstadt\'s request for safe conduct (No. 824) and
approves it.

The original (several times damaged) is in the Weimar Archives. It is
printed in Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 24; in the Leipzig Supplement, p.
37; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 628 (with the wrong date: \"Ende
Februars\"); in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 284 and in Walch, vol.
XXI, 84. In the original, the date is: \"am Sonnabent nach L. 1525\".

To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Frederick, Duke of
Saxony, Elector and Archmarshall of the Roman Empire, Landgrave of
Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! M. Georgius Spalatinus will indicate to E. C. F. G. D.
Carlstadt\'s writing what he desires from me. Now it is true, I promised
him, where he would let himself be kindly instructed, or talk to me, as
he has offered me, I would see whether I could acquire an escort for
him, or want to come to him in a place outside of C. F. G.\'s country,
if I do not acquire it, so that it would be felt that I should not lack
what would be considered good and useful for the honor of the holy
Gospel and the salvation of all of us. C. F. G. my humble request, if it
is possible, E. C. F. G. will graciously give the same D. Carlstadt a
written escort to talk with me for a while, so that he will not complain
that 1) he is not lacking, but I am, otherwise they are looking for
cause \[too\] 2) exactly. If it helps, it helps; for I have little hope
in him, as proud as his writing is. Hiemit GOtt in his grace commanded.
At Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Quinquagesimä \[March 4\] 1525.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

1\) This word is omitted in the original.

2\) Added by us.

**No. 829.**

Wittenberg. March 4, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2066, no. 692.

**No. 830.**

Wittenberg. March 5, 1525.

**To Theobald Billican in Nördlingen.**

Luther answers the question of whether the power of the sacrament
depends on the worthiness of the minister administering it.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 179. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 272 d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 630 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.
134. German hei Walch, vol. XXI, 959.

To Mr. Theobald Billican, evangelist in Nördlingen, his exceedingly dear
\[friend\] in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I believe, my dear Theobald, that your
rather long letter, which you have addressed to me, has at the same time
been done enough by my booklet on the Sacrament against Carlstadt. 3)
But what you wrote to Philip the other day, about the giving of the
blessing of the bread in Holy Communion, I understood as if an ungodly
person could not consecrate or bless the bread. I have a different
opinion, namely that the Word of God is God\'s Word, not by our
holiness, but by its own power, and does what it does, not by our merit,
but by its nature. For you know that the gospel is called by the apostle
Rom. 1,16. a power of God, which is mighty to save those who believe.
And yet not all obey the gospel, as it says there Cap. 10,16. Then it is
preached by those who are angry and hateful, Phil. 1, 15, and does not
cease to be the word of God and the power of God even because of the
unworthiness of these people or because of their unbelief. For although
it is weak and foolish in the ungodly, it is wise and powerful in the
godly. Therefore, neither the faith of the godly makes it different or
better, nor the unbelief of the godless makes it better.

3\) \"Against the heavenly prophets\" 2c.

**726**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 830. 831. 832.

727

worse. Is not 1) God Himself a bear and a lion for the wicked \[Hos.
13:8\], but salvation and life for the godly? Since the sacrament is
instituted by the power of the word and is also imparted by the power of
the word, no consideration is given to the minister who performs it when
the sacrament is considered, although consideration is to be given to it
when its own blessedness is considered. For Christ also instituted and
blessed it, not by the power of His holiness, but by the power of the
Word. Therefore, just as the Word of God, wherever it may be, is a
mighty power of God, 2) even though the ungodly do not enjoy this power:
so the Sacrament, where it is blessed, is a perfect Sacrament, even
though the ungodly do not enjoy this blessing. For we are the ones who
plant and water, administering the Word of Life and the Sacrament of
Blessedness, but we are not the ones who give the flourishing. But we
administer the same Word and Sacrament that Christ administered, who
also, as he did nothing to the Jews by the Word, so to Judas Iscarioth
he gave the Sacrament in vain. Nevertheless, he taught them the true
Word and gave him the true Sacrament. Otherwise, if one had to look at
the faith of those who administer and those who receive, everything
would be uncertain whether the Word and the Sacrament were anywhere,
since the faith of all is uncertain. Now the whole essence and power
(*integritas*) of the Sacrament is not based on your laws or our merits,
but on the promise, so that the knowledge of the sacred office is firm
and certain among the people of God. This is what I would like to say.
You take it for the best, and pray Christ for me, whose grace be with
you, Amen. Wittenberg, on Sunday Invocavit \[March 5\] 1525. Martin
Luther.

1\) This sentence must be taken as an interrogative sentence, otherwise
just the opposite sense would come out; therefore, instead of non in the
editions (at Aurifaber no) we read: nonno.

2\) Here is in the editions (as we think, wrong) so interpungirt: *sicut
verbum Dei, ubi fuerit virtus Dei, est potens etc.* - Instead of ndi iir
the editions is read with the handwriting more correctly udiudi.

**No. 831.**

Wittenberg. March 11, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X V, 2644, annex, no. 129.

**No. 832.**

Wittenberg. March 12, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Request safe conduct for a church robber, likewise for Carlstadt.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 259. Printed by *Buddeus, p.* 41; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
633 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. V, p. 137. German by Walch, vol.
XXI, 961 f.

To Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the court of Saxony, his
extremely dear brother.

\"Grace and peace in Christ!\" I beg you, my dear Spalatin, to hear this
woman in her cause and to stand by her. But she asks for a safe conduct
from the prince for her husband, because he has robbed a certain church
in Schonfelt, that he be allowed either to return to Schmiedburg, where
he lived, or, after the matters have been settled, to live with his
wife. You will learn the rest from her. I only had to do this. By the
way, I wrote to you 3) and sent Carlstadt\'s letter so that I could
obtain the same escort for him from the prince; I am surprised that it
has not been given, or why they are silent against me at the court. Fare
well in the Lord. Philip almost died of insomnia. He is still suffering
greatly from this disease; if you know a cure, let us know. Fare well
and pray for me. Wittenberg, 1525, on Sunday Reminiscere \[March 12\].

It is said that the Hessian wrote to Duke George that he, together with
the Palatine, had decided that he wanted to give room to the Gospel in
his country, since he had been overcome by the truth. More about this at
another time.

Martin Luther.

3\) No. 829.

**728**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 833 to 837.

729

**No. 833.**

Wittenberg. March 12, 1525.

To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.

A warm invitation to come to Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B, 24n, fol. 165. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 277; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 633 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V,
p. 138. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 963.

Grace and peace in Christ! The last letter, perhaps with the one to be
delivered to you at the same time, I believe you have received, for I
ordered the messenger to enclose this one, which was written this
morning, with the one written yesterday; you will see if they are
delivered at the same time. What I am writing now is this: We are filled
with a fierce desire for your presence, and this is not only my wish and
mine, but also that of our Captain Hans Metzsch, who desires this most
ardently. This has indeed been the reason for me to ask you more boldly,
that you, because we are quite distressed and challenged, let yourself
come to visit us as soon as possible for the sake of comfort and old
friendship. He promises for sure: when you will have shown the day, he
will send a very decent carriage to you and transport you back safely at
his expense. Now prove yourself to us as the simple, straight and
faithful Amsdorf, who will tell us the day, so that we may see each
other and comfort ourselves through conversation. Farewell in Christ,
dearest Amsdorf. On the Sunday of Reminiscere \[March 12\] 1525, Martin
Luther.

**No. 834.** March 20, 1525.

Spalatin to Luther.

Answer to Luther\'s letters No. 829 and No. 832, in which Luther asked
for safe conduct for Carlstadt, why the Prince could not grant this
request.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, Reg. p. 74 ff. 2; Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 81 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 139.

God\'s grace and peace in Christ before. Venerable Doctor! My most
gracious lord, the Elector of Saxony 2c., has, in accordance with my
next letter, granted your humble and diligent request for the escort of
Doctor Karlstat to his electoral counsellors, who are now at Torgau in
daytime performance, together with my humble request and notification.

allow them to arrive. Thereupon they inform His Lordships of their
reservations, and His C. F. G. has ordered me to inform you that His C.
F. G. has some reservations about this. G. has ordered me to inform you
that his C. F. G. is a little concerned about this, because his C. F. G.
has many doubts as to whether it would be good that the Karlstat should
come to Wittenberg at this time. Moreover, that his C. F. G. had always
let themselves be heard against papal and imperial embassies, also in
other ways, that they never got involved in a matter, as they also did
not let themselves be involved again in representing the same. Should S.
C. G. now enter into this with the representation of Karlstat, then this
would have to be done by public letter and seal of his C. G., which
would particularly indicate and present Karlstat at many ends and to
many people, which would then be known to the one who has his C. F. G.
beforehand. F. G. had previously said about himself, might also perhaps
be considered by some, who do not know the cause of the misdirection, as
if his C. F. G. had also been in his opinion at the time of the
misdirection. F. G.\'s opinion is also pending. Thus, S. C. F. G. does
not note from your letter that you yourselves can particularly comfort
the matter. Therefore, it is highly esteemed of my lord and master that
you should request that he be granted a hearing. I request that you
spare his C. F. G. and S. C. F. G. brothers, my gracious Lord Duke
Johansen of Saxony, in this matter, and do not doubt that you will know
how to report and refuse this to the Karlstat, which I, in the best
interest of you, have no longer known how to do. I would have liked to
report this to you much sooner, but the councilors\' concerns have only
just arisen, from which this answer has so far been withheld, and I
hereby entrust you to God\'s grace and protection. Date Monday after
Oculi \[March 20\] Anno 1525.

**No. 835.**

Wittenberg. March 23, 1525.

To Spalatin.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2628, annex, no. 120.

**No. 836.**

Wittenberg. March 26, 1525.

To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2256.

**No. 837.**

Wittenberg. March 27, 1525.

To Wolfgang Reißenbusch, preceptor in Lichtenberg.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 674.

**730** Letters from the year

1525\. no. 838. 839. 731

**No. 838.**

Wittenberg. March 27, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther gives his opinion on certain celestial phenomena, rejoices at the
meeting of Philip of Hesse with the Dukes of Saxony, and reports on some
enthusiasts from Antwerp.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 202. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 278p; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 640 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 146. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 965 f.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the Court of
Saxony, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I send you back the suns, the miraculous signs of God,
my dear Spalatin, but it is not my business to understand such things,
because I am not such a prophet. Indeed, the bloody sun in the west
seems to signify the king of France, and the other quite bright one in
the middle the emperor; so Philip also thinks, but at the same time they
bring the last day with them. I am glad that the prince of Hesse is
talking with our princes, 1) and I hope that it will produce fruit for
the gospel. I have here a new kind of prophets from Antwerp,2) who claim
that the Holy Spirit is nothing other than spiritual gifts and natural
reason. How Satan rages against the Word everywhere! And I do not count
this among the least signs that even Satan himself seems to notice that
day and therefore spews out his last wrath. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, Monday after Lätare \[March 27\] 1525, Martin Luther.

1\) On March 20, a meeting of Philip of Hesse with the dukes of Saxony,
John and John Frederick, took place in Kreuzburg on the Werra. They
agreed on the measures to be taken against the alliance of the Catholic
princes at Dessau. Philip said there that he would rather give up life
and limb, land and people, than depart from God\'s word.

2\) After the preachers of the gospel were expelled in Antwerp, a
slater, Eloy Pruystinck, appeared as a prophet and founded a sect, the
Loy isten. Luther rejected him with his ravings and warned the Antwerp
people in a public letter.

**No. 839.**

Wittenberg. April 1, 1525.

**To the Guild of Goldsmiths at Nuremberg.**

Request to accept the resigned monk Andreas Heidenreich as an apprentice
in the guild.

The original is in the Jnnungslade der Goldund Silberarbeiter in
Nuremberg. Printed in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 168 and in De
WetteSeidemann, vol. VI, p. 56. Earlier already printed in Wills *Museum
Noricum,* 1759, p.4I4 and in the 19th annual report of the hist. Verein
für Mittelfranken, Ansbach 1850, p. XI.

To the honorable and artistic master goldsmiths of Nuremberg, my special
favorable gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear lords and friends! I
ask you very kindly. Let your wisdom bear with me my foolish letter, for
those who know without doubt Christian teaching that, just as Christ
became a fool and a mockery to the world for our sake, so also we among
ourselves owe service to one another, acting foolishly and foolishly;
for Christian love does not respect worldly shame and disgrace.

Here is this pious, well-skilled journeyman, Andreas Heydenreich, who,
after noting how priesthood and monasticism, to which he adheres, is a
dangerously un-Christian being, as it is now, intends to turn away from
it and make an honest living with his own hands. But since he is
inclined to your craft and especially to your art, which is famous far
above other cities, eager, in good hope, to grasp it well with God\'s
help, he has asked me through several high personalities for an
intercession to your wisdom, hoping to enjoy my intercession with your
wisdom. Now I have not been able to deny my service to such people, nor
to his need, although I, an unknown person, almost unwillingly approach
E. W. with it. But because they praise and extol the journeyman to me as
being pious and skillful, I kindly ask E. W. to be helpful to him in his
desire for your craft, if the same could be done without your complaint,
for I also do not intend to burden E. W. with anything unreasonable.

**732** Letters from the year 1525. No. 839 to 842. **733**

I hope that our Lord Christ will recognize this with rich graces,
without my merit and futile fortune, which I willingly offer all to the
Lord unsaved; may the Lord be entrusted to his mercy. Amen. At
Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Lätare \[April 1\] 1525.

Martinus Luther, *Ecclesiastes* zu Vittemberg.

**No. 840.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early April 1525.)

**To the Christians of Antwerp.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1526.

**No. 841.**

Wittenberg. Ap\^il 3, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a letter for forwarding. From raptures in Thuringia.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. u, sol. 259. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 42; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
642 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 152. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 967.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, the servant of God at the court of Saxony,
his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace! Send this letter to the preceptor at Lichtenberg, my
dear Spalatin. He has given me some very good and beautiful Cologne
knives, so that I am also distressed that the smallest of them is
missing in the scabbard 1); I would so much like that all of them were
there, but I suspect that it fell out somewhere along the way. I send
what is written to me from Thuringia. Until now the world was full of
spirits that are outside the flesh,2) now it is full of spirits in the
flesh. Thus Satan rages against him who is stronger than he, Christ.
Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, Monday after Judica \[April 3\]
1525.

Martin Luther.

1\) in can also mean: in the case; so it will probably have been a
cutlery.

2\) These are \"rumblers\".

**No. 842.**

(Wittenberg.) April 10, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends back an increased letter that he wants printed, admonishes
Spalatin for getting married, reports on Carlstadt\'s goings-on in
Rothenburg, and expresses suspicion against Strauss.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 186 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 202. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 280; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 643 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 153. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 968.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the court of
Saxony, his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace! I am returning the letter multiplied,3) my dear
Spalatin; I had wished that it be given to Lucas\' \[Cranach\'s\]
printing office, which has nothing to do, so that I might enjoy a little
peace in the meantime. And why don\'t you go to marriage? since I urge
others to it by so many reasons of proof that I am almost moved myself,
although the enemies do not stop condemning this way of life, and our
smarties laugh at it daily.

I am glad that Christ is so supportive of the nucleus 4). Carlstadt is
raging in Rothenburg an der Tauber, 5) and although he himself is a
fugitive, he is pursuing us everywhere. He had decided to make his nest
at Schweinfurt, but the Count of Henneberg has prevented this by a
letter sent to the council. I very much wish that the D. Strauss,

3\) the one to Wolfg. Reißenbnsch, No. 837.

4\) Pastor at Allstädt.

5\) In a note on this passage, the Erl. Briefw. has two wrong
statements. It says there: \"After suppression of the peasant uprising,
Deuschlin sthis is the same who is elsewhere called Drechsler, Drechsel,
Teutsches and Johann Preding (the preacher)\^ was beheaded at Nothenburg
on June 1, 1525, while Carlstadt escaped on June 23.\" I). Johann
Preding was captured on June 23 and beheaded on July 1 (see St. Louis
edition, vol. XVI, 152 f.). Carlstadt, on the other hand, must have made
his escape earlier, for he wrote to Luther from Frankfurt am Main as
early as June 12. The letter is found in Burkhardt, p. 85 and is also in
Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 193, where p. 194, note 3, it is reported that
Carlstadt had left Nothenburg at the end of May. On June 6, he was at
the farmers\' convention in Schweinfurt (Köstlin, Vol. I, p. 753).

**734** Letters from the year 1525. No. 842 to 845. 735

who also seeks his rule 1), this will be resisted by the prince. Man
does not lack anger, but opportunity and time. For a long time now,
although secretly, we are not very agreeable to him, since he prefers us
by far to that rebellious peasant from Carlstadt 2) whom you admired at
Nuremberg, but he has been invented as a rogue, and, as they say, a monk
with the assumed gesture of a peasant. Farewell and pray for me. Monday
after Palmarum \[April 10\] 1525, Martin Luther.

**No. 843.**

(Strasbourg.) (April 10-11, 1525.) 3)

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

Gerbet sends Luther the copy of ZwingU\'s letter to Matthäus Alber
(Aulber) about the Lord\'s Supper (St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1513),
and reports about the inclination of Strasbourg towards Carlstadt.

Handwritten in Strasbourg in *Thes.* Printed by Krafft, Festgabe für
Crecelius, p. 7; by Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 63 (datirt: \"April\") and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 155.

I am sending you, dear Luther, what Zwingli has written in the past few
days about the Lord\'s Supper; although it has been written somewhat
badly (*radius*) by my scribe, you will nevertheless recognize it to
some extent,

1\) Jonas says in a writing against Wicel that Strauß ruled not only in
the church, but also as Amtmann, Rath 2c.

2\) The so-called Wöhrder Bauer. He called himself in the preface to his
Sermon von der Abgötterei, 1524, Diepold Peringer, a peasant, born of
Ulm, who can neither write nor read; Spalatin, *ap. Mencken*, II, 632,
calls him *Dieboldum Schusterr ex Aichenbrunnen, rusticum Augustin.
dioc.*.; but this was an assumed name, he was rather an expelled Swabian
clergyman. In 1524 he appeared in the area around Nuremberg, especially
in Wöhrd and Thon, but also in the city itself as a powerful preacher,
who aroused even Spalatin\'s amazement. But when the Archduke Ferdinand
complained to the city council on March 4, 1524 (Förstemann, Neues
Urkundenbuch, p. 155a) that a peasant was being allowed to preach, the
council expelled him from the city. He went first to Kitzingen and then
to Rothenburg. Involved in the peasants\' revolt, he is said to have
been drowned.

3\) Baum has placed this date in the margin without giving reasons for
it (Erl. Briefw.). - It seems to us that this letter must be dated
further back, because Zwingli\'s letter had already appeared in print in
March with Christoph Froschauer in Zurich (see St. Louis edition, vol.
XVII, 1529, note 3), and Zwingli already sent his copy to the
Strasbourgers on Dec. 12, 1524.

what he wants and what he deals with. This is not done by me for the
sake of inciting you against this man or any other, but so that you may
be warned beforehand, 4) if they should ever want to break out. For from
this I gather some suspicions as to what is being done secretly among
us. They receive the writings against Carlstadt with bitterness; not
that they say publicly that he has done right, but that in Carlstadt
their opinion is condemned. I, limited as I am, see that the people of
our time are not so subject to any error as to ambition and vain
doctrine. As for you, I wish more ardently to see you than any other
man. God grant that after so many adversities I may one day rejoice with
you and with my Philip. Farewell and write again with Secerius.

**No. 844.**

Wittenberg. April 11, 1525.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2638, annex, no. 126.

**No. 845.**

Wittenberg. April 15, 1525.

**To Spalatin in Lochau. 5)**

Luther recommends a wife who lives with her husband in

Dispute lay.

The original is in the Anhaltische Gesammtarchiv. Printed by *Buddeus*,
p. 43; by De Wette, vol. II, p. 644; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53,
p. 290 and entirely in German by Walch, vol. XXI, 969.

To the worthy Magister Georgen Spalatino, electoral preacher of Saxony,
my favorable master and good friend.

Grace and peace. Worthy, dear sir and good friend! I ask you very kindly
to be helpful to this poor woman, the ferry master, in her dealings with
my most gracious lord. And because she desires testimony from me, I give
it with this writing, namely thus: I have had both of them, her husband
and herself, present before me next to the priest and interrogated; but
because there has been no reconciliation

4\) We have adopted with Kolde *sis* instead of *his* in Erl. Briefw.

5\) From Förstemann\'s \"Neues Urkundenbuch\", p. 259b, we see that the
Elector was in Lochau on April 14.

6\) Bugenhagen.

**736**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 845. 846. **737**

I have to allow her, as she asked, to stay away from him and never take
a husband. But he, the man, wants to be beautiful and pure, desires to
take another, right and leave. I have refused him, and rejected him from
me, as I do not want to be the judge of him and his cause; if others
allow him, I am satisfied. 1) Summa, it is he of whom I recognize,
although it cannot be proven by witnesses, that he deals with it, to
reject this and to take another. But to bring this about, he pretends
that he wants her to live with him, but when she lives with him, he
treats her in such a way that she is forced to flee. Thus he arranges
things on both sides in such a way that, according to outward
appearances, he seems to desire her as a wife, while at any moment he
wishes that she were either dead or in the Caucasus. Do dll understand
what I want? rather, what he wants? From his words, which slipped out of
his mind unawares, although they were dark, I gathered this. He is, to
say nothing else, a monk, a mischievous and scheming man. I am not at
all well inclined against him. He has instigators, or at least one
instigator, namely A. v. N., the king of this city. You know the man; I
do not have to understand what he is after with this matter. The Lord
wants to exterminate these cunning and deceitful enemies of the gospel;
rather, he lets them be open enemies. But even they are no match for
Christ, who sees all things hidden, amen. Fare well in the Lord.
Wittenberg, the Saturday before Easter \[April 15\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 846.**

(Wittenberg.) April 16, 1525.

**To Spalatin in Lochau.**

Luther writes that he is about to go to Eisleben with Philip and
Agricola to establish a school there, and complains that the school at
Wittenberg is neglected. He jokingly encourages Spalatin to marry.

1\) The following is in the original Latin; we have retranslated it.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 252. Printed by *Buddeus*, x. 46; in De Wette, vol. II, p.
645 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 157. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 971.

To Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the court of Saxony, his
brother who is extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace! I have ordered our Lucas to send 100 copies to the
preceptor. 2) For at this hour I am going with Philip and M. Eisleben to
Eisleben, where we are summoned by Count Albrecht to establish a
Christian school, since you are so lukewarm and neglect ours. I am
beginning to wish and approach Philippus at Nuremberg 3) to start a
similar one. The Magdeburgers have appointed Caspar Creutziger 4) and M.
Arnold the Danzigers. Thus we are scattered, and our school falls apart.
I do not know what I will be. But I know that you are without any guilt
in this matter. Only Satan is behind it.

By the way, as you write about my marriage, I do not want you to be
surprised that I do not marry, since I am such a notorious lover. It is
more to be wondered at that I, who write so often of marriage and am so
busy with women, have not long since become a woman, not to mention that
I have not married any. But, if dll desire my example, behold, dll have
a very powerful one. For I have had three wives 5) at the same time, and
have loved so strongly that I have lost two, which other suitors would
like to accept. The third, which I just

2\) Lucas Cranach had printed the letter to Wolfgang Reißenbusch (No.
837) (see No. 842).

3\) Already in October 1524 Melanchthon had received a call to
Nuremberg.

4\) He followed, 21 years old, the call as Rector to the city school at
St. Johannis in Magdeburg, founded from the merger of the other schools
in 1524, in May 1525, remained there until April 13, 1528, when he
returned to Wittenberg as a preacher at the castle church and university
teacher and worked there until his death, Nov. 16, 1548.

5\) These \"three women\" are the three virgins Ave von Schonfeld, Ave
Alemann from Magdeburg and Catharina von Bora, who were freed from the
convent in Nimptschen. For Ave von Schonfeld Luther had some
inclination, Ave Alemann he calls against Amsdorf his \[former\] bride.
Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 1138; ibid. vol. XIX, 1788. See
also the note there.

**738** Letters from the year 1525. No. 846 to 850. **739**

if perhaps soon to be snatched away, I barely hold on the left arm. But
you lazy lover do not even dare to become the husband of one. But see to
it that it does not happen that I, whose mind is quite far from
marriage, should once forestall you quite willing suitors, as God is
wont to work that which one least expects. I say this so that I may
drive you to do what you intend without joking. Farewell, my dear
Spalatin. On Easter Day \[April 16\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 847.**

Wittenberg. (April) 1525.

**To Georg von Polenz, Bishop of Samland.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. ill, 1370.

**No. 848.**

Weimar. May 3, 1525.

**To Friedrich Myconius in Gotha.**

Letter of comfort and encouragement to continue in the proclamation of
the Gospel.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel. Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 1048, fol.
2. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 288b; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 65;
in De Wette, vol. II, p. 651 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 162. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 972.

To the highly esteemed brother in the Lord, Frederick Mecum,1)
evangelist and servant of Christ, his extremely dear \[friend\].

Grace and peace in Christ, who said: \"In the world you will be afraid.

1\) Mecum was his real name, which was later changed to Myconius. He was
born on Dec. 26, 1491, at Lichtenfels in Upper Franconia, came to
Annaberg in 1504 to the Rector Andreas Weidner, called Staffelstein.
Here he heard Tetzel preach in 1508, and as a poor man wanted to have
the indulgence for free, for God\'s sake, which he denied him (see
Myconius\' Narrative, St. Louis Edition, vol. XV, 364, no. 98). On July
14, 1510, he entered the Franciscan monastery at Annaberg, was
transferred from there to Leipzig and Weimar, and was ordained a priest
in Weimar in 1516. In the same year he became a priest in Weimar, and
joined the Lutheran movement from the beginning, for which he suffered
much from his fellow monks, who finally brought him to Leipzig and
Annaberg, so that he would be under the control of Duke George. From
here he fled to Zwickau in 1524, and Duke Johann assigned him as a
preacher to Gotha in the same year, where he remained until his death on
April 7, 1546.

but in me peace, but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. I am
writing this to you as a stranger, my dear Frederick, in order to share
with you all the comfort I have in Christ. 2) Since the world is
overcome in Christ, what is done apart from Christ and without him must
necessarily be such that it appears to be victorious, but in fact is
defeated and made triumphant in and with Christ, so that one possesses
nothing but victory when the world passes away with its appearance. We
who know Christ cannot doubt that this will happen. I pray that he will
encourage you with his spirit and enliven you with his power, along with
all of your own. But continue, my dear Frederick, in the Lord. Greet and
admonish my Basil 3) in the Lord. Weimar, Wednesday after Misericordias
Domini \[May 3\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 84S.**

Seeburg. May 4, 1525.

**To Johann Rühel, Mansfeld City Council.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 160, no. 783.

**No. 850.**

Wittenberg. 5 (?) May 1525. 4)

**To the City Council of Danzig.**

Luther sends (in response to a request addressed to him on February 6)
Michael Hänlein as preacher, exhorts to peace, and warns against wanting
to arrange everything according to the Law of Moses, which is why he
also encloses a note in which he explains himself about the purchase of
interest 2c.

Alis the autograph in the Danzig Archives printed in the Leipzig
Supplement, p. 38; in Walch, vol. XXI, 87. From the *Acta Borussica,*
tom. II, p. 298 (which has somewhat different text), in De Wette, vol.
II, p. 656 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 294. We reproduce
the text according to De Wette, but using several of Walch\'s good
variants, most of which are also found in a Berlin copy.

2\) Luther gave him this consolation, so that he would be confident in
resisting the uprising that was stirring in Gotha.

3\) Basilius Monner, at that time Rector of the school in the
Augustinian monastery, later electoral councilor.

4\) In any case, this date is wrong, because Luther, as we see from his
letter to Spalatin of May 7, did not return to Wittenberg until the
evening of May 6 after 7 o\'clock.

**740** Letters from the year 1525. No. 850. **741**

Grace and peace through Christ our Savior. Honorable and wise, dear
lords and friends! At your written request, I have done my best to
appoint a skilled preacher for you. Now it did not happen that Mr.
Johann Pommer, whom you yourselves named and desired, could have been
given to you, as I would have liked to have seen; for our congregation
did not want him, so that we also kept people here, through whom we
could educate others and serve other cities. Michaelem Hänlein, 1) an
almost pious, sedentary and learned man in all things, whose like I know
of no other here; so that I hope you will be provided for and cared for,
and that he will please you greatly every day. To the same I command
your wisdom and love, let him be commanded to you, if rather he goes
from us to you in foreign lands, and see that he is Christian and well
provided for according to your promise; as Christ and Paul teach many
times that those who teach us the word are worthy to be held in twofold
honor. I also ask you, my dear lords and friends, to do and suffer
whatever you want to do and suffer, so that you may have peace among
yourselves, and see to it that no swarming spirits come among you, as
unfortunately such people cause much misery here in Upper Germany, as E.
W. may well have heard. If something is to be changed or broken, be it
pictures or whatever it may be, that such should not be done by the
common man, but by proper authority of the council, lest, as elsewhere,
there should be a tendency to despise the authorities, whom God wants to
be feared and honored. In particular, however, that E. W. see to it that
you are not taught to govern according to the law of Moses, much less
according to the Gospel, as I have said in the following.

1\) He is identical with Michael Maurer, who was called Hänichen
(*Galliucus*, Hähnlein) after his birthplace. He arrived in Gdansk on
June 1 and preached at St. Mary\'s Church until the Reformation was
violently suppressed after the entry of King Sigismund of Poland on
April 17, 1526. On May 3, 1526, he was imprisoned along with the other
preachers, but was released by Duke Albrecht of Prussia, who took him to
Prussia on May 26, where he became pastor first in Rastenburg, then in
1531 in Löbenicht-Königsberg, where he died in 1537.

I have written it down on a piece of paper, and I have ordered it to
your preacher, Mr. Michael, who will teach you well; obey him. Hereby
commanded to God, who strengthens and multiplies you to His praise and
honor, Amen. Date Wittenberg, on the Friday before Jubilate \[May 5\]
1525.

*Copia* note enclosed.

The law of Moses is dead and entirely abe, even given to the Jews alone;
we Gentiles are to obey the laws of the land where we live, as St. Peter
says in the first epistle on the 5th: \"of all human order\". But the
gospel is a spiritual law, according to which one cannot rule, but must
make it for himself, whether he will do it or not. And one cannot and
should not force anyone to do it, just as one would force one to
believe; for here it is not the sword, but the Spirit of God that must
teach and rule. Therefore, the spiritual rule of the Gospel should be
separated from the outward worldly rule, and should not be mixed with
each other. The preacher is to conduct the evangelical rule with his
mouth alone, and let each one have his own will here; whoever accepts
it, let him take it all, whoever does not want it, let him leave it. As
if to give an example, the purchase of interest or the interest penny is
quite unevangelical, since Christ teaches, \"Lend without taking
again!\" Here one should not go to it, and all division should be
strictly abolished according to the gospel, nor does anyone have the
right or power to do so, for it came from human order, which St. Peter
does not want torn apart, but one should preach it, and give it home to
those to whom the interest is due, whether they want to accept such a
gospel from themselves, and let the interest go, or not. No further can
they be urged. For the gospel requires willing hearts, driven by the
Spirit of God. But this is what is to be done with the interest, that
human order, laws and customs are brought to justice in such interest,
if they go too far, and according to equity, which is called xxxxxxxxx
or *aequitas*,

judges. For all laws and customs should be subject to natural equity as
their rule and master. If one now wants to abolish the interest, one
must not go to it and abolish it all at once. For it

**\
742** Letters from 1525, No. 850 to 854. **743**

It could be that one had spent a thousand guilders three years ago, and
had hardly accumulated two hundred guilders of interest; this would be
too short, and would be an unreasonable robbery, and the interest man
would be entitled to too much, without all justice. Item, one should
also not break off interest on the principal sum. For why should I give
a thousand guilders of my own and have 50 of them given to me every
year, if I were a child, I would keep them just as much and take 50
guilders of them myself every year. These are all unreasonable things,
and are an imposed gospel. For the gospel teaches to freely let go of
all goods, but whoever forces or compels me to do so takes away what is
mine. Now if one wants to justify interest, there are two ways. The
first is to justify them according to human laws, namely to give 5
guilders per hundred to be used for a year, and to put the same 5
guilders into the estate, that is, onto a certain pledge standing in the
estate, such as fields, meadows, ponds, houses, so that if it does not
bear for a year, or bears little, the interest is also reduced according
to it, as the natural laws teach, and this would have to be recognized
by the Honorable Council or reasonable people. The other is to consider
the difference of persons and time, and to act according to their will:
if the person is of good fortune, and has occupied it for a long time,
that one should theid with them, that they should nevertheless let part
of the interest received go to the main property; but if the person is
old and unable, that one should not thus push his mouth off the manger
and make him a beggar, but let them keep the interest as long as they
live and suffer, 1) as love and natural equity teaches. In short, no law
can dictate how to act in this way, but everything depends on the
person, which must be borne according to love and fairness, through the
knowledge of good people, and not be allowed to perish, otherwise there
would be a lot of injustice where mail should be strict with them. Your
preachers will instruct you further. Date Wittenberg, on the Friday
before Jubilate \[May 5\] *Anno* 1525.

1\) \"bedarben\" will probably be as much as: need. Dietz has:
\"darben?\".

**No. 851 .**

(Lochau.) (May 6 and 7, 1525.)

**Questions posed to Luther and Melanchthon about the burial of the
Elector, together with their answer.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 177, no. 796.

**No. 852.**

(Torgau.) (ca. May 7, 1525.)

**Expert opinion of Gabriel Zwilling on the funeral of the Elector.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 178, no. 797.

**No. 853.**

(Wittenberg.) May 7, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Letter accompanying Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s expert opinion No. 851.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 253. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 47; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
659 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 170. German in Walch, Vol. XXI, 973
f.

For the attention of Georg Spalatin, the servant of God at the court of
Saxony.

Grace and peace! Here you have our opinion about the ceremonies at the
funeral of the prince, my dear Spalatin. Oh, bitter death, not only for
those who die, but also for those who leave the dead behind them alive!
But of that another time and orally. For I find myself overwhelmed at
home, although I had already returned yesterday sufficiently laden,
after seven o\'clock in the evening. Farewell and pray for me. Sunday
Jubilate \[May 7\] 1525.

Martin.

**No. 854.**

Wittenberg. May 8, 1525.

**To the Regensburg City Council.**

Luther responds to their request for a Lutheran preacher,
Barfüßerordens, that such a one is not available now, they must have
patience.

From Gemeiners Kirchen-Reformat.-Geschichte in Regensburg, p. 43; in De
Wette, vol. II, p. 660 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 298.

**744** Letters from the year 1525. No. 854 to 859. **745**

To the honorable and prudent Lord Chamberlain and Councilor of the City
of Regensburg, my favorable master and good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord. Honorable, prudent, dear gentlemen!
To your letter and verbal solicitation of the respectable Doctor
Hiltner, your skilled man, I give this answer, that I made every effort,
according to your desire, to procure a learned, sedentary preacher of
the Gospel, Barefoot Order, but had none available for such haste, for
there was indeed one, but he was arrested elsewhere. For this reason,
please be patient for a little while; for I hope that it will soon be
otherwise, that Eur W. may be well advised, as the above-mentioned
Doctor Hiltner will further report to E. W.. And I would like to know
the form of one with you, so that such a city would be safe and know how
to lay the right foundation; for I am willing and inclined to serve
E.W.. Hereby commanded by the grace of God. At Wittenberg, on Monday
after Jubilate \[May 8\] 1525. Martinus Luther.

**No. 855.**

Erfurt. May 10, 1525.

**The Council of Erfurt to Luther and Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 113, no. 778.

**No. 856.**

(Wittenberg.) May 15, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2050.

**No. 857.**

Wittenberg. 15, May 1525.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2045. 1)

1\) There, reprinted from Walch\'s old edition, is the superscription:
\"Trostbrief über den Tod eines [Vaters]{.underline}\", but Prince
Frederick the Wise died unmarried, and John Frederick was the son of
Duke John.

**No. 858.**

Wittenberg. May 15, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the two previous letters of consolation along with the
draft of his letter to the King of England, but withholds his draft for
the improvement of the university.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 253. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 47; by De Wette, vol. II, p.
664 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 173. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 974.

To the Lord George Spalatin, the faithful servant of Christ, his brother
in the Lord.

Grace and peace! It has seemed good to me, my dear Spalatin, to postpone
the establishment of the Academy until the princes have come here (for I
hear that they will come here soon), if you do not judge otherwise. In
the meantime, I am sending letters of comfort to them, and at the same
time a copy of the letter to be written to the King of England, so that
you may watch and indicate where anything needs to be added or changed.
Send it back to me and also give Johann von Minkwitz his. The council of
Erfurt calls Philippus and me to arrange things (I don\'t know which).
Farewell and pray for me. Monday after Cantate \[May 15\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 859.**

Wittenberg. May 20, 1525.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Luther asks him to take charge of the sinking university.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. O, p. 124, ZZ. 14. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 39; in Walch, vol. XXI, 91; in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 664 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 302.

Sublime, high-born F\[uerst\]! I have written to E. F. G. Father and
Lord, my G. H., to order 2) this high school.

2\) This letter, which was formerly in the Weimar Archives (Reg. O, p.
141, EEE 3), is missing. The registrar\'s note about it says: \"The
form, made by Luther and Melanchthon at Elector Frederick\'s request and
still existing *sub Manuscriptis Lutheri,* how to provide the school
with legenten and solde, from it

**746**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 859. 860. 861.

747

new, and to procure a man to do so. Now it is true that E. F. G. has a
lot of other things to do in these lausts. has a lot of other things to
do in these louses, but because the delay here is also dangerous, since
it has now hung long enough and is in a state of disarray, and in
addition people are moving away daily and are demanded, who cannot
easily be brought together again, so that our neighbors are already
rejoicing, as if the Elector Wittenberg were also there, and now even
that: It would be a pity that such a school, since the Gospel is spread
all over the world, should disappear like this, and yet people are
needed everywhere, and no one helps to create them. Wherever E. F. G.
wants to help, I humbly ask that E. F. G. help diligently, and not obey
whether some great courtiers would speak contemptuously of scribes,
because E. F. G. sees how the world cannot be ruled by force alone, but
must have learned people who help the people with God\'s word by
teaching and preaching; and of course, if there were no teachers and
preachers, worldly power would not stand for long, let it be said that
God\'s kingdom would have to come from us. I hope that E. F. G. will
prove himself Christian and gracious here. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen.
In Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Cantate \[May 20\] 1525.

E. F. G. undersigned Mart. Luther.

**No. 860.**

(Wittenberg.) May 20, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends the draft for the improvement of the university, recalls a
request for support and reports the receipt of a donated deer.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 253. Printed by *Buddeus, p.* 48; by
De Wette, vol. II, p. 665 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 174.
German by Walch, vol. XXI, 975.

to take also this prophecy that it will still come to the point that
art, doctrine together with the Gospel will have to emigrate from German
lands through hunger and hardship. This letter was answered on June 1.
The instruction that Elector John gave to Spalatin is found in *Reg. O*,
p. 124, ZZ. 15.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, servant of Christ at the court of Saxony,
his brother.

Grace and peace! I am sending the establishment of the university,
included in the letters to our princes; you will see to it that it is
sent. At the same time I am also sending yours. I would have sent a copy
\[of my draft\], but I had no time to copy it. I have followed all the
points you suggested, along with your reminders. If my nun from
Koßleth 1) has any hope of receiving a robe, show it, for the very poor
one is waiting for it. I have received a deer from Lochau, which was
given to Aurogallus; for I assume that, although nothing was said to
whom it should be delivered. But it has been delivered to him. Farewell
and pray for me. On the Saturday after Cantate \[May 20\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 861.**

Lier. May 20, 1525.

**Christian II of Denmark to Lnther.**

He informs Luther of the news he has received that almost the entire
peasantry and the bourgeoisie in Denmark ardently desire his
reinstatement. He asks Luther to intercede for his cause.

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. 26 a, fol. 29 and in Hamburg, Ms. 58,
quarto, 20. Printed in Zeitschrift für hist. Theologie, 1871, 460 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 175. A part of the letter in Seckendorf, *Hist.
Luth., lib.* I, p. 268 a, add. III. He considers Cornelius Scepper, vice
chancellor of the king (later imperial councilor in Belgium), to be the
writer of the letter.

Christiern, King of Denmark, Sweden 2c., wishes Doctor Martin Luther
much grace and peace in Christo.

The peace of Jesus Christ be with you, holy brother Martin! I cannot
refrain from telling you, dear brother, if I have received any cheerful
news, since I know for certain that my welfare is as dear to you as it
is to me, partly because I have experienced this not infrequently in the
holy conversations we have had with each other, partly because I do not
doubt that with fervent and persistent prayer to God, which for me is
the sprout of all things

1\) Seidemann in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 673 assumes: \"Kospoth\", a small
village in the Weimarsche Amt Burgau.

**748** Letters from the year 1525. No. 861 to 864. 749

I hope that you will come to the aid of my weakness, even though it is
the most important and desirable thing.

On 19. May the exceedingly joyful news came here about my subjects, my
brothers, that they expect above all things nothing so much and implore
with anxious sighing from God than that they may be freed from such
tyrannical captivity, in which they are oppressed in a miserable way
according to the ungodly desires of the clergy, for whom it is not
enough to rage against the body and against temporal goods, if they do
not also strive to destroy the exceedingly wholesome word of God at the
same time as all the heavenly gifts that have been acquired for us by
Christ. But listen, I beg you, to the glorious miracles of the
exceedingly gracious GOD! He has so enkindled almost the entire
peasantry and the bourgeoisie of the entire empire for my return that
they now, with the utmost desire, would like to see, desire and \'wish
for\' him whom they had previously despised as king, persecuted and
rejected. So even with God is all comfort and victory, however much the
others, the more powerful, 1) oppose. 2) Trusting in this mercy, I have
no doubt that by God\'s grace I will be able to tell you more certain
things before all. In the meantime, dearest brother, by your fervent
prayer, which is definitely more useful than all help from men, you will
entrust my cause to the exceedingly good will of God, according to which
everything may be done; we may die or we may live, we may rule or we may
serve, so it will be pleasing by His grace. Farewell. At Lier,3) on the
20th day of May, Anno 1525. Christiern.

**No. 862.**

May 21, 1525.

**D. Joh. Rühel, Mansseldischer und Magdeburgischer Rath, to Luther.**

(Two fragments.)

In the first fragment, Rühel reports that Muenzer has not only revoked
his previous teachings, but has become a Papist altogether; in the
second, he asks Luther to write to the Elector of Mainz about his
marriage.

1\) Here Seckendorf adds in brackets: \"namely the bishops and the
noblemen, as is known elsewhere\".

2\) The rebellion that broke out in Christian\'s favor was suppressed
after two heavy defeats.

3\) Lier is a town in the Belgian province of Antwerp. where the
governor! Margaretha had ordered the king and his wife to live there.

From the original, which was then in the possession of D. Caspar
Sagittarius in Jena, Seckendorf*,* *Hist*. *Luth.* II, p. 13a and p.
20a, has provided these two fragments, the former in Latin translation.
After that in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 176. Seckendorf added the date in
both places.

I.

Muenzer, in his prison, and in him Satan, in order to flatter the
godless tyrants, not only recanted his errors, 4) and used the Sacrament
under one form, but also confessed the Roman faith, and became entirely
a Papist. Although this has a good appearance, it is not without poison,
as you can see from the fact that he admitted that he had erred in all
things, that is, that he also recanted the true teachings of the Gospel.

II\.

I would like you to write a letter of comfort to my most gracious lord
of Magdeburg in these perilous times and an exhortation to change his
status (you understand me well), 5) but that I would like to have a copy
of it; I want to go to Magdeburg today to act in the matter. God
Almighty grant me mercy! Ask God from Heaven to grant grace to such
serious work and undertakings. I hope you understand me well, I do not
want to be written. Please, please, please for God\'s sake, grant me
grace and strength as a worker.

**No. 863.**

Wittenberg. May 23, 1525.

**To D. Johann Rühel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 130, no. 783 (2).

**No. 864.**

(Wittenberg.) 26, May 1525.

**To Duke Albrecht of Prussia.**

Luther wishes him luck in resigning his office as Grand Master; he
promises to send a preacher to Prussia and asks him to help two virgins
to obtain their inheritance.

4\) See the confession of Thomas Muenzer, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI,
122, no. 781. There is nothing to be seen of a revocation of the true
teachings of the Gospel. The questioning took place in two ways, first
\"in kindness,\" then \"embarrassingly\"; the latter concerns only
personal matters. The remark of the Erl. Briefwechsel to the words: \"in
kindness\", namely: \"in reality: under torture\", is therefore not
quite correct.

5\) Luther did this on June 2, as Seckendorf thinks, with the knowledge
and will of Elector Albrecht.

**750**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 864 to 868.

**751**

The original is in the Königsberg Archives. From the collection of
letters which Faber published under the title: \"D. Martin Luthers
Briefe an Albrecht, Herzog von Preußen. From the originals in the secret
archive at Königsberg 2c. Königsberg 1811. 8.\", printed in De Wette,
vol. II, p. 667 f. and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 5\'6, p. 304.

To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Albrecht, Margrave of
Brandenburg, Duke of Prussia, of Stettin, Pomerania 2c., my gracious
lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! I am
very pleased that God Almighty has graciously and miraculously helped
such a state of affairs, and I wish that the same merciful God will
carry out the kindness he has begun to E. F. G. to a blessed end, and
also to the benefit and good of the whole country, amen.

I have helped to order the preacher 1) that E. F. G. wants; he should
come soon after this.

Also, my lord, I humbly ask you to grant me a vain intercession to E. F.
G. in mercy. The bishop of Rige 2) owes his mothers several hundred
guilders from a will of their brother, He Niclas Plankefeld, in which he
defaults on payment. Now the two virgins are all here with Master
Kersten Goldschmid,3) who has their sister) pious, fine children, who
now daily need that they are advised, and poor maidens. But since the
same bishop still has some money outside with E. F. G., they would like,
if it were up to E. F. G., to keep the same money inside, as much as he
owes the children, as all M\[eister\] Kersten Goldschmid sends a list to
M. Joh. Brismann, and they would like to obtain it from and through E.
F. G. from him. What E. F. G. now wants to advise or do in this regard,
I place humbly in E. F. G.\'s power. F. G., who will undoubtedly know
how to act in a Christian manner. Herewith GOtte ordered. On Friday post
\].seensioms Domini \[May 26\] 1525. Martinus Luther.

1\) The preacher was Poliander, whose real name was Graumann. In the
fall of 1525 he took over the pastorate at the Old Town Church in
Königsberg. He died on April 29, 1541.

2\) The archbishop of Riga since June 1524 was Johann Blankenfeld from
Berlin.

3\) This is Christian Döring, the goldsmith (*Aurifaber*).

**No. 865.**

May 27 (?) 1525. 4)

**D . Johann Rühel to Luther.**

(Fragment.)

Rühel gives his verdict on Münzer\'s letter, which he wrote to the von
Mühlhausen. (St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, 125, No. 782.)

From Seckendorf\'s *Hist. Luth*. *lib.* II, p. 13 printed in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 180. We have translated this piece into German.

Although the opponents claim that Münzer\'s letter to the people of
Mühlhausen is a retraction, it seems to me to be more of an insistence,
for he alone accuses the peasants of having caused their own ruin by
following their benefit too closely. Whatever they may say, I consider
him to be a desperate man.

**No. 866.**

(Wittenberg.) May 30, 1625.

**To D. Johann Rühel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 131, no. 783 (3).

**No. 867.**

Wittenberg. May 30, 1525.

To Amsdorf in Magdeburg. See St. Louis edition, Vol. XVI, 133, No. 784.

**No. 868.**

Wittenberg. May 30, 1525.

**To the City Council of Frankfurt a. M.**

In response to his request for a preacher, Luther sends him Johann
Agricola for one month.

From Ritter\'s Protestant Monument to the City of Frankfurt in Walch,
vol. XXI, 976; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 672 and in Erl. Ausg., vol. 53,
p. 307.

To the honorable and prudent gentlemen, mayor and council of the city of
Frankfort, my favorable gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! Here comes
Magister Joh. Eisleben, as I have written to E. W. before. But he comes
alone, because

4\) This date, which Seckendorf gives, does not agree with the fact that
he says the letter was written after Münzer\'s death, because Münzer was
not beheaded until May 30.

**752**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 868 to 871.

**753**

in these lausts many people are in need, that our sub-priest, by causes
occurred, might not have been sent along. But he has accepted such a
journey. To be with you for about a moon. You will know how to stay
here. For we may also be here and otherwise. God grant that he may do
you much good, amen, and let him be your command. May God\'s grace be
with you all, Amen. At Wittenberg, on Tuesday after *Exaudi* \[May 30\]
1525.

**No. 869.**

Eisenach. June 1, 1525.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Answer to Luther\'s request for improvement of the University of
Wittenberg.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 124, 22. 14. Printed by
Burkhardt, \'p. 83 and rm Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. V, p. 184. - This
letter is the reply to Luther\'s letter of May 20, mentioned in No. 859,
which has been lost.

Our greeting before. Worthy and esteemed, dear devotee! We have heard
the length of your letter, and since it concerns the entertainment of
the most necessary persons in Wittenberg and the university there, we do
not want to reassure you that our mind and opinion is not to let the
laudable work perish, but are rather inclined to help it, so that it may
increase and be comforting to all of Christendom and the German nation.
As it has been the will of the Highborn Prince Friderich, Duke of
Saxony, Elector, of laudable memory, of our dear brother. But now that
we are not able to order things constantly according to your reports,
due to the burdensome trades and runs, we graciously request that you
enable the persons everywhere whom you report to us and are to read, so
that they will do diligently and not celebrate in that which is due to
each until our arrival. For if God Almighty helps us, of which we have
no doubt that he will do it, that we will stop the senseless uprisings
here outside in these lands, and submit ourselves to the electoral
office in Saxony, we want to make the arrangements with your and other
scholars\' advice and concern, so that we will not be found wanting for
the preservation of the University of God to the praise and benefit of
common Christianity, that you may well put them off on our account. All
this

we did not want to behave you graciously opinion. Date Eisenach,
Thursday after Exaudi \[June 1, Anno 25.

Note. ,

We also do not want to refrain from asking the good God with all lovers
of His divine word for us, that His grace may be imparted to us, to act
and do that which is His divine will and favor in these anxious and
dwindling times, as we provide for you in all ways. *Date uts*.

**No. 870.**

Eisenach. June 1, 1525.

**Duke John Frederick of Saxony to Luther.**

Response to Luther\'s request (No. 859) for improvement of the
university.

From the copy in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 121, 22.14, in
Burkhardt, p. 84 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 185.

Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! We have read all the contents of
your letter with a humble request that we would like to support and help
our lord and father, so that the high school and university in
Wittenberg, after it was not provided with a man who would be in service
to it, might again be appointed, and the persons who move away daily be
preserved, and have noted such notification from you to your grace; We
have also talked with our Lord Father about it, and have noted so much
of his love that his loved ones are inclined to support you on the same
occasion, and if his loved ones were to go down to the church, to inform
their minds, and to help promote, so that the university may once again,
as much as possible, be preserved. Therefore, it is our most gracious
request that you use all possible diligence to preserve the university,
for whatever our Lord and Father may know how to do to accommodate it,
his love will undoubtedly not be lacking. That we do not want to save
you in our gracious opinion, so that we are inclined to you. Date
Eisenach, Thursday after Exaudi \[June 1\] Anno 25.

**No. 871.**

Wittenberg. June 2, 1525.

**To the Elector Albrecht of Mainz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 678.

**754**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 872 to 875.

**755**

**No. 872.**

Wittenberg. June 3, 1525.

**To Christoph Jörger at Tolleth.**

Luther sends Michael Stiefel to him as a preacher.

From Raupach\'s Evangel. Oesterreich, erste Fortsetzung (Hamburg 1736.
4.), p. 37 in De Wette, vol. II, p. 676 and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 53, p. 312.

To the strict and firm, Christopher Jörger 1) to Tolleth and Kreusbach,
my favorable, special dear gentleman and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Strict and firm, dear Junkherr! I am sending
you Mr. Michel Stiefeln as a preacher, as you have asked me, and I ask
you again to let him be your command. He is a pious, learned, sedate and
diligent man, so that I hope he will be of good use to you. I have also
written to your dear mother, as you requested, through this Mr. Michael.
May God give you all His blessing, that you may see and spread His
glory, amen, and greet me in Christ your dear mother and all yours.
Hiemit GOtt befehlt. At Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Exaudi \[June
3\] 1525.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 873.**

(Wittenberg.)

June 3, 1525.

**To D. Johann Rühel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 682.

**No. 874.**

Wittenberg. June 5, 1525.

**To D. Johann Rühel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 684.

1\) Christoph Jörger was the eldest son of the knight and governor in
Oesterreich ob der Ens, Wolfgang Jörger (died 1524), born in 1502, later
a councilor of Maximilian II. He was, together with his mother Dorothea,
née von Mining, a zealous promoter of the Gospel in Oesterreich. He died
on January 19, 1578 as ErbLand-Hofmeister in Oesterreich ob der Ens. -
Tolleth is a castle in the Hausruck district in Upper Austria.

**No. 875.**

Wittenberg. June 10, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a letter (which no longer exists) to the Elector, exhorting
him not to postpone the marriage of the Elector-Prince.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. u, fol. 333. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 293d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 679 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.
189. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 978.

To his brother, M. Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at the court of
Saxony, who is extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace! I am sending a letter to the Elector, my dear Spalatin,
because I thought that was enough, since the younger prince surrenders
completely to the will of the older one. 2) The clergyman for Prussia
has not yet appeared; today you are looking for him, and when you find
him, he will be asked, and it will be written to you. The dangers of a
thing that is drawn out, I think, can be gathered sufficiently from
proverbs, from experience and from examples. The sayings are:
Procrastination has harmed those who were ready, and: There is danger
ahead. \"Night deadline, year deadline.\" He who is not skilful today
will be even less so tomorrow. If one has guessed, it is necessary to
put it into practice soon. Certainly such sayings are gleaned from
experience, and scriptural passages dealing with sacred things agree
with them, as Paul exhorts \"that we should not receive the grace of God
in vain,\" and the bride in the Song of Songs laments that the
bridegroom had departed when she hesitated to open. And in German one
says: \"Wenn GOtt grüßet, soll man danken, item: Wenn man das Ferkel
beut, soll mau den Sack herhalten.\" A pagan example: since Hannibal
could, he did not want to bring Rome to ruin; afterwards he could not,
since he wanted to. In the Holy Scriptures: Since Esau could have the
birthright, he despised it; afterwards he wept

2\) On August 6, Spalatin was in Wittenberg, as he writes to Warbeck, to
negotiate with Luther by order of the Elector (probably because of the
marriage of the Elector Prince to Sibylla of Jülich). - \"The clergyman
for Prussia\" is Poliander.

**756** Letters from the year 1525. No. 875 to 878. **757**

in vain. And Christ says Joh. 7, 34: \"You will search for me and will
not find me\"; \[Joh. 12, 36. 35.:\] \"Believe in the light, because you
have it, so that the darkness will not overtake you.\" Summa: All
Scripture, all creation, all experience testifies that the temporal
benefits of God are indeed temporal, therefore they do not last, but are
in a constant course and violent movement,1) therefore one must seize
each one,2) whatever it may be, when and where one can, so that it does
not escape. But what they pretend, that they will be safe of their
minds, is foolish. For no man\'s heart is in his power; the devil is
exceedingly powerful, who more frequently separates even those who are
already united, and how many examples of broken marriages there are for
this cause alone, that they have been postponed! How much more danger is
to be feared here, since the marriage has not yet been publicly
consummated. They must be admonished that they should not fight against
all this alone. They will not bring it to pass that this is void and
false, by their one and new example; therefore may they stand in fear,
if they heartily desire that the thing be done. Fare well and pray for
me. Wittenberg, on the day before Trinity Sunday \[June 10\] 1525.
Martin Luther.

**No. 876.**

Königsberg. June 11, 1525.

**Paul Speratus to Luther.**

(Fragment.)

Speratus reports that Martin Cellarius has arrived in Königsberg, but is
being kept locked up so that he does not spread poison. He is to be
examined.

Printed in Kapps kleiner Nachlese, vol. II, p. 677, with the
superscription: *Paulus Speratus, Dominica Trinitatis, ad D. M.
Lutherum*; in *Acta Borussica,* I, 810 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.
191.

\... that Martin Cellarius 3) has arrived here, whose spirit is to be
tested. For he seems to share Münzer\'s and Carlstadt\'s spirit. We

1\) *impetu*. Walch translates it by: \"low tide\".

2\) In the editions, we think, there is a wrong punctuation by putting a
comma before *quidquid.*

3\) This small fragment is of particular importance to us because it
confirms what we stated in our edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, pp. 24b
f.

have summoned Cellarius to our court, 4) so that he might not roam
around the city spreading poison. In the meantime, he is being treated
most kindly, 5) until his spirit is tested. If he should be bad, we wish
that he will come to terms again, but if he is good, he will be honored
as is right.

**No. 877.**

Wittenberg. June 12, 1525.

**To Nic. Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 135, no. 784 ( 2).

**No. 878.**

Frankfurt a. M. June 12, 1525.

Carlstadt to Lnther.

He asks Luther to forgive him for everything he sinned against him out
of the old Adam and to intercede for him with the Elector. He apologizes
for not having participated in the riot. If he had not already responded
to Luther\'s writing (against the heavenly prophets), he would no longer
do so. He piteously pleads that Luther take care of him, his wife and
his child; he has nowhere to take refuge.

A copy of the letter, probably originally in Latin, is in the Weimar
Archives, N, p. 367, No. 183. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 85 and in Erl.
Briefw., Vol. V, p. 193.

God\'s Grace and Peace. Venerable Doctor and dear Godfather! This is my
request that you forgive me for all that I, moved by the old Adam, have
sinned against you. Then look at my poor and miserable wife and child,
have mercy on them and forgive us.

The authorities have shown that the *homo miser,* whom Luther kept
hidden, was not Cellarius, but *Carlstadt.* The most dangerous time for
the real or supposed participants in the peasants\' revolt was around
June; on May 30, Muenzer was beheaded, on July 1, 34 rebels in
Rothenburg. Cellarius, as we can see from this document, was already in
Königsberg at this time, away from danger. There he was kept \"in
Christian honest custody,\" that is, closed off from contact with the
outside world, and only regained his freedom on February 9, 1526.
Therefore, Melanchthon\'s letter to Brismann (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. I, 756)
cannot be dated to August 1525, but, because it reports Cellarius\'
arrival in Wittenberg, to March 1526 at the earliest. Thus, an alibi for
Cellarius seems to be completely proven.

4\) Instead of *conscivimus* (from *conscisco), concivimus* (from
*concieo*) will be read.

5\) He was allowed to read and write.

**758** Letters from the year 1525. No. 878 to 880. **759**

write that we again come to ours. For I know neither counsel nor help to
seek in these dwindling and outrageous courses. There is turmoil from
there to the French countryside, which I am hostile and hateful to, and
have never trusted nor want to trust. I have written and answered your
letter; 1) if I had not done so, I would not have done so now, because I
now understand the decisions of this world. If you find anything in my
booklets that is too close or offensive to you, I can suffer you to
punish it and pay me. I have resolved not to write, preach or teach
anything in the future, and I intend to persist in this resolution as
much as I can. Do as a Christian brother and friend of God and commit my
wife, child and myself against our most gracious Elector, and bring us
in again. I will earn this in humility and diligence, and show myself in
such a way against Christians and the like that you will not receive any
disfavor because of your intercession. Committed to the living God. Date
at Frankfurt am Main. Monday after Trinitatis \[June 12\] Anno 25.
Please answer in writing.

Let neither trouble nor wrath turn you away from supporting us poor and
afflicted. For what I will not or cannot earn, God our Lord will reward
abundantly, even though I will always do my utmost to satisfy your will.
Prove your Christian love and do not neglect us wretched people. We have
no peace, neither from travelers nor from peasants, and fear and
hardship have surrounded us. My wife will tell you how I was escorted by
the council of the peasants in Franconia and how their escort helped me.
2) *Date uts*. God preserve us all.

Your benevolent servant

Endres Karlstat.

**No. 878a.**

Wittenberg. June 15, 1525.

**To Joh. Rühel, Joh. Thür and Caspar Müller.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 726.

1\) That is, to the writing \"Wider die himmlischen Propheten. For more
details about the two writings that Carlstadt published against it, see
St. Louis, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 226.

2\) From this passage it can be inferred that Carlstadt\'s wife was the
bearer of the letter to Luther.

**No. 879.**

Königsberg. June 15, 1525.

**Johann Brismann to Luther.**

(Fragment.)

Brismann reports his marriage, as well as that of the bishop of Samland.
Duke Albrecht of Prussia had written to Luther about Martin Cellarius,
who had come there, and was awaiting his judgment about him.

Printed in Kapps kleiner Nachlese, Vol. II, p. 676 (with the
superscription: *Joh*. *Brism. ad Doct. M. Lutherum. E Regiomonte, die
XV. Junii* 1525); in *Acta Bornssica*, vol. I, p.818; in *Gebser, epp.
Brismanni*, 1837, p. 1 and in Erl. We have translated this document into
German.

God, who, according to His wonderful providence, has called and led me
to Prussia, has given me, certainly without my knowing it, a maiden as a
wife. 3) I know that this was done by God\'s decree.

There is also betrothed to the bishop of Samland a noble virgin, the
daughter of Conrad von Truchsess, on the eighth day of June, that is,
about the fourth day before our wedding. You pray that God will shortly
tread Satan under our feet \[Rom. 16, 20\].

The Lord of Samland sends you his heartfelt greetings. Greetings also
from my rib, which knows you only by doctrine and name.

Martin Cellarius came to us, who left Wittenberg three years ago with
Stork and Marcus, those prophets, and went away. 4) Man, rather the
little man 5) can find no end (*est ineloquibilis*) in the boasting of
his spirit. But God, who makes us see the light in his light \[Ps. 36,
10\], shows by his word that this is the spirit of falsehood and error.
The most noble prince writes to you about this matter and also expects
your opinion and judgment from you.

**No. 880.**

Wittenberg. June 16, 525.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 726.

3\) Brismann married on June 12 Elisabetha Sackheim from Königsberg, who
is said to have been abbess of the monastery in Löbenicht in Königsberg
before.

4\) Compare St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 11a.

5\) *hominucio*. He must have been very small in stature, because
Melanchthon (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I, 756) calls him the same.

**760**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 881 to 886.

**761**

**No. 881.**

Wittenberg. June 17, 1525.

**To the Christians of Liefland.**

See St. Louis ed. vol. X, 258.

**No. 882.**

Wittenberg. June 17, 1525.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tolleth. 1)**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 672.

**No. 883.**

Wittenberg. June 17, 1525.

**To Leonhard Koppe in Torgau.**

Luther sends a petition from the escaped nuns, and invites him to his
wedding.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 217; in the Altenburger,
vol. II, p. 903; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 548; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 92; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 9 and in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p.
321.

Grace and peace in Christ! I will let you read this letter of complaint
and this wretched writing, worthy father Prior, 2) if you do not know
someone who could help with it; for I am well afraid that it is too high
and too much for your person. But if you do not know, take the letter
back to me, so that I can seek help and advice elsewhere; for I am sorry
for the wretched children.

You also know what has happened to me, that I am braided in the braids
of my metzen. God has pleasure to wonder, to fool and to ape me and the
world. Greet me your Audi, and send you, when I give the prandium, that
you help my bride to give good testimony, how I am a man. Hereby
commanded by God. At Wittenberg, on the Saturday after Trinity \[June
17\] Anno 1525.

Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 884.**

Wittenberg. June 20, 1525.

**To Wenc. Link in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 728.

1\) Stiefel was formerly a preacher in Esslingen, but now in Tolleth in
the Jörgerschen Haus.

2\) \"Prior\" Luther calls him, because he was several times helpful to
help the nuns out of the convent.

**No. 885.**

Wittenberg. June 21, 1525.

**To the Marshal Johann von Dolzig.**

Luther invites him to the wedding feast and asks for game.

Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 40, from the collection of
Sagittarius; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 11 (comparing it with the
original in the possession of Kaufmann Binder in Stuttgart); in the
Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 322 and in Walch, vol. XXI, 93.

To the strict and firm Johann Dolzig, Marshal of Sachselt, my favorable
master and good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Strict, honorable, dear lord and friend!
There is no doubt that my outrageous cry has come before you, as if I
had become a husband. Although this is almost strange to me, and I
hardly believe it myself, the witnesses are so strong that I have to
believe them for their service and honor, and I plan to seal and make
sure of it next Tuesday with my father and mother, along with other good
friends, in a collation. For this reason, I ask you kindly, if it is not
burdensome, to advise me faithfully with a wild pretzel and to be there
yourself, and to help to set the seal with joy, and what belongs to it.
Hereby God bless, amen. On the Wednesday after Viti or *Corporis
Christi* \[June 21\] 1525. Martinus Luther.

**No. 886.**

(Wittenberg.) June 21, 1525.

**To Leonhard Koppe in Torgau.**

Luther invites him again to his wedding feast and asks him to bring a
barrel of the best Torgau beer.

Transcript in Trier at the city library, Ms. 1880. Printed in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 202.

To the careful and wise Lenhart Koppen, citizen of Torgau and prior in
the Aue, 3) my dear lord and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Worthy Prior and Father! God has caught me
suddenly and unawares with the \[venerable

3\) In our template: Auwe(?)\", which is probably to be resolved by
\"Aue\". \"Torgau\" is written there: \"Torgaw\".

**762** Letters from the year 1525. No. 886 to 889. **763**

1\) bonds of holy matrimony, that I must confirm the same with a
collation on Tuesday. So that my father and mother and all good friends
may be the happier, my Lord Caterin and I kindly ask you to have a
barrel of the best Torgian beer, which you may have, brought here for my
fare and in the most beneficial way. I will give you wages and
everything honestly. I wanted to send a load, but I did not know whether
I would be able to do so, because it must be ripe and cool, so that it
tastes good, and I set the penalty on it, where it is not good, that you
should drink it alone. Furthermore, I ask that you do not stay outside
together with your Audi and appear cheerful. You should bring along
Magister Gabriel and his wife, as long as it is possible for him to do
so without food. For I know well that his good is not much more than
mine, therefore I did not want to write to him in particular, even
though he had forgotten mine. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. On Wednesday
after *Corporis Christi* or *Viti* \[June 21\] Anno 1525. Martinus
Lutherus.

**No. 887.**

Wittenberg. June 21, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Invitation to the wedding feast.

The original is in *Cod. Gothan*. 122, fol. 27. Manuscript in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 334. Printed *Spalat. ap. Mencken*, vol. II, p. 646; in
*Spalat*. *ap. Schelhorn*, *amoenitat*. vol. IV, p.426; in Aurifaber,
vol. II,bl.296; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 12 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
V, p. 203. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 977.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ, his brother who is
exceedingly dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord. My and my Catharina\'s wedding feast will
be next Tuesday, that is, after the feast of St. John the Baptist, to
which I invite you, my dear Spalatin, so that I may know that you
sincerely wish me happiness on my marriage, and ask that you may not be
absent. I have also written to the marshal about Wildpret and at the
same time have invited him to a

1\) In the original, as the Erl. Briefw. indicates, from the word
located here only: \"e\.... igen\" is to be read.

You will make an effort that something can be obtained. I am sending
back the letter from the King of Denmark. But I don\'t know anything
about the books of the King of England. I will also pray as much as I
can, and in his time I will write, 2) now I could not. You will remind
me when there will be leisure and opportunity for a messenger. Farewell
and pray for me. Wittenberg, Wednesday after Viti \[June 21\] 1525.
Martin Luther.

**No. 888.**

(Wittenberg.) June 21, 1525.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2639, annex, no. 127.

**No. 889.**

(Wittenberg.) June 25,1525.

**To Spalatin in Torgau.**

Luther gives him the time of the wedding feast, misunderstood by
Leonhard Koppe, very precisely and asks for timely sending of the game
pretzel.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*, a, fol. 253. Printed in *Buddeus*, P. 49; in De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 14 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 219. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
980.

For the attention of Magister Spalatin, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Lest you be mistaken, my dear Spalatin, Tuesday itself
will be the day of my wedding feast, so that at the breakfast 3) of that
day will be the highest and most important banquet. Therefore, the
venison must not come too late, but be there in time tomorrow towards
evening, if it is possible. For I want to arrange this pomp in one day
for the ordinary guests. I am writing this because L. Koppe did not
understand me from my letter, so that you may not also misunderstand me.
Farewell. Early on Sunday after St. John\'s Day \[June 25\], 1525.

Martin Luther.

2\) Compare St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, Introduction, p. 7b f.

3\) The *prandium* was usually taken at 9 o\'clock in the morning, the
*coena in the* afternoon at 5 o\'clock.

**764** Letters from the year 1525. no. 890. 891. 892. 765

**No. 890.**

(Wittenberg.) (June or July 1525.)

**To Caspar Müller, Chancellor at Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 77, no. 770.

**No. 891.**

Wittenberg. July 19, 1525.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

Luther gives this letter to Ambrosius Moiban, who had received the
theological doctorate in Wittenberg on June 26, and warns against the
communion revelers.

Handwritten in the library at Heidelberg. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 296; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 18 (with the wrong date: \"26.
Julius\") and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. V, p. 220. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 981.

Grace and peace in the Lord! D. Moiban lives and returns to you, my dear
Heß, after he has been made a regular of the \[noble\] families 1) by
us, out of obedience to the brothers and to the gospel. But I remind you
to beware of the prophets who are now wandering about everywhere and,
prompted by Carlstadt and Zwingli, think and speak very evil of the
Lord\'s Supper. But I have not yet despaired of Carlstadt. 2) God do
what is good. But you will hear everything from Moiban that is going on
here. The peasants are subdued almost everywhere. Greet all of ours and
pray for us. Finally, be well in Christ\'s grace, amen, my dear brother.
At Wittenberg, on Wednesday after Margaret \[July 19\] 1525. Martin
Luther.

1\) *gentilis cum gentibus* is a joking expression chosen by Luther,
which could also be translated: to the Gentiles with the Gentiles.

2\) The answer to the question: What entitles Luther to any good hopes
for Carlstadt? will be impossible for those who deny that Luther just at
this time kept Carlstadt hidden in his house. (See St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 24, Note 4.) On June 12, Carlstadt would have
written to Luther from Frankfurt a. M. (No. 877). His wife delivered the
letter, and had to return from Wittenberg to Frankfurt before Carlstadt
could find out about the asylum Luther offered him there. Given the long
distance between the two places, it cannot be assumed that Carlstadt
could have arrived in Wittenberg earlier than the beginning of July.
Since Luther himself says (St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 1824, No. 129)
that Carlstadt stayed longer than eight weeks in his house, Carlstadt\'s
stay there must have lasted until the beginning of September.

**No. 892.**

Wittenberg. July 20, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

About the employment of Spalatin and Brisger in Altenburg.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. IX, p. 1588; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XXII, p. 549; in Walch, vol. XXI, 126; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 14 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 323.

To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, John, Duke of Saxony,
Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! M. Georgius Spalatinus has reported to me that 3) in his recent
farewell to E. C. F. G., he has obtained the right to continue to
concern himself with the profession and burden of the parish office in
Altenburg, and has asked me to write to E. C. F. G. for this purpose.
Thus I humbly inform E. C. F. G. that I still hold to my previous
opinion; for the person is well learned, well eloquent, in addition
sedate and chaste, and, what moves me most of all, has a good, righteous
heart, who means the word of God and the souls with faithfulness. And
whether he will be weak in body, experience shall teach us; otherwise
there is no faith here. Moreover, the council of Altenburg wrote to me
to have our prior, as indicated by Doctor Wenceslaus, next to Magister
Spalatin: I did not spare my diligence. But because the above-mentioned
council is seeking this from E. C. F. G., it will be necessary that E.
C. F. G. request the same prior, Magister Eberharden, in writing for the
parish office, if he pleases E. C. F. G.. For the person is skilful and
capable enough; but because he makes himself difficult for it, and has
undertaken otherwise, a stronger profession is needed here than is the
council\'s and mine. Put all this in E. C. F. G.\'s concern and
pleasure. But there is one thing I must humbly request of E. C. F. G.,
that E. C. F. G. would have a gracious understanding that the parish
goods or interest of those who have used them up to now, would be

3\) orally, because Spalatin was in Wittenberg on July 20.

**766** Breeze from the year

1525\. no. 892. 893. 767

to the present and new pastors. For it is unpleasant that they should
work, and others should take the wages, as they have done until now, and
would probably do forever, if they were allowed to. So it is also to be
considered that \[it\] might henceforth become too difficult for the
council and the city with a new provision. He who does not want to
preach the gospel should not feed on the preaching of the gospel; it is
permitted him lukewarmly enough.

And for myself, as a caretaker for the Gospel, I ask that the monks of
Altenburg seek to confirm their previous unchristian nature, in God\'s
disservice and vexatious abuse, with E. C. F. G., so that E. C. F. G.
will graciously turn it away from them, and turn them away to the Word
of God and to the image of other Christian communities. For it would be
blasphemous, where the fallen idolatry should be set up again, as there
is no doubt in my mind, that they will almost make an effort with ECFG.
And- although I knew that E. C. F. G., by the grace of God, knows all
this well himself and is inclined to do it, I did not like to let E. C.
F. G. remember it in my humble opinion. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At
Wittenberg, on the Thursday after Margaret \[July 20, 1525.

E. C. F. G. undersigned Mart. Luther.

**No. 893.**

Wittenberg. July 21, 1525.

**To Archbishop Albrecht of Mainz.**

Luther intercedes for Asmus Günthel of Eisleben, who was allegedly
involved in the peasant uprising.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 224; in the Jena
edition (1556), vol. Ill, p. 166; in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p.
155; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 549; in Walch, vol. XXI, 128;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 16; and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.
324.

To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Albrecht,
Archbishop of Mainz and Magdeburg 2c, Elector, Margrave of Brandenburg
2c, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu. Most reverend in GOD Father, most noble,
most highborn Prince, most gracious Lord! I am

report how a citizen\'s son from Eisleben, named Asmus Günthel, was
caught by E. C. F. G., as if he should have helped storming the
outworks 1) 2c. Now, however, his father is doing so miserably, and
indicates how his son did not storm, but only ate and drank inside at
that time, with a piteous request that I would make an intercession to
E. C. F. G. to save his life, which I then could not refuse: is
therefore my humble request that E. C. F. G. would consider that this
riot is not a crime. would see that this rebellion is not quelled by
human hand or counsel, but by God\'s grace, who has had mercy on all of
us, and first on the authorities, and in turn also act graciously and
mercifully with the poor people, as is well befitting spiritual
authorities, and more due than secular ones, so that God\'s grace may be
recognized and thanked, and it may be proven before the world that one
has not sought and desired lust.

For otherwise, unfortunately, there are all too many who treat people so
cruelly and act so ungratefully toward God, as if they want to wantonly
arouse the anger and displeasure of God and the people in turn, and
invite upon themselves a new and worse turmoil. For God soon decreed
otherwise, that those who do not show mercy perish without mercy.

So it is not good to be master with unwillingness, reluctance and enmity
of the subjects; it also has no permanence. It is good that earnestness
and wrath are proven, since the people were found rebellious and
stubborn and obdurate in their work. But now that they have been pushed,
they are different people, and worthy of mercy in addition to
punishment. Too much tears the sack on both sides; but measure is good
for all things, and mercy prevails against judgment, says St. James
\[Jac. 2, 13\].

I hope that E. C. F. G. will know how to keep to this in a Christian
way. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, on Friday Praxedis
\[July 21\] Anno 1525.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

1\) According to Krumhaar, \"Mansfeld\", p. 163, probably the monastery
outworks at Helbra or Helfta. In the old editions: \"Furwerck\", which
De Wette, and according to him the Erlangen edition, has dissolved by
\"Fuhrwerk\".

**768**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 894. 895. 896.

**769**

**N o. 894.**

Wittenberg. July 22, 1525.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Altenburg.**

From the appointment of Prior Eberhard Brisger to Altenburg and the
departure of Link to Nuremberg.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 296b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 17 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 222. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 981 f.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have written to you before. The prior had
written and invited you to his wedding, 1) but the messenger had left.
He certainly proves to be difficult against this profession, although he
is skilful and useful, because he intended to become a layman. But I
have written to the prince that he appoint him and see to it that the
income of the parish is restored to the ministers of the Word, and also
that a measure is set for the godless canons and that they are not
strengthened in their opinions and customs. I have good hope in
everything concerning this matter. The prince has complained against me
that you are leaving his country, and it would not please me either if I
did not hope that you will produce fruit there, and if I thought that
your Altenburgs are farmers. For I am not moved by your reason for being
angry. Be well in the Lord. \"I am bound to Kethen 3) and imprisoned,
and lie on the Bore\", that is, dead to the world. But my chain
(*catena*) greets you and your chain. Wittenberg, on the Saturday before
Magdalene \[July 22\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 895.**

(Wittenberg.) July 31, 1525.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Altenburg.**

Luther recommends a poor person to him for care and reports that he and
Brisger have given the monastery to the prince.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 297; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 19 and
in Erl. Briefw., Bd. V, p. 223. German in Walch, Bd. XXI, 982 f.

1\) Brisger married a Wittenberg woman on July 25.

2\) namely in Nuremberg.

3\) Luther plays here with the words \"kethen\" and \"bore\", taking the
former for \"chains\", the other for \"bier\".

Grace and peace in the Lord! I recommend this John Queytzen, a troubled
and poor man, to you, my dear Wenceslaus, because you could provide him
with a small service, although I send him to you with little hope, since
you are more used to sending such people to me, and we also have many
other poor brothers; but \[I do it\] because he asked me in such a way,
trusting in you, that the Lord might provide something for him there. If
this is nothing, then the way and the same journey is free for him if he
wants to return. The prior sends his regards to you, who is now no
longer prior, but Magister Eberhard. We have given up the income of the
monastery and placed it in the hands of the prince. Be well and pray for
me. On Monday after Jacobi \[July 31\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 896.**

Wittenberg. July 31, 1525.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther reports to him that a son has been born to Amsdorf\'s brother and
gives news of the Peasants\' War.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 297; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 19 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 223. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 983.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I report the news to you, my dear Amsdorf,
that a son has been born to your brother Bartolus, whom he has called me
to baptize; I would like nothing better, but I absolutely cannot go away
nor be absent.

It was the constant rumor here that the Swabian League 4) had been
defeated at Memmingen, but yesterday from the court ge

4\) Walch translates *conjurationem Suevicam* by: \"die Schwäbische
Rotte\", but there can hardly be any doubt that it must be given by
\"der schwäbische Bund\". - All editions, except the Erl. Briefw.,
misread: *Meiningen* instead of: *Memmingen*. The Allgaeu peasants had
encamped in front of Memmingen, into which the Swabian Union captain
Diepold von Stein had thrown 2000 men on foot and 200 horsemen, who made
a lucky sortie, but without being able to drive off the peasants. These
only withdrew voluntarily on the approach of the federal army under
Truchsess on June 27, heading for Babenhausen and Obergünzburg, not in
flight, however, but in an orderly fashion, and were only dispersed by
treachery near Kempten toward the end of July.

**770** Letters from the year 1525. no. 896. 897. 898. **771**

They wrote that the peasants had fled here and there, and that this
rumor was null and void; but they assure that 500 horsemen and some
footmen, who had been sent to the Cardinal for help, have been laid low
at Salzburg, 1) and 100 castles have been taken in Ferdinand\'s duchy,
but in such a way that they want to deliver them back to their lord
unharmed, while up to now (as they say) the scribes have been holding
them. Hungary is also in great movement. I wrote this so that you could
not claim that I had not written anything. But you pray for me. I will
be mindful of your Heinrich as soon as I have a job for him. Greet those
who are to be greeted in the Lord, and farewell. Wittenberg, Monday
after Jacobi \[July 31\] 1525.

**No. 897.**

(Wittenberg.)August 1. August 1525.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Altenburg.**

Luther complained about the malicious attitudes of certain courtiers
against the Gospel, for whose sake no one had to flee. About the
departure of Link to Nuremberg and the appointment of Brisger to
Altenburg.

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 2976 (with the wrong heading: *Ad
amicos quosdam*); by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 20 (with the correction of
the address made by him) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 224. German in
Walch, vol. XXl, 984.

Grace and peace! I believe and learn that the tyrants at court, after
Frederick\'s death, are more submissive than before, and that they would
rage more against the gospel than the Georgians,2) if only they could.
But what is in it? Therefore neither Joachim nor anyone else must flee
until they are driven out by force. Christ still reigns in the midst of
his enemies \[Ps. 110, 2.\], so that they grit their teeth and perish,
and yet that is lost which they would gladly have \[Ps. 112, 10.\].
Enough has been said about your departure 3) to Nuremberg, and the
question is ended.

1\) On this event, see St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, 144, No. 790.

2\) That is, the chapter of St. George\'s Abbey at Altenburg, not, as
Aurifaber states, the followers of Duke George.

3\) *De abitu tuo* is De Wette\'s Conjectur instead: *Deo tuo* at
Aurifaber.

If the Altenburgs want our prior, then it is necessary that they ask for
him, because in the last letter of the prince to me there is no mention
of it, although I had very strongly insisted on it. Thus this court is
exceedingly negligent in the matters of Christ, under the best and most
Christian prince. Fare well and pray for me. On the eighth day after
Jacobi \[Aug. 1\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 898.**

Wittenberg. (After August 15) 1525. 4)

**To Johann Brismann in Königsberg.**

Luther responds to Brismann\'s letter of June 15. He reports that he had
written two letters to Duke Albrecht. He reports that Carlstadt had been
secretly received by him, but would not depart from his mind. He writes
about the evil consequences of the peasants\' revolt, about his
marriage, about the efforts of Duke Georg and others against the Gospel,
and much more.

Printed in *Andr. Vogler*\'s Briefsammlung, *Regiomont*. 1622, no. 4; in
*Acta Borussica, tom*. I, p. 800; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 113; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 21 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 225 f.

To the extremely dear brother in Christ, Johann Brismann, evangelist in
Prussia, at Königsberg.

Grace and peace in Christ! May your marriage make Christ happy, my dear
Bris

4\) The date: *post ascensionis \[Mariae*\] is supposed to be in the
original, which, as De Wette states, was in the Wallenrodt library in
Königsberg, but is no longer available. Since the indication of a
weekday is missing, so the date cannot be determined exactly, but De
Wette\'s datirung: \"16. August\", will come close to the truth. Several
times doubts have been raised against the correctness of this date, so
by Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 481, note 1, and for it:
*visitationis \[Mariae\],* that is \"after July 2\" conjicirt, which we
were also inclined to assume earlier (see St. Louis edition, vol. XX,
introduction, p. 25 a). Now we have decided on the above date (which the
Erl. Briefw. has also set), guided mainly by this consideration: On June
12, Carlstadt wrote from Frankfurt a. M. the exceedingly miserable
letter No. 877 to Luther, which his wife delivered. The distance of
Frankfurt from Wittenberg is in a [straight line a]{.underline} little
over 46 German geographical miles, which at that time could hardly be
covered in less than eight days. This way had to be made three times,
before Carlstadt could enter the asylum offered to him by Luther; so the
presumable time of Carlstadt\'s arrival in Wittenberg is about the sixth
of July. In this letter, however, already a longer presence of Carlstadt
with Luther is presupposed.

**772**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 898 to 900.

**773**

when. I have written before about Martin Cellarius and now in more
detail to Prince Albrecht, 1) at the same time about the establishment
of the ceremonies, so I will be very brief to you, because I am
overloaded with so many writings. If Carlstadt\'s or Zwingli\'s poison
from the Sacrament should come to you, see that you are vigilant. The
wretched man 2) has been secretly preserved with me. Now the whole world
is too narrow for him; he is pursued everywhere in such a way that he
has been forced to seek protection from his enemy. I have treated the
man as kindly as I could and stood by him, but he does not leave his
senses, even since he has been convicted, as this kind of spirits is
wont to do. So beware of him and his teachings. I have found that
everything in him is void, especially in this matter.

Muenzer and the peasants have brought down the gospel so much in our
country, and raised up the minds of the papists so much, that it seems
that it must be raised up all over again. For this reason, I too have
now testified to the Gospel not with words alone, but also with deeds,
by taking a nun as my wife, in order to show my contempt for the
triumphant and Jo! Jo! screaming enemies, so that it would not appear as
if I had desisted. Although I am old and clumsy, if I can, I will also
do other things that hurt those and confess the word.

Duke George, the Elector of Mark and the two Brunswickers have held a
small concilium,3) and have conspired to restore everything. Our prince

1\) These two letters are not available.

2\) *homo miser* is, as De Wette has already correctly indicated,
[Carlstadt,]{.underline} not Cellarius, whose alibi is proven from No.
876. Cellarius did not come to Wittenberg (as Seidemann, \"Münzer\", p.
97, states) in July 1525, but at the earliest in March 1526. The letter
of Melanchthon to Brismann (*Corp. Ref.,* vol. 1,755) mentioned (ibid.
p. 98) is not written in August 1525, but in March 1526 at the earliest.
See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, introduction, pp. 24 f. Cellarius is not
from Stargard, as the *Corp. Ref.* states, which we followed there, but
from Stuttgart.

3\) namely at Dessau on July 19 (not, as Seidemann says in De Wette,
Vol. VI, p. 481, note 1, on June 26). This also serves to confirm the
date we have set.

Johann has been approached by Duke Georg with great efforts, but he is
still bravely standing firm, so that that person almost becomes
nonsensical and wants to burst with anger. I believe that the Landgrave
of Hesse is also still bravely standing firm, although he is being
worked on by the Duke of Brunswick, the legate of the Council. The
imperial cities are now holding consultations that they want to stay
with the Gospel, even though the angry princes are threatening to the
utmost. All in all, it looks as if a major war is about to break out,
and that it will throw the godless princes to the ground if God does not
protect them.

Duke George thinks that, since Frederick is dead, he is able to do
everything, but Christ laughs at him even more, and will laugh at him
even more if you pray with us. The cause of the peasants has come to
rest everywhere, 4) after about a hundred thousand have been slain, so
many orphans made, but the rest so deprived in life that the appearance
of Germany has never been more miserable. Thus the victors rage, so that
they may complete their misdeeds.

Greetings to the new wife and the most reverend Father, the Bishop of
Samland. Since I could not write at length, I wanted to do it briefly.
May you also be well in the Lord and pray for me. Wittenberg, after the
Ascension 5) \[of the Virgin Mary\] 1525. Martin Luther .

**No. 899.**

Wittenberg. August 18, 1525.

**To the council and preacher at Domitsch.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 748.

**No. 899a .**

September 1525.

**Admonition to the printers.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XI, XI,VI.

**No. 900 .**

Wittenberg. September 1, 1525.

**To King Henry VIII of England.**

See St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 378.

4\) This was not the case at the beginning of July.

5\) Otherwise, *ascensionis* is not used of the Assumption of Mary, as
here, but *assuruptionis.*

**774**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 901. 902. 903.

**775**

**No. 901 .**

Wittenberg. \' September 6, 1525.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

About Brisger\'s appointment to Altenburg and the rumor that the Elector
was not favorable to the university.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten *Cod.
Dessav. A,* No. 187 and in *Cod*. *Jen*. a, fol. 203. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 298 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 26 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 235.

To the worthy man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Bishop of Altenburg, his brother
who is exceedingly dear in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have already written and said before, my
dear Spalatin, that M. Eberhard must be summoned by a letter from the
prince; when this will have happened, he will be there as soon as
possible. But the Altenburgers must see to it that this happens, as I
have long since indicated to them.

I am writing to the prince on behalf of Joachim. The fact that the great
ones are dying this year is perhaps due to the fact that so many signs
are also affecting them. I am pleased that you are gradually getting
used to your Altenburg. 1) The rumor has come to us that the Prince\'s
mind is alienating itself from our academy, and that he even receives
our memories with displeasure, as if they were unreasonable. We likewise
hold the students together only with displeasure; we will soon break out
of all gates into all the world, if we realize that this is true, but
perhaps this is the work of Satan, the enemy of good. May Christ show us
mercy. Amen. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg, Wednesday after
Aegidii \[Sept. 6\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 902 .**

Wittenberg, September 6, 1525.

**To Leonhard Beier.**

Judgment on a marriage case.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Gud*. 214, fol. 19b. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 65; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 27 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 235 f.

1\) Spalatin had taken office in Altenburg on August 5 and preached for
the first time on the 6th.

Grace and peace to Christ! You have judged correctly, my dear Leonhard,
in the overwritten marriage matter. If now the force of the sword were
to press upon it, then the adulterer, who was so impudent and shameless
in the first rut, would have to be severely punished or expelled from
the country. If the girl will not let herself be persuaded by good words
to forgive him and give her consent, she must not and cannot be forced
by law. Nor is there any hope for your happy marriage if the fiancé
subjects himself to such things before marriage. Fare well in the Lord.
Wittenberg, Wednesday after Aegidii \[Sept. 6\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 903 .**

Wittenberg. September 6, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony, together with Jonas, Bugenhagen and
Melanchthon.**

Expert opinion of the Wittenberg theologians on the Ansbach council of
the Protestant-minded theologians there. - As a result of the Nuremberg
Treaty, Margrave Casimir of Brandenburg summoned his estates to Ansbach
on September 25, 1524, where he presented 23 articles for their
consideration. He also appointed a committee of six zealous Catholic and
six Protestant-minded theologians to give their opinion. The advice of
these twelve later appeared in print; that of the Protestant-minded,
delivered at Ansbach on September 30, 1524, under the title: \"Theology
of the Protestant\". September 1524, under the title: \"Eyn Ratschlag,
den etliche Christenliche Pfarrherrn, Prediger, vund andere, Götlicher
schlifft verstendige, Ein Ein Fürsten, welcher yetzigen stritigen leer
halb, auff den abschied, in nghalteys Reichßtag zu Nürnberg,
Christlicher wahrhait vnderricht begert, die auch solcher Ratschlag zur
notturfftlich sein, Vund durch gütliche schlifft verthedigen wöllenn.
Cum Gratia & Priuilegio Senatus. 1525.\" At the end: \"Printed at
Nürenberg by Jobst Gutknecht.\" 150 quarto. Johann Schopper is believed
to be the author. On August 21, Casimir sent this publication to the
Elector, who gave it to his Wittenberg theologians for evaluation.

Printed in Hocker, Supplement zum Heilsbronnischen Antiquitäten-Schatz;
in von der Lith, Erläuterung der Ref.-Historie, p. 109; in *Corp. Ref*,
vol. IV, 954; in Seidemann-De Wette, vol.VI, p. 57 and in Erlanger
Ausgabe, vol. 56, p. VIII ff.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious Lord! We have received your
Lord\'s writing together with the booklet sent to us.

**776**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 903. 904. 905.

and read through with diligence, and give your Lordship our answer and
judgment, namely that everything that is discussed and stated in the
booklet, pleases us almost well. It is also our coin and of the right
blow, so that we have now circumvented and taught for five years,
thanking God with joy that elsewhere there are such people who take the
right truth so seriously and faithfully to heart, we are also certain
that wherever the counsel comes, it shall stand with all honor, not only
against the papists, but also against the infernal gates. We also want
to stand by those who have proven such articles, as we have done and are
obliged to do with our doctrine; for it is the right truth on which both
your Lord and the Prince, who sent it to your Lord, comfortingly rely,
as far as God gives us grace and strength.

Except for the one article in which they resist the images, we do not
hold with them at all; although we do not grant much to the idols, we do
not consider them to be condemned, as if it were done against God, if
someone has or has had images painted, since Christ also let the
Emperor\'s coin go and also used it himself, since images were and still
are standing. But because this booklet is a counsel and to be presented
for a final judgment, we know not to blame the pious people\'s
discretion and suggestion, first because they so Christianly offer to be
instructed and taught, and for the sake of a small error such a dear
good booklet is not to be despised. This we have answered to your
lordship\'s writing and command with submissive diligence, and we ask
that it be sent or judged in your lordship\'s favor and grace, as God
will grant. Date Wednesday after Egydi \[Sept. 6\] Anno 2c. 25.

Your churf. G.

understated

Martinus Luther. Justus Jonas. Joannes Bugenhagius Pomeranus.

Philip Melanchthon.

**No. 9 04.**

Erfurt. September 9, 1525.

**The Council of Erfurt to Luther.**

(Regest.)

On May 10, 1525, the council of Erfurt had invited Luthern and
Melanchthon in writing (see St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 113 f., no.
775) to come there to discuss certain articles handed over to them by
the subjects. Neither of them came. Now the council sends these articles
to Luther with the request to give his opinion about them. Luther
complied with this request in his reply to this letter on September 19,
1525.

Handwritten in the Royal State Archives at Magdeburg, Abth. Erfurt,
*Libri communium* 1523 - 1526, fol. 263. Printed in the Neue
Mittheilungen aus dem Gebiet histor.-antiquar. Forschungen des
thüringisch-sächsischen Vereins, vol. 15, 1 (Halle 1880), p. 189, No.
XIII and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 237.

**No. 905 .**

i(Wittenbert, in Luther\'s house.) 1) (Before September 12, 1525.)

**Carlstadt to Luther.**

Carlstadt urgently asks Luthern to remedy the misery of his banishment
as soon as possible, since this is in his power, and to let him live in
Kemberg, where he can most easily earn his living.

Handwritten in *Cod*. *Spalat*. at Bern. Printed in Krafft, Briefe und
Documente, p. 57 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 238 f.

**A. B. Carolstadius to D. M. Luther.**

**I have not wished to disturb you, venerable sir, from your sweet
sleep, for the sake of your**

1\) The proof that Carlstadt wrote this letter [in Luther\'s
house]{.underline} we believe to have provided in the 20th volume of our
edition, Introduction, p. 24 f.. That Cellarius could not be the *homo
miser* mentioned in No. 898, results from the letter of Paul Speratus to
Luther of June 11 (No. 876); therefore, only Carlstadt remains, who can
be meant by this designation. Although the Erl. Briefw. still firmly
insists (Vol. V, p. 228, Note 4) on Luther\'s letter to Brismann (No.
898) that *homo miser does* not refer to Carlstadt, but to Cellarius, he
nevertheless feels prompted here to ask: \"or did Carlstadt write this
letter in Luther\'s house?\" Furthermore, he brings the following
quotation from the writing of Alberus \"Wider die verfluchte lere\" 2c.,
Bl. liij: \"But because D. Martinus neglects to obtain genade for
Carlstad from the Elector, he writes to Carlstad that he should come and
be with him secretly until he obtains genade from the Elector that he
may be in the country. Carlstad came and was for some time secretly in
D. Martini\'s house, which no one knew, without D. Martini\'s faithful
famulus Wolff (Sieberger), who secretly brought him food.\"

**778** Letters from the year

1525\. no. 905. 906. **779**

Therefore, I pray that you will not be unwilling. I recognize your good
deeds and will do my best to repay you. Moreover, as I asked you,
venerable Lord, on yesterday, so I again implore you, and beg you, that
for the sake of God alone, who has made you rich in innumerable and
excellent gifts and has given you honor in the sight of \[other\] men,
you will remedy this \[my\] banishment. Yes, even if my misfortune does
not move you much, I am confident that you will be moved by the poverty
of my poor wife and your son and mine, 1) whose possessions are swept
away by such a storm. I know that a large part of our liberation is in
your will, venerable Lord, not to say in your ability. And it is not
necessary that you lose your effort, even if you give it to an ingrate,
unless Christ\'s speech deceives me, which cannot deceive. But behold, I
shall never lack the will to give thanks, but if I have the ability, I
shall not allow that very thing to be lacking in me. I may have been a
not too docile (*commodus*) brother in the past, but henceforth I will
be a docile and reverent slave. And I consider that I have been driven
to this task by the banishment, since the Lord has willed it so, who can
only want the best. Therefore, put away suspicion, since true love does
not tend to be suspicious either, turning its eyes to God\'s will, and
look at my misery; help, and help without delay. I would rather live in
Kemberg than in Schmiedeberg, because of many advantages for the poor.
In Kemberg, the livelihood is easier, there are fat and sandy
(*arenosi*) 2) fields, then wood and a market, hops and many such
advantages. I add, which is by no means a contemptible consideration,
that I will be closer to you, venerable father, and that the boasting of
the adversaries is less to be feared. But I do not prescribe anything.
Greetings to your wife. God grant that I may see you again safely. Be
well in the Lord and be mindful of our affliction.

Your Honor\'s Slave

Andr. Carolostadius.

1\) From this it seems that Luther was his godfather. In the letter No.
878 he calls Luther: \"Gevatter\".

2\) Perhaps: *fructuosi*, fertile.

**No. 9 06.**

Wittenberg. September 12, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercede for Carlstadt that he may come to Wittenberg for interrogation
and settle in Kernberg.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, p. 367, No. 183.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 40; in Walch\', vol. XXI, 129; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 28 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 327.

To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony and
Elector and Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave in Meissen, my most
gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime Prince, most gracious Lord! I come
once again with a trouble and unwillingness, but nevertheless E. C. F.
G. is in the office, created by God. D. Carlstadt has come to the
interrogation to apologize for the riot, and has also sent me an
objection 3) to his error, which I will also let go out. Although I now
do not know how to advise that he should be around Orlamünde, I still
think it fair that he should come to the interrogation. If it were up to
E. C. F. G., I think he would be interrogated in Wittenberg, and if he
were found innocent, and his contradiction was sufficient, that E. C. F.
G. would let him stay in Kemberg, or in a village nearby, because he has
firmly resolved never to preach or write for the rest of his life, but
to remain silent forever, 4) and to feed on his work. But if he were to
be rebelliously overcome from other lands, it would be so much more
dangerous for him that he could be attacked here. I am writing this
because the poor man\'s lament makes me very sad, and E. C. F. G. also
knows that mercy is to be shown to the wretched, and especially to the
innocent.

M. Philipps and I also have the concern that his silence would be bought
with such favor and grace, so that he would not have to

3\) This is the writing that Carlstadt wrote in Luther\'s house, which
is included in our edition, Vol. XX, 312. Luther\'s preface to it can be
found in ibid, vol.

4\) Carlstadt had already written almost the same words to Luther on
June 12. See No. 878.

**780**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 906. 907. 908.

**781**

He has caused more misery somewhere, either out of revenge or out of
final despair. This would be a mighty help against all who have caught
his error, to dampen it, that he did not live far from us, as our
opinion and grace. But I put this in E. C. F. G.\'s gracious concern.
Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Tuesday after *Gorgonii*
\[Sept. 12\] 1525.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Mart. Luther.

**No. 90 7.**

(Wittenberg.) September 15, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks him to send one of his councilors to take charge of the
university.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 124. Printed nn
Leipziger Supplement, p. 40; ber Walch, vol. XXI, 131; bei De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 29 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 328.

For the attention of my most gracious Lord Duke Hans, Elector z. S.\'2c.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Most Reverend Prince, G. H.!
Although I, together with the others, comfortingly rely on E. C. F.
G.\'s gracious promise of our university, we can see that E. C. F. G. is
prevented from attending due to necessary matters, and especially due to
the Diet: in my humble opinion, I cannot refrain from reminding E. C. F.
G. that you would like to have the Dolzken or someone else 1) come here.
and ask that you have the Dolzken or someone else 1) come here, or let
E. C. F. G. know your opinion in writing; for otherwise it is to be
feared, because many lessons are now lying down and some lessons have
remained unrewarded so far, and also some are already thinking that we
may not receive the journeymen at last. For the school is poor and does
not want to suffer a long delay. I did not want to leave this
undisclosed to E. C. F. G. recently. See

1\) The Elector sent Johann von Dolzig and Hans von Gräfendorf to
Wittenberg for the regulation of university relations with an
instruction dated September 17, which is found in Cyprian\'s Nützliche
Urkunden, Vol. II, p. 362. Spalatin was also in Wittenberg because of
this matter.

me also, the university will write E. C. F. G. himself. Hiemit GOtt
befohlen, Amen. Friday after *Crucis* \[Sept. 15\] 1525.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 90 8.**

(Torgau.) September 17, 1525.

**Instruction of the Elector for Spalatin to Luther.**

Carlstadt receives pardon from the Elector and permission to settle in
the Saxon lands, but with the exception of the Thuringian lands and
Wittenberg. The place of residence to be chosen should not be further
away from Wittenberg than about three miles. Kemberg is expressly
excluded, because a country road leads through it.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, 367, No. 183, 3. Printed
by Burkhardt, p. 88 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 241.

First, our dear devout Magister Spalatinus shall give our gracious
greeting to our also dear devout Ern Martino Luter.

And thereafter notify him of the following opinion: that we have read
the writings which he wrote a few days ago on behalf of Doctor
Carolstat, and which he especially addressed to us, together with the
excuse of the suspicion,2) concerning the peasant rebellion, and that
the said Doctor Carolstat has recognized his error, and is inclined to
recant and revoke the same to the glory and praise of God Almighty and
for the salvation of his soul, that we gladly heard this, and also
received a special joy and pleasure from it out of Christian kinship and
duty. And since we as a Christian prince, as we would like to be felt
and noted, recognize ourselves guilty, and are also inclined to forgive
those who have acted or broken against our person, and to communicate
mercy to them, as we are aware of that of God, our Creator, and ask for
it daily, we want to forgive the aforementioned Doctor Carolstat all
that, so and whether he has acted against our person,3) for the sake of
God and His mercy. But what our prince

2\) Carlstadt\'s writing: \"Entschuldigung des falschen Namen der
Aufruhr, so ihm ist mit Unrecht aufgelegt worden\". See St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 23 b f. - We assume that Carlstadt
himself brought this writing, which he still wrote in Frankfurt, to
Wittenberg.

3\) especially in the writing: \"Ursachen der halben Andres Carlstatt
aus den landen zu Sachsen vertryben.\"

**782**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 908. 909.

**783**

The Eternal God has called us to this office, from which we owe and are
obligated to punish those who have acted contrary to the outward peace,
and who have done so in fact, and who do not refuse to prosecute others
who request such our office in equity and justice, and in this we want
to show ourselves, if God wills it, no other way than as we know how to
answer for it before God and the world, and to put him off 1) to the
apology for it that has been sent over, We have also put him off
herewith, that he will not do anything wrong for us and ours, whom we
have the power to do and leave for our sake, and that no punishment will
be inflicted on him with our knowledge or will, except according to the
order and the power of the law, and that his answer and others will hear
his need for it, and that he will be overcome, as is just and right. Nor
shall we be displeased, insofar as his retraction and objection are
sufficient, that he remain in our principality and abstain therein, but
in such a way that he does not enter our Thuringian (duringian) lands
outside our foreknowledge, nor does he touch them. But around Wittenberg
on a half, whole, two to the third mile of it he may sit down or settle
down in spots or villages according to his opportunity, only Kemberg
excluded. And that we are not inclined to tolerate Doctor Carolstad in
Kemberg is due to the fact that a road to Leipzig, the Mark, Pomerania
and other ends passes through there, which is built and wandered by some
and partly strange people 3); since we want to know him for moving
reasons as little as in Wittenberg with beings. And so he shall keep it,
until further our permission or business. And so that his letter,
petition and request may be answered, it is our gracious request, where
Doctor Carolstat is to be found so recently, that such may be held
before him without special delay, that Doctor Martinus, in addition to
Magister Spalatin, notify him of the above opinion of ours and give him
an answer, If, however, he is not to be found in such a way as touched,
that Doctor Martinus alone will do this, then we will graciously provide
for him that he will not be lacking in this, and this will be done for
our gracious favor.

1\) In the editions: \"them\".

2\) In the editions: \"at the same time and right\". We have added the
following additions in parentheses. See Colossians 4:1.

3\) That is, made into their orbit.

**No. 909 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 19, 1525.

**To the City Council of Erfurt.**

Luther gives his expert opinion on the articles sent to him by the
council.

Printed in Fortgesetzten Sammlung von alten und neuen theologischen
Sachen, 1723, p. 1025; in K. F. Lossius, \"Helms Eoban Hesse und seine
Zeitgenossen\". Gotha 1797. 8. p. 305; in Förstemann\'s Neuem
Urkundenbuch, p. 286, No. 53 and p. 280, No. 48 (according to an
inaccurate copy from the 17th century); in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI,
p. 59 and in the Erlangen edition twice, namely vol. 56, p. XII, No. 836
(incorrect as to Lang and the other Erfurt preachers) and vol. 65, p.
238. - In the prints, the letter is dated soon \"Tuesday\", soon
\"Thursday\" after Lamberti, which is Sept. 19 and 21. To designate the
latter date, which coincides with St. Matthew\'s Day, Luther would
probably have applied the latter; therefore, we take the former.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, careful, dear gentlemen! I have
received your writing together with the articles, and I am now glad that
God has not permitted my future to you, for the articles are in part so
clumsy that I could have done little good, or perhaps made the matter
worse. It seems as if they were made by those who are too comfortable
and have thought that there is no one in heaven and earth who is not
afraid of them. And where I would be mighty in Erfurts, I would not let
any of the articles be good, although some would be good in them, but,
as punishment for such outrageous presumption and outrageousness, all
such articles would have to suffer and bear reproach. Nothing is sought
in it, but that each one may have his benefit, and live according to his
will, the lowest to the highest, and turn everything around, that the
council may fear the community and be a servant, and that the community
may be lord and master and fear no one, which is against God and reason.
Then I should have a fine city, so that tomorrow the houses would lie on
top of each other. For this reason, I know nothing to answer E. W.\'s
articles, except to admonish the community to be quiet and to entrust
everything to an honorable council for improvement; and to ask God to
give grace and reason to carry this out well, so that the princes are
not caused by such clumsy actions and have to harm the city of Erfurt.

**784** Letters from the year 1525. no. 909. 785

and drive out the Kützel. Is that evangelical, that is, wanting to go
through with one\'s head, without all humility and prayer before God\'s
eyes, just as if Erfurt should not be God\'s, or God were not also Lord
over Erfurt? I do not see any article on how one should first fear God,
seek Him, ask Him, call upon Him, and command Him in the matter. And
that I stir some: Is it not rebellious that the parishes 1) want to
elect and de-select parish priests themselves, regardless of the
council, as if the council as the authorities had no interest in what
they did in the city? Item, that they do not want to give any more
interest, but to settle the sum. Rather, if I wanted to live off the sum
annually, I would keep it with me. What may I do with it to another? as
if I were a child, and let another deal with it. Who wants to command
his summa to you for his own sake in such a way that you give it to him
yearly and piecemeal? This is so gross that it is too much. The same
applies to not giving the princes protection money. They hold peace and
security in such low esteem, which cannot be paid for with any money.
Finally, I am sending the same article to E. W. again with an indication
of my hand about some, because a lot of quite worldly business is
involved, in which it is not my place to judge nor to advise. Nor can I.
I am ready to serve you. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Tuesday after
Lamberti \[Sept. 19\] Anno 1525.

Martin Luther. 2)

The following

List of articles, so all quarters of the city of Erfurt sammt the crafts
therein belonging to further improvement have discussed.

In the first article, concerning pastors, it is considered good that
they be divided into various parishes according to the circumstances in
the city, and that a congregation of the same parish appoint and remove
its pastor, and that through the same appointed pastor the pure Word of
God be clearly presented, without any addition of all kinds of human
commandments, statutes, and doctrines concerning the conscience.

1\) \"Parishes\" put by us instead of: \"Parish priests\".

2\) In Seidemann, the name is spelled \"Lauther\" throughout.

3\) Seidemann: \"most convenient\".

Martinus Luther.

However, the council shall have the supremacy to know what kind of
persons have offices in the city.

On the other hand, from the unmistakable interest,

By which we hear the re-purchase or usurious interest, if the main sum
has fallen again home, also often to the abundance, which interest one
no longer intends to give. However, if the principal sum is not paid,
the remainder, which is not paid, shall be made merry and paid for a
reasonable period of time. We also ask that the coinage and bills of
exchange be looked into.

Martinus Luther.

In fact, nothing better, one gives interest to the summa, because it is
preserved in Erfurt.

Thirdly, from the gate interest, since the free of is given.

They shall be abolished, so that he, 4) who has had the gate rent, shall
take the same free pennies with the right to receive the same. This
shall be further dealt with, namely in free interest.

Martinus Luther.

I do not know what it is. If it is harmful according to the council\'s
knowledge, then one humbly asks that it be stopped, if not, that one
patiently suffers it, and thanks God that one lives and nourishes
oneself in peace.

Fourthly, from the withdrawn goods of a. The first of these is wood,
water, and the like.

The first is to be used by a community, but the second is to be used by
a community, but the first is to be used by a community, but the second
is to be used by a community, but the first is to be used by a
community, but the first is to be used by a community.

Martinus Luther.

This shall not be, but the authorities shall sell it for the benefit of
the common city.

To the fifth of wills or foundation of altars,

Where these exist, they shall henceforth no longer follow, namely the
clergy, but the heirs and devisees from whom they flowed. But where the
heirs and devisees are not found, such endowments shall then be placed
in a common box.

4\) Seidemann: \"your\".

**786**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 909.

**787**

Martinus Luther.

The persons who have them now 1) shall be left to enjoy them until they
die, otherwise the person and the interest shall be under the authority
of the council. Otherwise, let them be commanded by God, if the heirs
are quite poor and meager.

To the sixth from the council.

That one has a perpetual council, which annually gives account to the
guardians of the quarters and crafts of the community, which are not to
be of the council, if it is recognized useful.

Martinus Luther.

Where one does not trust a council, why does one set one and not rather
leave none?

To the seventh.

That the current council give an account of all expenditures and
revenues.

Martinus Luther.

And that the council is not the council, but the mob rules everything.

To the eighth.

Item, that all kinds of merchant business are free to any citizen who is
able to do so.

Martinus Luther.

So that no poor person may remain before the rich, nor feed.

To the ninth.

Item, that every citizen is free to brew, who has house and yard and is
manable.

Martinus Luther.

So that the rich alone may remain brewers in the end.

To the tithe.

Item to give a full quarter for his money. Martin Luther.

Isn\'t that how it used to be?

To the eleventh.

Item, that every one be allowed freely to work his craft, unhindered by
the guild, who does there civic duty, and who has kept himself honest
and respectable for his person.

Martinus Luther.

I leave that to the judgment of the council.

1\) Seidemann: \"lift\".

To the twelfth.

Item, that any matter, which comes before an honorable council, which
decision is included in the city book, shall be paid without any delay
within fourteen days on request in the own person of the citizens. If,
however, the citizen is not able to present his case, an honorable
council shall assign one of the council members to present his case, so
that further expenses of the citizens are avoided.

Martinus Luther.

It is also worldly and does not concern my teaching.

To the thirteenth.

Item, to look into the scribes, to make an order, so that no one is
taken over, as has happened so far.

Martinus Luther.

Him too.

To the fourteenth.

Item, action with the House of Saxony to have a gracious remission of
the protection money half.

Martinus Luther.

Yes, so that no one protects the city of Erfurt, or that the princes
still add money and still protect. I would like to know whether Erfurt
also invests money better, because so that it buys protection and peace.

To the fifteenth.

Item, after the citizens and compatriots are highly complained with the
escort, that in this also a gracious understanding is attained.

Martinus Luther.

Yes, God grant that it is a pity for princes and councils that we have
only our will.

To the Sixteenth and Seventeenth.

Item, that henceforth obviously all boys and girls of all classes are no
longer tolerated, nor the common house of the common women.

Item, all those who are indebted to the council and the community,
*retardata* or otherwise, shall be faithfully admonished, he be who he
will.

Martinus Luther.

I guess those two are going.

To the eighteenth.

Item, with all diligence we ask and desire, together with the
countryside, that no one be obliged to

**788** Letters from the year

1525\. no. 909. 910. **789**

The court shall not imprison any citizen or countryman, but shall let
any man come to his answer, unless he is to be punished in the flesh.

Martinus Luther.

Where the council recognizes this as good.

To the nineteenth.

That also all citizens, so entangled in Erfurt, shall be counted loose
on honest answer.

Martinus Luther.

At the pleasure of the council.

For the twentieth.

Whether also some citizens in or after the indignation refer and could
indicate their innocence, are to be left to their answer.

Martinus Luther.

It\'s cheap.

To the twenty-first.

Also, henceforth, the council shall not establish an essay 1) without
the knowledge and will of the entire community and countrymen.

Martinus Luther.

It would be necessary to pay the people.

To the twenty-second.

Item that ask outside the gates to give their grown wine in the suburbs.

Martinus Luther.

Then the council realized what was best.

To the twenty-third.

Item, our request is to strive conducively so that a laudable
university, as held before, may be established.

Martinus Luther.

This is the very best.

To the twenty-fourth.

Item, that no one is endangered because of this action. 2)

Martinus Luther.

That is also good, because many may mean well, the others are to be
thanked and admonished to desist from their pretentiousness.

1\) \"Essay\" edition, tax.

2\) \"on account of this act\", that is, on account of putting these
articles.

For the twenty-fifth.

Item, because all the charges and complaints are over, that an honorable
council would want to have attention, that meat and bread would become
quite a purchase.

Martinus Luther.

Otherwise, a council should do this out of duty and office.

To the twenty-sixth.

Item, the foreign bakers and butchers may have the week two days feil.

Martinus Luther.

The council is watching.

To the twenty-seventh.

Item, all goods, which were taken from the common city and which were
given to an honorable council, projectile, interest, wages and what is,
also want to come back to the common city, as namely Melchendorf,
Gispersleben, the half of Kiliani, as before.

Martinus Luther.

God and the council will help.

To the twenty-eighth.

Item, that everyone may use the pasture, who is a citizen, to his
neighbor without harm.

Martinus Luther.

Let that remain with the council\'s findings.

Martinus Luther ultimately displayed.

Item, One article is forgotten, that an honorable council does nothing,
has no power, nothing is trusted to him, but sits there like an idol and
Zifra,3) and lets the community chew on him like a child, and thus
governs with bound hands and feet, and the wagon leads the horses, and
the horses bridle and drive the wagoner, then it will go well, according
to the laudable example of these articles.

**No. 910.**

Wittenberg. September 26, 1525.

**To the Mayor and City Council of Nuremberg.**

Luther asks that the Nuremberg printers be barred from reprinting his
books.

Printed in K. Christian Hirsch\'s *Millenarius* I V. *Norimb*. 1749, in
the preface; in Seidemann-De Wette, vol. VI, p.70 and in the Erl.
Edition, Vol.56, p.x, No. 835.

3\) \"Zifra\" zero.

**790**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 910 to 913.

**791**

To the honorable and prudent gentlemen, mayor and council of the
laudable city of Nuremberg, my favorable dear sirs.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, prudent, wise, dear gentlemen! I
add to E. W.\'s complaint that some sixths of the postilion still in
print have been secretly stolen from our printers here, more than half
of the book, and brought to your noble city, and hastily reprinted,
sold, before ours is finished, and thus, with the completed book, led
ours into noticeable damage, and it is right for me that the Hergetlein
should also be on it. They are not satisfied with this and will continue
to wait for it, if they get the other and the rest, and have also
ordered to reprint in a hurry, as they did before, and even ruin us in
the ground. Other cities on the Rhine do not do so, and even if they
did, we would not be harmed, because their printing does not come in and
is driven, like yours, for the sake of proximity. Now we have watched
long enough, until \[it\] has at last become unmistakable, also so far
one of the causes has been, that I have not been allowed to attack the
prophets, lest I give cause to their ruin, and thus by avarice and envy
divine Scripture is prevented and must remain, and that by fault of your
laudable city citizens, which is ever an unfriendly neighborhood, so
near one beer sticks out to the other to spite and harm. So it is
pathetic enough that I have such work, which makes me heartily sour, and
yet I like to do it for the benefit of common Christianity, nothing to
speak of without glory, and still have to add to it, even though a book
ever confesses to three or four kinds of work, and should not earn so
much with the people that the printers are not put down and spoiled for
me. They have done well, may not dare to work on it, have obtained it
through thieves, it is no different than if it were stolen from one on
the street or in the house; we poor have to suffer it, are banished. Now
I would be well satisfied that I am urged by such a cause to keep quiet,
but for the sake of others I speak, and that the holy scripture is
prevented by such perfidy of the devil. Moreover, that my books are
commonly corrected

and corrupted in other printings. Therefore, it is my very friendly
request that E. W. would do a Christian service here and have an eye on
your printers so that they do not graze such important books after ours
to their detriment; that they wait no longer, that they wait seven or
eight weeks, so that ours also have bread next to them and are not so
shamefully robbed of theirs by them. Where this does not help, I must
admonish such robbers and thieves by public notice, and yet I would
gladly not have to name your praiseworthy city. But whether they say:
they must feed themselves. Yes, without harming others, and not in such
a way as to steal and rob from them, as they would have others do. I
also know well that the Coburgers 1) have lost many books, as other
printers have more: but what can we do about it? should they take such
revenge on us, who have never sought their damage with our books? but
God has so sent that these have fallen off and are torn, as is otherwise
more common in other merchants. May E.W. grant me such a necessary
letter and do what is in accordance with Christian love and
faithfulness, as has been done before, except for these envious
printers, and do not allow such new deceit and unchristian behavior. I
deserve it, as I should. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg,
Tuesday after St. Matthew\'s Day \[Sept. 26\] 1525, Martin Luther.

**No. 91 1.**

(Wittenberg.) September 27, 1525.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1986.

**No. 912 .**

Wittenberg. September 28, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 1986.

**No. 913 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 29, 1525.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tolleth.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 800.

1\) \"Die Koburger\", a book printer and bookseller company in
Nuremberg. Compare No. 927.

**792**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 914 to 917.

**793**

**No. 9 14.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of September 1525.)

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther says that he cannot do anything else because of his writing
against Erasmus. He would not answer Zwingli and Oecolampad. Carlstadt
would, as he hoped, get up again, get along, and come back into favor
with the prince.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the Franciscaneum, Ms. 26, fol. 13. Printed by *Strobel-Ranner, p.
Ill*; by Schütze, Bd. Ill, p. 247; by De Wette, Bd. Ill, p. 32 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 249. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1565.

His Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of the Church at Zwickau, his \[friend\]
in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I hope that my letter has come to you, my dear
Nicolaus. Now I say briefly: during the time that I am at Erasmus, 1) I
am not able to do anything else; when this is finished, I will attend to
the things of which you write. Zwingli and Oecolampad attack us, but I
will leave this to others, or rather, they will be despised. Satan is
nonsensical everywhere, but Christ is wise and strong. Carlstadt will
rise again through our good deeds (as I hope) and, having come to his
senses, will again obtain favor with the prince through Christ\'s help.
2) What will they say then? Farewell in Christ, my dearest Nicolaus. Now
I will become an abbot of the nuns. Christ wills it so. In haste.

Martin Luther.

**No. 915 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 8, 1525.

**To Leonhard Beier in Guben.**

About a nun who escaped from the convent.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Gud*. 214, fol. 19b. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 66; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 33 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 250.

1\) That is, busy with the writing against Erasmus: \"Daß der freie
Wille nichts sei,\" St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 1668 ff.

2\) We would have been inclined to date this letter a little further
back, because here Carlstadt\'s pardon is postponed into the future,
which took place on September 17, if we had not been held back by the
liberation of the nuns mentioned in the previous letter, to which the
end of this letter alludes.

Grace and peace in Christ! Among other virgins recently freed from the
convent, I have a Gertrudis von Mylen, whose mother or grandmother is
said to live in your Guben, to whom she writes through this messenger.
It is now your duty to admonish her to take her daughter or
granddaughter, if she does not prefer that I take her away, which would
perhaps displease her. Be well and pray for me. Sunday after Franciscus
\[Oct. 8\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

**No. 916 .**

Strasbourg. (October 8, 1525.)

**The Strasbourg Preachers to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Letter of credentials for Gregorius Casel to negotiate with Luther
regarding the Lord\'s Supper controversy.

Handwritten in *Thes. Tree*, in Strasbourg, vol. II, 169. Printed by
Pappus, \"Wahrhaffte und Wohlgegründte Widerlegung\" 2c. Strasbourg
1611, quarto. P. 424; in Rührig, Geschichte der Reformation im Elsaß,
vol. I, p.457; in Kolde, *Analecta* p. 68 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V,

S. 251.

**No. 9 17.**

(Wittenberg.) October 11, 1525.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Recommendation of Basilius Axt to the doctor in Zwickau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the Franciscaneum, Ns. 26, fol. 17. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p.
301; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 33 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.
252. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 988.

To the man of God, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at
Zwickau, the exceedingly faithful servant of Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! There is something, my dear Lord Nicolaus,
for which I need your help; I ask you not to feel burdened to serve me.
A rumor has come to me under the table that a doctor is wanted for your
town. It is perhaps true that many others aspire to this position, but
with us is the licentiate Basilius, - I do not know whether you know the
man or not, - who has that nun of Schönfeld, and together with

**794** Letters from the year 1525. no. 917. 918. 919. **795**

He has been sucking his fingers for a long time and is without office.
What shall I praise his faithfulness, his skill and his experience in
this matter? He is also highly praised by the most excellent
\[physicians\] of our university 1). I would now like him to attain this
office, not only for the sake of his advantage, but also so that Zwickau
would be best advised and provided with a man who is worthy of him. If
you now wanted to or could contribute something so that he would be
brought there, then you would indeed be doing Christ a service and your
city a good deed; or if it should be necessary for me to do this in
another way, then let me know. Prince Frederick had promised him that he
would provide for him if a position ever opened up in his lands; he held
man in such high esteem. Do what I hope and expect, this service worthy
of your name and your person.

The great ones of the prince 2) are here; it is a matter of arranging
the ceremonies with us. After that, the parishes will finally be dealt
with. In the meantime wait, God will give blessing. The grace be with
you, Amen. On Wednesday after Dionysius \[Oct. 11\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 91 8.**

(Wittenberg.) October 21, 1525.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

About the sending of two teachers to the school at Eisleben in Tulich\'s
place; about the progress of the Reformation and about Catharina\'s
pregnancy.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzeberger*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 67;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 34 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 254.

To the exceedingly dear brother in the Lord, Johann Agricola, the
rightful educator of the youth in Eisleben and servant of Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! Since I write so often, and write so much,
and to so many

1\) *nostri* stands here for the *magistri nostri*, the doctors, of the
medical faculty.

2\) Johann von Dolzig, Johann von Minkwitz and Hans von Gräfendorf were
in Wittenberg to help arrange the ceremonies in the collegiate church.

that I think I am nothing other than a scribe, it has pleased me that I
also write to you, dearest Johann. Although I have nothing to write, I
will write this, that there is nothing I want to write. \"I cannot come
from writing.\" We are now sending both our Syrus and our Darms 3) in
Tulich\'s place, namely a pair of twins for one, so that we the more
easily fulfill our promise. I have written about this to the count, you
will support the matter verbally. For such a thing was necessary, which
is common to all. Syrus will communicate other things.

We have a rumor that the Margrave of Baden and Casimir grant a free
place to the Evangelio. The nobility of Franconia demands the same from
the bishop of Würzburg. 4) Thus Christ reigns in power, that what the
gospel was supposed to eradicate and seemed to have eradicated, strikes
out for the gospel.

Greet your flesh with its sprouts and fruits, its grapes and exceedingly
sweet figs. And pray for us. My chain (*Catena*) puts itself in such a
way or fulfills in truth the word Gen. 3, 16.: \"You will have many
pains when you become pregnant\", and she greets you with all her heart,
and it distresses her now that she cannot in any way persuade the
servant Catharina, I do not know which, to go to you. Grace be with you,
amen. On the Saturday after Lucä \[Oct. 21\] 1525. M. Luther.

**No. 919.**

Wittenberg. October 27, 1525.

**To Gottschalk Crusius in Celle.**

Luther refutes Zwingli\'s assertion of the certainty of faith.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 298; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 35 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 255 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 985.

3\) A pair of twins in a comedy by Terence. It is no longer possible to
determine who is meant by this. - About Hermann Tulich, see St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XIX, 4, Note 2.

4\) Conrad III von Thüngen.

**796** Letters from the year

1525\. no. 919. 920. **797**

To His Lord Gottschalk, Evangelist at Celle in the Lüneburg Lands.

Grace and peace in Christ! I write little, my dear Gottschalk, since I
am very busy. I have received only this one letter from you after Duke
Otto1) was here. But I sympathize with you, who are so plagued by new
spirits; but be strong, the Lord will help you with his strength.
Zwingli\'s reason for the certainty of faith may not move you, for he
speaks of faith only according to what he has heard and invented
himself, without any experience. It is possible, indeed it happens
daily, that we are firm in some articles of faith and weak in others.
Moses, the man of such great faith, was left at the water of the Hader
as a weak one \[Deut. 20:13\], then all the children of Israel became
weak in the faith of sustenance and food, while they had overcome
Pharaoh with so many miracles in faith. Then not everything that is
accepted by the papists is suspicious, otherwise the baptism and the
whole Bible would also be suspicious. It is more suspicious that
Carlstadt was the first to put forward that opinion, the reasons for
which Zwingli and Oecolampad completely reject, and yet try to defend
the opinion with other reasons, and the foolish people only put forward
Carlstadt\'s most important reasons, which they rejected. This is a
ridiculous spirit to me, which first puts forward some article with
trivial reasons, and then with the promise of other reasons almost
extols the same, and thus argues completely against itself. Those people
argue about the honor of this doctrine. I do not see anything else
there, but in the sequel you will perhaps see something else. In the
meantime, insist on the right opinion. May the Lord help you with his
grace, Amen. Wittenberg, Friday after Severi \[Oct. 27\] 1525.

Martin Luther.

1\) Duke Otto of Brunswick-Luneburg was at that time with the Elector to
obtain his advice on the introduction of the Reformation in his lands.

**No. 920 .**

Wittenberg. October 28, 1525.

**To Joh. Lang and the other preachers at Erfurt . 2)**

Ueber die Einführung einer deutschen Ordnung des Gottesdienstes.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 301; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 36 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 257. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 989.

To Mr. Johann Lang and the other servants of Christ at Erfurt.

Grace and peace in Christ! Dearest brothers, we like your efforts to
arrange the ceremonies properly, and the form you have set is not
unpleasant to us, even if only Erfurt should agree to it. And I do not
think that anything is in it, if the other churches do not want to
accept it. Who can force people against their will? Of course, we had
already drafted a form and sent it to our prince, and now it will be
completed by his order and tried in a public rehearsal in the name of
Christ on Sunday morning. 3) It will be a German mass for the laity, but
the daily service will be in Latin, combined with German lectures, as
you will see shortly, when the printed copies 4) have come out; then you
can, if it pleases you, conform with us, or use yours. In the meantime,
do what you do and be well in the Lord. Wittenberg, on the Saturday of
Simonis and Jude \[Oct. 28\] 1525.

Your Martin Luther.

2\) According to Schmidt, \"Menius\", Vol. I, p. 55, the preachers of
Erfurt at that time were: Joh. Lang, nine preacher at the cathedral,
Joh. Rödelstein (*Rutellus*) at the Predigerkirche, Egidius Mechler at
the Barfüßerkirche, Nicolaus Fabri at the Augustinerkirche, Kilian
Wichmann, Pfarrer zun Reglern \[Regelerherren\], Peter Geltner at the
Kaufmannskirche, Melchior Wedemann at St. Andreä and Justus Menius at
St. Thomä.

3\) This happened on the 20th Sunday \"ach Trinitatis, the 29th of
October. See the conclusion of the sermon on the 21st Sunday after
Trinity, St. Louis edition, Vol. XI, 1786 f.

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 226.

**798**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 921. 921a. 922.

**799**

**No. 921 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 30, 1525.

**To the town council of Planen.** On the use of the goods of an
abandoned monastery.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol.VIII, p.969; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XXII, p. 549; in Walch, vol. XXI, 134; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 37 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 329.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! I have no other
answer to your letter, because of the monastery with you,\" as I have
previously written by public pressure in such cases: namely, where the
monastery is abandoned, the city or lordship must take the houses and
turn them to good use, but the property and interest, where poor and
meager heirs are the founders, that one lets the same go, or becomes
them in part now. For this reason, it is at my discretion that you make
a friendly agreement with the nobility, whether they want to cede all or
part of their parents\' endowments and thus contribute to God\'s work.
Such a thing is right and pleases God as a fruit of love; but the jewels
remain where the dwelling remains. Hereby commanded to God, Amen. Monday
after Simonis and Jude \[Oct. 30\] 1525.

Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 921 a.**

(Wittenberg.) October 30, 1525.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1538.

**No. 922 .**

Wittenberg. October 31, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther apologizes for having pressed so hard for improvements at the
university and asks the Elector to now also provide for the endowment of
the parishes and the visitation of the secular regiment.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 142, EEE. 4 Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 40; in Walch, vol. XXI, 131 f.; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 38 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 329.

To the \"most illustrious, highborn\" Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke
of Saxony, Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen,
my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I humbly request that E. C. F. G. graciously grant me that I often
have to bring trouble and unpleasantness to the court with writings,
considering that I certainly have nothing to gain from it, because
trouble and unpleasantness are also enough, and would gladly spare E. C.
F. G., but because I am of such standing and respect, I cannot be
overburdened.

First of all, G. H., I apologize for having suggested so hard to ordain
the university, because I heard how E. C. F. G. was almost disconcerted
by my so diligent activity, as if I should not have believed E. C. F.
G.\'s promises much; now it is not that I should not believe E. C. F.
G., because if that were the case, I would have left my suggestion
pending out of doubt; but because I had no doubt about E. C. F. G.\'s
promises. C. F. G.\'s promises, that is why I made sure that \[it\]
would not be delayed by superfluous business, as has happened many times
to our most gracious lords 2c. before; for lords\' trousers have a lot
to do, and it is necessary to stop there, as they say; so I was also
urged by others, because the people got lost and the school split up,
that haste was necessary.

But as for all that, even if I had offended against E. C. F. G. with
mistrust, such a sin should not grieve me too much, considering the good
work that has resulted, 1) which is probably worth more of such a sin,
and would like to sin even more so against E. C. F. G., where I could
create such good, the comforting confidence that E. C. F. G. will not
only forgive such a sin, but also forgive me myself. C. F. G., where I
could create such good, the comforting confidence, E. C. F. G. will not
only graciously forgive me such, but will also be pleased with it
himself, because it is certain and cannot be otherwise.

1\) Joh. von Dolzig reports on October 25 to a friend about the
negotiations on the basis of the Instruction of Sept. 17 (No. 908): \"It
has come about according to the advice and goodwill of the unanimous
will, as the four patrons have considered it Christian, necessary and
certain, namely the Babst Martinus, the Probst (Jonas), Pomeranus, the
parish priest, and Philippus, so it has been decided and finally passed
in the case.\"

**800** Letters from the year 1525. no. 922. 923. 924. **801**

because E. C. F. G. must feel in her heart that such work is good and
pleases God; and although she seeks neither merit nor reward in it, much
less glory or honor before the world, yet her conscience must rejoice
and be strengthened in the faith that God has accomplished such good
through E. C. F. G. and has used her as an instrument, and has indicated
that she intends to use him further for His divine will, which we
sincerely wish for. C. F. G. has accomplished such good, and has used
him as an instrument, and has indicated that he intends to use him
further for his divine gracious will, which we sincerely ask and wish,
amen.

Accordingly, G. H., because the university is now in its order, and the
order of the church service is also now being established, and should
continue, there are still two things that demand E. C. F. G., as secular
authority, understanding and order. The first, that the parishes
everywhere are so miserable, since no one gives, no one pays. Sacrifices
and pensions have fallen, interest is not there, or too little, so the
common man respects neither preachers nor pastors, that, where there is
not a brave order and good preservation of the parishes and preachers\'
chairs made by E. C. F. G., in a short time there will be neither
parsonage, nor schools, nor students, and thus God\'s word and service
will fall to the ground. Therefore, E. C. F. G. wants to continue to be
used by God, and to be His faithful instrument, for more comfort, also
for E. C. F. G.\'s own conscience, because she is asked and required to
do so by us and by the need itself, as certainly by God. E. C. F. G.
will certainly find the means to do so. There are monasteries, convents,
fiefdoms and donations, and there are enough of these things, where only
C.F.G.\'s order can be given. F. G.\'s order to look at them, to
calculate and to arrange them. God will also give His blessing and
prosperity to this, so that, if God wills, the order concerning the
souls, as the high school and divine service, will not be prevented for
lack and abandonment of the poor belly, we also ask for His divine
grace, amen.

The other piece, that E. C. F. G., as I once talked to E. C. F. G. in
Wittenberg, would also have the secular regiment visited, and how
councillors in cities and all other officials governed and presided over
the common good; for there is great complaint everywhere about evil
regiment, both in cities and in the countryside, in which E. C. F. G.
would have the same effect. C. F. G., as a head and a countryman

The court would perhaps have fewer notes, things and complaints if such
a visitation and good order could be carried out in a proper manner. E.
C. F. G. would graciously accept all this from me as a submissive
suggestion, because E. C. F. G. sees and notices that I mean well. God
graciously grant this in E. C. F. G.\'s heart with complete light and
power to do what pleases Him, Amen. At Wittenberg, Tuesday after Simonis
and Jude \[Oct. 31\] 1525.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 923.**

(Wittenberg.) October 31, 1525.

**To the City Council of Torgau.**

Luther indicates that the physician, Licentiate Basilius, will soon come
to Torgau.

From a copy in Lingke\'s \"Luthers Geschäfte und Andenken in Torgau,\"
p. 87; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 40 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
53, p. 332.

To the honorable and wise, mayors and council of Torgau, my favorable,
wise and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, firm, dear sirs! I have spoken to
the licentiate Basilio from E. E.\'s writing, and have indicated your
opinion. So, God willing, he will find his way to you first, when the
weather returns, and God grant you both His grace for a good outcome,
amen. Hereby commanded by God. Tuesday after Simonis \[Oct. 31\] 1525.
Martin Luther.

**No. 92 4.**

Torgau. October 31, 1525.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

He asked Luther to find him a pastor who would be suitable for Niemeck.

The concept is in the Weimar Archives, H 167, No. 117, 28c. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 90 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 260.

**802**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 924 to 927.

**803**

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We inform you
that he Andres Stolp, pastor of Niemeck, has previously reported to us
the damage he suffered from the fire that burned down his parish there,
with the request that we would dispose of it with those of Niemeck,
because he could not now maintain himself with them due to the fire
damage he received, We also ask that, in order that he may enjoy his
loss to some extent and receive it to a greater extent, he be given
something to reimburse him and that he be paid an annual pension from
the income of the affected parish. Thereupon we wrote to those of
Niemeck, if it would not be burdensome for them or something would be on
him, that they would let the said priest appoint another priest to the
parish or would lend and give him a fief or something else for his
damage, with a request, where he would indicate that the damage was done
to him by someone of Niemeck, that he should be helped in equity.
Hereupon the council of Niemeck came to us with the enclosed letter, as
you will hear from it. Now we have sent such a letter of the council to
the mentioned pastor\'s copy, and the complaints that Niemeck has made
to us about him before, have been shown next to it. Since it can be
considered manly that it is almost burdensome for the people that they
should be provided with a tenant and not with their own pastor, our
gracious request is that you think of a suitable one, who may preside
over the poor people with the word of God, as befits a pastor, and
inform us of the same, and we will have him ordained and assigned to the
von Niemeck as a pastor. We did not want to restrain you from this, and
do us a gracious favor. Date Torgau, Tuesday after Simonis and Judä
\[Oct. 31\] Anno 25.

**No. 9 25.**

Wittenberg. November 5, 1525.

**To the preachers of Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1533.

**No. 926 .**

(Wittenberg.) November 5, 1525.

**To Gregor Casel.**

Instruction on what he should say to the Strasbourg people.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1534.

**No S27.**

Wittenberg. November 7, 1525,

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

Complaining about the unfair procedure of the printers in Nuremberg.
Request for a letter to be sent to the printer and bookseller Koburger,
in which Luther makes suggestions about the distribution of his books.

The original is at the Coburg fortress. Facsimile in O. Hase, \"die
Koburger\", 2nd ed. 1885, plate IV. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement,
p. 41; in Walch, vol. XXI, 135; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 47 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 334.

To the honorable and prudent Lasaro Spengler, Syndico of the city of
Nuremberg, my favorable master and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, prudent, dear sir and friend! Here
in Wittenberg we have problems with printing, as you know, and I have
previously written to the council in Nuremberg that the printers and
accountants have made a fuss about our printers, and are showing them
all mischievousness and wickedness. Now this prevents me from doing all
the prophets, postils, Latin bibles and other great works, nor from
continuing, although I would gladly have such work for my own sake, and
would know how to use that malice for my rest 1). So there are now some
printers on the Rhine who are willing to enter into an alliance with my
printers, so that such evil may be controlled. But because the Koburger
has recently spoken to me, and I then offered what I could, I should not
lack anything: according to the promise, as I remember, I have
undertaken and stopped my printers, and suggested whether they wanted or
would like to suffer the Koburger in such an alliance and trade, should
perhaps be more useful and beneficial for both parts. Accordingly, my
request and friendly request is, if it would not be too difficult for
you, to let such my letter reach the Koburger, and to advise therein
what would be the best thing to do; for Briefs Zeiger therefore
dispatched by us, to discuss and hear such with the Koburger. I respect,

1\) In the original: \"Rüge\", which is to be resolved by Ruge, that is
\"Rube\". Compare the parallel passage in No. 910.

**804**

Letters from 1525. no. 927. 928. 929.

**805**

It should not be harmful to the Koburger, because we lived, if he would
transfer the preprint and store to us in Wittenberg, together with my
printers, of which they themselves will further consult and discuss. Do
not let this annoy you, for it should ever annoy me and all pious hearts
that the Holy Scriptures should be hindered in this way, and that one
should suffer such things from evil people. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen.
At Wittenberg, on Tuesday after All Saints\' Day \[Nov. 7\] 1525.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 9 28.**

Torgau. November 7, 1525.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Answer to Luther\'s letter\" of October 31, in which he asks: after the
better establishment of the university has taken place, the Elector may
also tackle the endowment of the parishes and a visitation of the
secular regiment.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives Oo, p. 142, EEE. 4.
printed by Burkhardt, p. 92 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 268.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! You wrote to us
last week, apologizing, among other things, for having made so many
suggestions to us about the university order. We have read your letter
with further contents and are graciously and well satisfied with your
apology, because we know what you did in the same matter, that it was
well meant by you and done in the best way.

And when you further indicate that the parishes everywhere are so
miserable, so that no one gives anything, paid, to that that sacrifice
and soul pennies have fallen, that it is due to us, as the secular
authority, to establish and make order, so that the pastors and
preachers receive properly. Now it may well be that the sacrifices and
the like of the common access of the parishes and preachers have fallen,
and that the people with the interest, rents and the like, which they
gave before age, will leave something to be done. Should we now provide
for the same parishes and preachers from the income of our office and
chamber property, it will be difficult for us, as you can see. However,
we believe that it is nevertheless proper for the citizens of the
cities, as well as those in the countryside, to do something from their
own property or from the ecclesiastical fiefs that they have to lend, so
that

the pastors and preachers, who preach the Word of God to them and
administer the holy sacraments, could maintain themselves all the more
nobly. And it is our gracious request that you inform us of your
concern, as you think, that where the pastors and preachers are not
provided for their needs and entertainment, an order should be made and
established for them, \[so\] we want to show ourselves further in this
by the bestowal of divine grace, and also have the appointment that the
interest and other things, which are dedicated and suitable for this,
should be given to the same pastors and preachers undiminished.

Concerning the third article, as to visit the secular regiment, how the
councils in cities and the officials govern, of which you spoke to us
once before in Wittenberg, we do not want to reproach you in your
gracious opinion that we recently filled some of our offices anew with
officials, We are of the opinion that our subjects and relatives in the
cities and in the countryside should find help, advice and comfort in
their matters with the same, so that their afflictions and objections
can be remedied in an equitable manner. Some time ago we would have been
inclined to decree in all our offices and cities, and to hear how their
order and government was; but it remained primarily because of the
uprising that had occurred a while ago, and also because of other
matters that we were responsible for; but we want to do it with God\'s
help at another time according to our opportunity, and also do that
which serves God\'s praise and for the free spreading of His holy word
and common benefit, and also for good order. We do not want to restrain
you in your gracious opinion, because we are inclined to you with grace.
Date Torgau, Tuesday after Leonhardi \[Nov. 7\] Anno 25.

**No. 9 29.**

Wittenberg. November 11, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

About the occupation of the parish of Niemeck.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ll*, p. 167. 117. 28c.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 42; in Walch, vol. XXI, 136; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 48 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 336.

To my most gracious lord, Duke Johanns zu Sachsen, Churfürsten, zu S. C.
F. G. Handen.

Grace and Peace in C. Durchl., hochgeb. Prince, most gracious Sir! E. C.
F. G. have given me

**806Letters from the year**

1525\. no. 929. 930. **807**

written to order a skilled man to Niemeck. Now I humbly inform E. C. F.
G. that I want to keep to E. C. F. G.\'s writing, but I find that the
parish is not yet vacant, and the previous parish priest has not yet
given up anything, because he finds himself burdened with great damage,
and also with scorn and ridicule. But in order that I may do my
diligence enough, I call E. C. F. G. one by name, M. George Wesel,1)
almost learned and skilful, who shall probably be there for a long time,
with God\'s grace. What E. C. F. G. now manages to do, to remove both
with the previous pastor, and to raise them with this one, I leave to
God. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Saturday S. Martin\'s
Day \[Nov. 11\] 1525.

E. C. F. G. undersigned Mart. Luther.

**No. 930 .**

(Wittenberg.) November 11, 1525.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Luther apologizes for not being able to attend Spalatin\'s wedding and
answers the question of whether a prince has the right to prevent
idolatry.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. u, fol. 205. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 304b; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 49 (with the wrong date: \"November 12\") and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 271. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 990.

To the Lord Georg Spalatin, the bridegroom and new husband and servant
of Christ, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace! How gladly I would like to be at your wedding 2), my
dear Spalatin, and I would also not suffer that I should be so much
prevented,3) that the free will of Erasmus should not also be forced to
be subservient to me. But behold! the recent liberation of the nuns
prepares for me

1\) This is the later so infamous Georg Wicel (Witzel) von Bach, who
fell away to the papacy again.

2\) Spalatin\'s wedding was scheduled for November 12, but was postponed
until the 19th. His wife Catharina was the daughter of an Altenburger,
Johann Heidenreich, or Streubel.

3\) The reading of the original is: *impediri*, Aurifaber and De Wette
read: *impedire*. We think that in the former reading a comma should be
placed after *impediri.*

new unrest; the nobles, who are ignoble at heart, are raging. And it is
to be wondered at how one must not believe even those who have hitherto
been regarded as the evangelicals. Amsdorf himself was recently in
danger with those of whom we ourselves believed with him4) that they
would be our castles and our refuge if it should be necessary.
Amsdorf\'s statement was this: \"They are knaves not only before God,
but also before the world.\" You would be surprised if I were allowed to
entrust their names to the letter. This is the reason that I am held
back by the tears of my Käthe (*Katenae*), that I do not go to you,
since she believes that you want nothing less, as dll also write, than
my danger. For she disputes so: Amsdorf\'s reputation is indeed very
important to me. Then you know how much our present prince cares for the
gospel; he is all the less to be feared by his own, because they hope
that words can easily be put before him, whatever they may have taken
for themselves.

To the question whether it is a prince\'s right to abolish abominations,
when the adversaries assert that no one must be forced to faith and the
gospel; then, that there is no example for this; finally, that the
princes have the right to rule only in outward things: you can answer
why they do not themselves do so first, as they now finally conclude?
for they do not only force outward abominations, but also inward
unbelief and godlessness of heart. Therefore they may suffer, at least
in part, the measure with which they measure. That they are coercive,
however, is sufficiently evident from the fact that they invoke a
foreign prince, by which alone they fully deserved to be expelled. Then
our princes do not compel to faith and the gospel, but curb outward
abominations. Since they themselves confess that the princes have a
right in external things, they condemn themselves. For the princes must
prevent public outrages, as perjuries, public blasphemies of the name of
God, such as these are, by doing nothing.

4\) We do not consider it permissible to refer *ipso to* the Churfürst,
as the Erl. Briefw. does. Amsdorf is meant by this.

**808**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 930. 931. 932.

**809**

Those who are prevented may believe or not believe, even if they
blaspheme secretly or not. For we say of public revilings and
blasphemies, with which they revile our God. Here (I say) we must, if we
can, prevent them; if we cannot, we are forced to let it go. Here no one
is yet forced to faith and gospel, no one is forced to an ungodly
opinion of the heart, as they would do if they could; 1) now that they
cannot do it, they agree with them and justify them, therefore they are
worthy of equal punishment, Rom. 1. I believe that this is a
sufficiently great example, that Christ made scourges and by force drove
the sellers and the buyers out of the temple. Therefore, continue, and
do not be moved by the talk of those people, and be at ease with your
Lord and your bride. Since Magister Eberhard 2) is coming, I will honor
your little wedding as much as I can. On St. Martin\'s Day \[Nov. 11\]
1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 931 .**

Torgau. November 12, 1525.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

About the occupation of the parish of Niemeck.

The concept is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. Ll,* p. 167, No. 117, 23
c. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 93 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 273.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We have heard
your letter, in which you indicate to us, at our previous gracious
request, a magister named Georg Wesel, who should be learned, sent and
suitable for a pastor in Niemeck, to our gracious favor, and if the same
Magister Jörg will apply to us, he shall be given a certificate by us in
writing as a prospective pastor. But that the parish of Niemeck, as you
find, should not be vacant, we do not want to reassure you that it seems
to us that the old parish priest should go into service, and
nevertheless want to be absent from the parish in question, which is
difficult to endure, and also that the old parish priest should be
absent.

1\) *possunt*, in the original will probably only be a misspelling
instead of *possent in* Aurifaber and De Wette.

2\) Brisger.

The income of the parish does not extend so high that this or another
parish priest should be absent. And since it is considered that the
recent fire 3) in Niemeck has been to the detriment of the parish priest
there, we have ordered some of our people to diligently investigate 4)
how the same fire happened, and if we find out, we will, if God wills
it, appoint that the damage inflicted and suffered by the parish priest
be reimbursed and paid for by the townspeople. We do not want to
restrain you in your gracious opinion, because we are inclined to be
merciful to you. Date Torgau, Sunday after Martinmas \[Nov. 12\] Anno
1525.

**No. 9 32.**

Torgau. November 25, 1525.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther, Jonas, Hans von Dolzig and Hans von
Gräfendorf.**

The Elector requests the addressees to conduct a detailed investigation
of a case brought before him.

The concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 546.

M. 2. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 94 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 274. -
The decision is missing from the Acts.

Dear devotees, councilors and faithful! A woman named Brigitta Melhausin
5) has come to us with a complaint about how she had trusted one of our
servants at Wittenberg, called Lang Jörgen, in marriage, and how she had
also been with him in marriage for a good time, and because of this he
had repudiated her and given him another woman to marry and trust. If
such a deal, where the wife did not give him cause for it through
adultery or inequity, would not cause us unreasonable complaint and
displeasure, then our council and dear faithful, Christiano Beyer,
Doctor, and Anthonien Nimeck, both mayors of Wittenberg, have sent the
women\'s complaint to me and ordered them to humble the woman and the
said Langen Jörgen before them, to hear them against each other, and
otherwise to inquire about these matters, and if they then find that the
woman has not caused the man by the adultery, they shall be entitled to

3\) Burkhardt has read \"mvyst brand\", which the Erl. Briefw. has
rendered by \"Mistbrand\". We have adopted Kawerau\'s conjecture
\"iugst\" (== recent).

4\) Instead of \"also\" it might have read \"itself\".

5\) Soon called so, soon Melhasin (Burkhardt).

6\) In Burkhardt: \"with\" instead of: \"nit\".

**810**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 932.

811

that he may by divine right take another to show himself further, as
touched our order brought with it. That we now gave such an order to
these two mayors is due to the fact that we considered it as if Lang
Jörg, out of his own will and without prior knowledge, might have
undertaken to take the other wife. For if the woman had indicated in her
complaint, 1) that the other marriage in question had taken place with
the foreknowledge of the venerable, our dear devout Ern Johansen
Bugenhagen, pastor at Wittenberg, and on the latter\'s inquiry, we would
have known how to show ourselves just with such an order. Although we
have now ordered our commissioners to inquire about the matter, which
they have done, as we can see from the papers they have received, 1)
when they were sent back here, we would not have made any mistake, where
they found in the interrogation held or otherwise that the said priest
had inquired to some extent before the other marriage, as it was about
the first wife\'s trial, that they would have proceeded with
imprisonment outside our further order 2). Because they indicate in
their report, among other things, that the priest was present during
their interrogation, and that the same 3)) gave us information about the
captured farmhand, what he had done with the other woman before she was
entrusted to him, and what form he had taken, which we are sending to
you herewith, and find that the evidence taken by the two mayors, and
before that by the priest, is not consistent, and that there is not only
a deficiency in this, but also that some witnesses who were present at
the trial, and who were not present at the first trial, are not in
agreement, that some of the witnesses, whom the priest interrogated
before the hearing, wavered in their testimonies before both mayors and
changed their first speech, but some, whom the priest interrogated at
the same time, in addition to the pre-determined ones, who were not even
decided by the mayors in the opinion that they are to be believed, but
other and new witnesses were interrogated against them, so that we do
not know how things stand on all sides: We therefore request that you
first of all diligently review the reports that have been submitted to
us by both parties, and note which of the people who were interrogated
by the priest and both mayors said something repugnant in their
testimonies, and then examine the

1\) Inserted by us.

2\) Burkhardt: \"worthy\".

3\) \"the same\" (namely Bugenhagen) put by us instead of: \"the same\".

Witnesses all together, who interrogated them on both sides, and who
especially changed their testimony in the interrogation of the mayors,
shall present themselves to you hurriedly and without warning, and
demand that they come to you one after the other, read to them their
speech and testimony, as they should have done first before the priest,
according to his list sent over, and then before the two mayors,
according to their list, and remind them of the repugnancy which they
had shown in their testimony, and hear which report they give by chance,
and say that they had testified before. and hear what report they will
give by chance, and say that they had testified before. After that,
those, and each one in particular, whom the priest interrogated and who
remained unquestioned by both mayors, shall also be interrogated, upon
the priest\'s instruction, as to what they should have said before; and
then, finally, those whom the mayors interrogated and who were not
questioned by the priest. And what they will say of all parts, you want
to record, but bind each witness, if he goes from you, to say nothing of
what you hold against him. If you then find from all this, and also from
other reports which you will know how to take, where the necessity of
the trade requires it, that the presumption is in favor of the landowner
and against the first wife, then both of you, Hans von Doltzigk and Hans
von Grevendorf, shall then decree, that the land servant, upon guarantee
or vow to reinstate himself when required, come out of prison, but in
the event of a countermove let him remain there, and report to all four
of us in writing how you found things, and also report your concerns as
to what should be done in this matter as far as the marriage is
concerned. And since the two mayors indicate what impropriety should
result from the fact that in Wittenberg the divorce is being handled
somewhat improperly, and the persons are being secretly brought together
in the houses without prior order, we request that you, Doctor Martinus
and Doctor Jonas, Provost, want to call the pastor and Philippum
Melanchthon, Doctor Jeronimus, 4) Johann Apel and Licentratum Benedictum
Pauli to you, to discuss and unite how you think that this should be
done in a fair way and in a Christian order, and to let us know about
your concern, if you may come together in other matters. In all this,
our gracious and pleasing opinion. Date Torgau, on Saturday Cacharinä
\[Nov. 25\] *Anno dmi*. 1525.

4\) Prospecting.

**812**

Letters from the year 1525. No. 933. 934. 935.

**813**

**No. 933 .**

Wittenberg. November 30, 1525.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther makes suggestions on how the parishes should be equipped and
visited. - However, the visitation was not carried out until 1527.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p.229d; in the Jena
edition (1556), vol. III, p.183b; in the Altenburg edition, vol. III,
p.301; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p. 353; in Walch, vol. XXI,
139; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 51 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53,
p. 336.

God\'s grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most
Gracious Lord! E. C. F. G. have answered my suggestion to provide the
parishes everywhere. Now this is not my opinion that all parishes should
be appointed from E. C. F. G. Chamber\". But because E. C. F. G.
graciously requests my concern as to how it should be done, I give my
humble opinion that E. C. F. G. should inspect all parishes in the
entire principality, and where it is found that the people want to have
Protestant preachers, and the parishes\' property would not be
sufficient to maintain them, that then by order of E. C. F. G. the same
congregation, be it from the town hall or otherwise, must provide so
much annually. For if they want to have a parish priest, it is the
office of the C.C.F.G. to keep them so that they also reward the worker,
as the Gospel states (Matth. 10,10. Luc. 10, 7.).

Such a survey could be done in such a way that C.F.G. divides the
principality into four or five parts and sends two nobles or officials
to each part to investigate such estates and parishes and to find out
what is necessary for the parish priest, and to request such an order
from C.F.G. regarding the annual tax. If, however, such costs or efforts
would be too much for C.C.F.G., citizens from the cities could be needed
for this purpose, or the countryside could demand that a number of
prominent cities do so and act with them. But whichever pleases E. C. F.
G. best, let it be so.

In addition, attention should be paid to the old priests or otherwise
unfit ones, so that, where they are otherwise devout, or not contrary to
the Gospel, they either read the Evangelia with the Postillia itself
(where

They would be obligated to preach (or have them read), so that the
people would be properly ministered to in the Gospel, if they were to
nourish it; for it would not be good to expel those who have been
sitting until now, where they are not hostile to the Gospel, without
restitution. I wish to inform E. C. F. G. of this at E. C. F. G.\'s
request. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Thursday St. Andreä
\[Nov. 30\] An. 1525.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 93 4.**

(Wittenberg.) (December 2, 1525.)

**Caspar von Schwenkfeld to Luther.**

(Regest.)

On Dec. 2, Schwenkfeld had a discussion with Luther and Bugenhagen about
the Lord\'s Supper and on the same day, with this letter as an
accompanying letter, he sent a letter from Krantwald about the Lord\'s
Supper, which he asks to be considered. In this letter he says: \"It is
impossible that the Pabst\'s kingdom should perish as long as this
article of flesh and blood stands in the sacrament of bread and
wine.\" - Luther did not reply to both Schwenkfeld and Krautwald until
April 14, 1526.

This letter is found in Schwenkfeld\'s Epistolar. (1570), vol. II, p. 27
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 277.

**No. 935 .**

Wittenberg. December 6, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther wishes Spalatin luck on his marriage and returns to the reasons
that prevented him from being at the wedding. Brisger delivered this
letter.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Dessav*. 86, 10, p. 8 (partly
illegible due to wetness). Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 234.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 305 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 52
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 278. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 992.

To the learned and godly man, Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of
Christ and new man in the Lord, his extremely dear \[friend\].

Grace and peace in the Lord and delight in your exceedingly lovely wife,

**814Letters from the year**

1525\. no. 935. 936. 815

also full of the Lord! As unpleasant as your marriage is to your
brothers, the servants of Baal, 1) it is pleasant to me, indeed God has
shown me nothing more pleasant in you (apart from the gospel) than that
I should be worthy to see and hear you as a husband. But this too shall
be considered as no small gift and fruit of the Gospel. But with what
kind of heart I remained absent, and for what reasons I did not come to
this exceedingly pleasant wedding of yours, M. Eberhard will tell. Thus
everything turns around under the prince, who is a confessor of the
Gospel and even chivalrous (*equestris*). We are less safe on the
journey than under the prince who looked through his fingers and did
nothing, and now mall is forced to fear those as servants of highwaymen
and traitors who should be expected to be castles of refuge. But this in
relation to those. I return to you wishing you great joy and many
children, through Christ\'s blessing. Surely, my heart leaps in my body
at your wedding, that, I want you to believe, not unlike my own. But I,
poor man, would have sent you the golden Portugaleser 2) which you had
given to mine, if I had not feared that you might take offense at it.
Therefore, I am sending one that I still have left over from the
wedding, and I do not know whether it was yours or not. But you will
recognize by this small gift my exceedingly great affection for you. But
what are words necessary? I am convinced that I am too well known to you
to need my confession. Greet your wife in the most loving way, but you
should do this when you hold Catharina in the marriage bed under the
most loving embraces and kisses and think: \"Behold, this person, the
very good dear creature of my God, has been given to me by my Christ; to
him be praise and honor. I, too, since I can guess the day on which you
will have received this letter, will in the night, with the same work,
send the letter to you.

1\) That is, the canons of Altenburg. Spalatin was also a canon there,
and the first to marry.

2\) A Portugaleser is a gold coin worth about seven dollars.

3\) I love thee in remembrance of thee, and will repay thee like with
like. 4) My rib in Christ greets both you and your rib. Grace be with
you, Amen. Wittenberg, on the day of Nicolai \[Dec. 6\] 1525. Yours,
Martin Luther.

**No. 936 .**

Wittenberg. December 9, 1525.

**To Spalatin.**

The chapter of the Altenburg Abbey had warned Spalatin in writing to
desist from his supposed marriage and threatened him with the loss of
his canonry for breaking the celibacy. For this reason, Spalatin turned
to the Rector and the University of Wittenberg, and they instructed
Luther to write to Spalatin, asking him what he should reply to those of
their nobility.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 206. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 306 b; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 54 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 279. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 994.

To the highly venerable brother in Christ, Georg Spalatin, the faithful
servant of God, Bishop of the Church at Altenburg.

Grace and peace! It has been charged to me, who am very busy, my dear
Spalatin, that I answer you about the things you wrote to the Rector and
the University. First, you may not give way to these proud Baal
servants, but again despise them bravely, and answer them with lofty
speech about this way: You, too, have taken marriage for this reason, so
that you may bear witness before God and men, but above all testify to
them that you will not consent to their wicked, impure, godless and
devil-worshiping state, or rather to their Sodom, which is consecrated
to fire and brimstone from heaven and will shortly be devoured.
Therefore, you still admonish them to desist from their abominations and
to desist from blaspheming God\'s word and work, but much more to desist
from a punishment against you, who are not convicted nor condemned by
the word of God, otherwise you would be compelled to take the hand of
God.

3\) In the original there is an insoluble word before *ea nocte*:
\"*max\...*\"; we have completed it to *maxime* and related it to
*amabo.*

4\) This entire sentence is missing from Aurifaber and De Wette.

**816**

Letters from the\" year 1525. no, 936. 937. 938.

817

of the prince, and to attack them in turn in such a way that they would
rather wish they had never taken this upon themselves. With these
writings you can also call upon the prince, 1) and remind him of his
office that he should not allow you to be punished as an innocent man,
but from the power that belongs to a prince, write to those senseless
people that they should either convict you of an offense with the holy
scriptures or leave you unpunished, so that he is not forced to defend
the innocent man in such a way that their tyranny must make them repent.
There will be no doubt that they will be deterred by this letter unless.

that God may harden them, that they may perish quickly. For those their
arrows do not come from the quiver of others; therefore you may not
fear, but suffer the shame, so that your judgment may also be borne in
humility. Fare well and greet your chain (*catenam*), and let M.
Eberhard be commanded to you. Wittenberg, Saturday after Nicolai \[Dec.
9\] 1525. Martin Luther.

**No. 93 7.**

(Wittenberg.) December 21, 1525.

**To Duke George of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 504.

**No. 93 8.**

Wittenberg. 22, December 1525.

**To Marquard Schuldorp in Magdeburg.**

Luther consoles him in the anguish he has to suffer over taking a
sibling in marriage.

The original is at the University Library of Rostock. Printed in the
Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte, Vol. I (1877), p. 321 and in the Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 283.

To the highly venerable man, Mr. Marqnard Schuldorp, 2) the servant of
Christ, his extremely dear friend in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Mr. Marquard! That you have taken in
marriage

1\) Spalatin had already done this by complaining on Nov. 29 against
Hans von Dolzig about the behavior of the chapter and on the same day he
sent the letters of the chapter to Veit Warbeck.

2\) Schuldorp from Kiel was inscribed in Wittenberg on July 13, 1521 and
joined Amsdorf in particular,

Your 3) sister\'s or brother\'s daughter, I have said and written
before, I still say and write that it is not wrong in the sight of God,
there is neither a saying nor an example against it 4) in Scripture, but
rather for and with it, that you are well assured of your conscience.
Also, it may be found that the pope himself has allowed and dispensed
for money and favor, and has set up another law against his right, which
is not new in himself. And even if the pope did not do it, or if it were
ever new with us, it is enough that it is not new with God. And what
Pabst admits for the sake of money or favor, we may well need for the
sake of God. That now much

What do you ask of them, do you not want to suffer anything? or should
people, for your sake, be and do differently than they could? If those
who would have advised you to do so would do so, you should not fidget
about it, and consider God\'s right more than they do, if it cannot be
otherwise, and you cannot in good conscience leave her, if the marriage
has taken place and she is your love, until she is taken from you by
force. And because the trouble presses so hard, and they make themselves
out as if it were unjust, you ought to resist it all the more, as you
know that St. Paul teaches and does where they want to deny him his
freedom, and continues just then when they press upon him, and looks
neither at trouble nor at laws. For we must always act defiantly and
boldly if they want to weaken or deny us our freedom. If it is right,
then keep over it, and the more, the more one wants to resist it or not
suffer it. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen, and greet me your dear Hanna. I
have a lot to do. At Wittenberg, on Fridays after St. Thomas \[22 Dec.\]
1525. Martin Luther.

with whom he also stayed in Magdeburg, and was married by him to his
sister\'s daughter on Sept. 13, 1525, about which the canons raised a
clamor. In 1527 he was appointed by Duke Frederick, later King Frederick
I of Denmark, to the cathedral at Schleswig, where he celebrated German
Mass and Vespers on July 16, 1528. He died of English sweat on Aug. 13,
1529.

3\) In the original: \"eurs\".

4\) In the Erl. Briefw.: \"da weder\", for which we have put
\"dawider\".

5\) Maybe: Woman?

**818** Letters from the year 1525.

No. 939 to 942. 819

**No. 93 pp.**

Dresden. December 28, 1525.

**Duke George of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 508.

**No. 9 40.**

Wittenberg. December 31, 1525.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tolleth.**

Luther sends his writing *de servo arbitrio*, comments on the sacrament
controversy and thanks for a gift to be expected from Stiefel\'s
mistress, Mrs. Jörger.

Handwritten in Copenhagen in the old royal library, Ms. 1393, p. 116.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 309 b ; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 59
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 294. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 996.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I send you the Erasmus I refuted, 1) as I
was able to do in the brevity and haste, my dear Michael. And I like
your opinion how powerful the prince of the world is, both 2) in
preventing the fruit of the word, although he is obliged to allow it to
be heard, and in sowing the sects of the wicked, that is, his tares. But
this error of the sacrament has three sects, which are of the same mind.
With other reasons Zwingli goes against Carlstadt, with others the
Silesian Valentin 3) against both and all, of which you will hear in his
time. This struggle of the sects is a sign that what they teach is of
Satan, because the Spirit of God is not a spirit of disunity, 4) for God
is not a God of disunity, but of peace \[1 Cor. 14, 33\].

Your mistress 5) together with her sons you want to

1\) namely, the paper \"Daß der freie Wille nichts sei,\" St. Louis
edition, vol. XVIII, 1668.

2\) Erl. Briefw.: \"here an \"um seems to be missing\". We have assumed
that.

3\) Valentin Krautwald, Canonicus and Lector at the Johannesstift in
Liegnitz, was won over by Schwenkfeld for his views after initial fierce
resistance.

4\) Here, according to the Vulgate, we have inserted before *Deus the*
words: *non enim est dissensionis,* which seemed necessary to us.

5\) Mrs. Dorothea Jörger, not, as Aurifaber thinks, Stiefels Frau.
Aurifaber lacks the puuctum after *pacis.* Therefore Walch translates:
\"But you will greet your peace wife with the dear children\" 2c. In the
previous one, he did not use the words *sed pacis.*

greet you affectionately, and give thanks for the gift sent, although it
has not yet arrived, and perhaps will not arrive; but there is nothing
wrong with it, the good will is enough. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg, on the Sunday after the Nativity \[Dec. 31\], on which I
received your letter. Anno 1526 \[that is 1525\].

Martin Luther.

**No. 941.** (1525.) 6)

**To the community in Penza.**

Consolation over the persecution she suffered.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. IX, p. 1590 ; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XXII, p. 578; in Walch, vol. X, 2208; in De Wette, vol. V,
p. 799 and in the Erlanger, vol. 56, p. 162 ff.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1920.

**No. 942. (Before 1526.) To a woman.**

Luther comforts her because of her weak faith.

Printed: \"Houet Artickel vnde de vornemelykesten stücke vnses Christen
domes mit spröcken, vth der hhylgen scryfft beweret durch Benedictu
Gretzinger. Tho the other time gecorrieret Wittemberch 1526.\" At the
end: \"Gedrücket tho Wittemberch dorch Hans Weyß D. M. xx v. i.\" (cf.
Panzer, Annalen II, No. 3079) and in Erl. Briefw., Bd.V, p. 296
according to a copy by pastor D. Krafft in Elberfeld. In the High German
printings of the book, already from 1523 on, this letter does not
appear. In the Erl. Briefw, it is in Low German; we have translated it
into High German.

A Sendbrief Doctoris Martin Luther, quite useful to the weak believers.

Grace and peace in Christ! My dear wife, I hear you say that your heart
suffers great temptation in faith, which I am sorry for, and I ask God
to graciously strengthen you, as I have no doubt that He will do so in
time. Only give yourselves, as you know, into his will, whether he will
still leave you like this for a while and have you like this, and think
that weak faith is also faith, and Christ is as close to the weak as to
the strong, as he is to the strong.

6\) Both Burkhardt, p. 97, and Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 568,
note 5, assign this letter to the year 1525, which De Wette and the
Erlangen edition have placed in the year 1546, which is also repeated in
the St. Louis edition.

**820**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 942 to 946.

821

Paul tells the Romans on the fourteenth that Christ himself is sinned
against, since the weak are not spared. And Paul commands to accept the
weak everywhere, from which it can be seen that the weak also sit in
Christ\'s lap. And thank God that you have come so far that you feel
your weakness, for this is a good sign of a certain faith among you. Woe
to those who are completely mad and feel nothing! Therefore be of good
cheer, and as Joel \[Cap. 3:15.\] saith, \"Let the weak say, I am
strong;\" and Paul 2 Corinth, on the twelfth \[v. 10.\], \"Strength
increaseth by in strength.\" So it must be. I have also often 1)
suffered the illness that I thought neither God nor Christ was anything,
that 2) I wondered how such things could happen to me, since I was more
certain of them than of my own life. God thus tempts us, but does not
abandon us, which is better than an anger (erger), since something must
have suffered. I hereby commend you to Christ, who makes you weak in
your own strength, that he may strengthen you in his power. Amen.

**No. 943.**

(Strasbourg.) (Early 1526.) 3)

**Gerbel to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Gerbel expresses his pain about the communion disputes. About secret
machinations and vituperations of the Strassburgers against Luther. He
urgently calls on Luther to write a larger document on the Lord\'s
Supper because of the frightening arousal through which large crowds are
being drawn away from Christ. About his second marriage.

Handwritten in Strasbourg in *Thes.* Printed in Röhrich, Geschichte der
Reformation im Elsaß, vol. I, p. 458; in Kolde, *Analecta* p. 77 and in
Erl.

Briefw., vol. V, p. 298.

**No. 944.**

Wittenberg. January 2, 1526.

**To Amsdorf.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1786, no. 12.

1\) \"vaken\". This expression occurs only in the Westphalian dialect,
and from this it can be concluded that Luther did not write this letter
in Low German.

2\) Inserted by us.

3\) This time determination results from the fact that Casel delivered
Luther\'s letter, which is answered in this letter.

**No. 945.**

Wittenberg. January 3, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

On the release of a Protestant preacher in Lübeck.

From the Weimar Archive in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 43; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 140; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 75 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
53, p. 357.

To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony and
Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn, Most Gracious Lord and
Prince! I am sending here an answer from Lübeck to E. C. F. G.\'s
letter; and although some there ask me most earnestly that I should urge
E. C. F. G. to write again, I do not know how to do it, because I do not
know what they are writing, and I worry that they have cut off the first
letter. That\'s what they say: When you beg the farmer, his belly gets
big. It would like to blow out this farmer E. C. F. G. also the belly.
But E. C. F. G. will know how to keep to this, even though I would like
to see the poor man4) go. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg,
Wednesday after *Circumcisionis* \[3 Jan\] 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Mart. Luther.

**No. 946.**

(Wittenberg.)January 3. January 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the Licentiate Basilius Axt for support.

From the Weimar Archive in the Leipzig Supplement, p.43; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 142; in De Wette, vol. III, p. 76 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
53, p. 357.

4\) The prisoner was the former Premonstratensian Joh. Ossenbrügge, who
had held private services in the house of Tylen Kayser in Lübeck and had
presented evangelical teachings. The city council had him arrested on
Aug. 26, 1524, and although King Frederick of Denmark and Elector John
of Saxony interceded for him on Dec. 4, 1525, he remained in prison
until 1528. However, he had to leave the city after gaining his freedom
and went to Reval.

**822** Letters from the year 1526. no. 946. 947. **823**

To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen,
my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! In response to E. C. F. G.\'s letter, I have spoken with the
licentiate, for the sake of surgery, 1). But it has been decided that
nothing will come of it this time; not that he cannot do it, or is
unskilled in it, but that the Faculty of Medicine thinks it should not
be done, for the reason that \[it\] is an art that belongs to Practica,
and should not be done with reading; For it includes anatomy and many
other things that are not yet customary or practiced in our country; and
especially if it were to be read in German, the balblers would make a
mockery of it and not listen, because they consider themselves ready
masters. Should one then buy mockery for money and contempt? would not
be advice; otherwise it is enough. It is true that we would have gladly
helped him herewith to service and office, as he also did with my lord.
H. blessed, Duke Frederick, that H. C. F. G. might want to provide him
with a service. For he has one of the nuns, 2) because of which he is
not allowed to go to foreign principalities in the presence of the
nobility and tyrants, and yet he is pious, faithful, learned and well
kept by our physicians, so that he would be well worthy if H. C. F. G.
would give him a year or two in pay or man\'s money, until God advised
him with a service. And since I did not otherwise complain too much to
E. C. F. G., I would like to humbly request that E. C. F. G. look at his
great poverty and thirst, in which he is now in his third year, and give
him one florin or thirty out of the remaining money of this foundation,
one year or two only. After all, it is so well invested,

1\) We have placed the words \"for the sake of surgery\" between commas.
Because this was not done in the previous editions, the Erl. Briefw.,
Vol. V, p. 301 made Basilius Axt a \"Licentiate of Surgery\". In our
letter, it must have been about the establishment of a chair of surgery
in order to provide for Basil. However, nothing came of it, because the
medical faculty had declared itself against it with the reasons given by
it.

2\) Ave von Schönfeld.

than from Christ himself, and a truly Christian alms and charity. For he
can well earn it, not only with his piety, but also in hospitals, and to
visit and help the sick; which he does without any of that. Command this
all in E. C. F. G.\'s gracious concern; I have also helped him so far,
but the monastery was better off than I was. Hereby commanded by God,
amen. Wednesday after the New Year \[3 Jan.\] 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Mart. Luther.

**No. 9 47.**

Wittenberg. January 4, 1526.

**To Matthew Who in Reutlingen.**

Luther expresses his joy about the state of the church in Reutlingen,
which has so far remained pure and free of fanaticism. He approves of
the changes made there in the ceremonies and warns him against new
changes along the lines of the Wittenberg order of worship.

Printed by I. G. Füsing (actually Beger), Reformation der Stadt
Reutlingen, 1717, p. 102; by *C. M. Pfaff,*

*Acta et scrjpta publica ecclesiae Wirtembergicae*, 1719, p. 30; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 115; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 78 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 301.

To the man of God Matthew Alber, 3) the exceedingly faithful evangelist
of the church at Reutlingen, his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace! Your exceedingly dear brothers are returning to you, my
dear Alber, for God wanted them to be so edified by us as they have been
pleasant and sweet to us, not only by their own faith and godliness, but
also by the exceedingly sweet message with which they have delighted us
greatly, telling us that the state of your church is still intact and
pure from these spiritual wickednesses. For seldom do we hear

3\) Alber or, as Pfaff says, more correctly: Aulber was born on Dec. 4,
1495 in Reutlingen. Dec. 1495 in Reutlingen, studied in Tübingen and
Freiburg, and was appointed preacher in his hometown in 1519, where he
introduced the Reformation. Zwingli\'s attempt to draw him to his side
by his letter of November 16, 1524 (St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1513)
failed. In 1536, he met Luthern personally during the negotiations on
the Wittenberg Concord. Expelled from Reutlingen in 1548 by the Interim,
Duke Ulrich summoned him to Stuttgart. He died on Dec. 2, 1570.

**824**

Letters from the year 152.6. no. 947. 948. 949.

825

We are forced to see and suffer sects, violence, the wickedness of Satan
on all sides, on the right and on the left. The Lord Himself, who began
His work in you and has kept it until now, keep it and complete it until
His day, amen.

We like the changed ceremonies with you. We too have made changes and
are now publishing them 1) for the sake of the neighbors who demand it.
But beware that you do not change again according to our example, but
persevere as you have begun, so that the weak are not annoyed by sudden
and frequent innovations. Only see to it that you do not burden yourself
too much with reading, and by stopping too much cause the listeners
weariness. But experience and the diligence of the listeners will teach
you this. The grace of God be with you, Amen. Wittenberg, January 4,
1526, Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 9 48.**

Wittenberg. January 4, 1526.

**To the Christians of Reutlingen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1539.

**No. 9 4 9.**

Wittenberg. January 5, 1526.

**To Marquard Schuldorp.**

Luther again encourages him in his marriage with his sister daughter.

First printed in script: \"Grundt vnd orsake worup Marquardus Schuldorp
hefft syner suster dochter thor ehe genamen, boweret dorch Ern Nicolau
Amßtorp Licentiaten, vn Ern Martinum Luther Doctor yn der hylligen
schrifft. Anno 1526.\" 2 quarto sheets, no location given. The printer
was (according to Hülße, Geschichte der Buchdruckerkunst in Magdeburg,
1880) H. Oettinger in Magdeburg. Then, as an appendix to Schuldorp\'s
writing: \"Breef an de Glövigen dev Stadt Kyll.\" Further, incomplete:
in the Eislebensche Ausg., vol. I, p. 270; in the Altenburger,vol. Ill,
p. 516; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 434 and in Walch, vol. X, 961.
Supplemented from *Cod. Pal.* 689, p. 66, in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 83;
in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 364 and in the St. Louiser, vol. X, 808. In
all these editions with the inscription, \"An einen Ungenannten.\" Since
now the Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 304 contains significant improvements
from your first printing.

1\) \"Deutsche Messe und Ordnung des Gottesdienstes,\" St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 226.

we have reprinted this letter, using the same. - The Bries, written by
Luther to Schuldorp, probably in Latin, was translated by the latter
into Low German for his writing, and from there translated into High
German by others.

To the honorable and prudent Marquardo Schuldorp of Kiel, I, Martinus
Luther, wish grace and peace in Christ.

I have heard your writing, my dear Marquard, which you sent to me the
closest, and I can easily believe, and almost certainly know, that many
are angry and make a big fuss about the fact that you have taken your
sister\'s daughter in marriage. And I do not want to help you that you
did it with my advice and permission, that is, with God\'s advice and
permission, which I took from divine Scripture. Yes, this is what causes
the greatest annoyance of all, that you have taken the arch-heretic and
damned man, the devil\'s apostle and apostate, Luther, as your council
and followed him in this.

You should have given money to the most holy father, the pope, and
bought and paid such a woman from the same womanizer. That would have
been right, Christian and godly; no trouble would have remained, and you
would have been honored as a pious child. The villain Luther gives
justice and takes no money for it: is this not a great impudence? how
can one suffer it!

Now, dear Marquard, I confess and admit that it is my divine counsel and
permission. For there stands our foundation and rock: What God does not
forbid, but leaves free, that shall remain free for everyone, and no one
is to be obeyed who forbids what God wants to have free, but everyone is
guilty of doing against such a prohibition with words and works, and
always to defy it, Gal. 2 and 5.

Now this is evident, no one may say otherwise, except that God has not
forbidden but left it free for sisters\' children to marry each other,
or for someone to take his brother\'s or sister\'s daughter. In spite of
this, one letter here indicates otherwise. Although the pope is not too
shy to forbear such things when money or favor do the intercession, even
though he is still such a strict lord. However, we hope that God
Almighty will ever be so wise as to give

**826**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 949

827

and to govern people as the pope is, and we should be more sure to
follow God than the pope. But this does not help; there is no hearing
here. Say, write, sing, or read, and they stand like sticks, even like
stones. In short, eyes and ears closed, with the head through: Heretics,
heretics, heretics! It is not right, it is not right! like the mad,
raging dogs or ravening beasts in the forest.

Well then, because they do not hear badly, and want to have such divine
freedom increased and dampened by force, you should 1) again say and do
everything in spite of their great power, which only distorts them to
the very highest and annoys them most bitterly. They are worth nothing
else than that they see and hear what annoys them, because they rage and
rage against that which should correct them; as it is written: He does
not want the blessing, so it should come far enough from him. I have
also taken a nun in marriage, though I might have advised it, and had no
special cause, but that I had done it in defiance of the devil with his
scales, the great men, princes, and bishops, who wickedly desire that
spiritual persons should be free.

And I would like to cause even more trouble, if only I knew something
more that would please God and annoy them. For with this I cool my
temper at their raging against the gospel, so that they are angry, and I
do not give anything to it, and always continue, and do it the more, the
more they do not want it. They insist on force, so I defy the right, and
will wait whether force or right will finally go and stay.

So I counsel you to do likewise. You should be sorry if they are not
angry with you, for that would be a sign that you are living to please
the enemies of the gospel. But if they are angry, you should laugh and
be of good cheer, because you know that it pleases God.

But that some of the weak also take offense at this is not our fault,
but the fault of the tyrants who resist the gospel, so that it is

1\) \"Shall you\" put by us instead of: \"shall they\".

cannot get there and teach the weak. Therefore they must answer for it.
Even if it comes to that, that Christian and divine liberty wants to be
muffled or desecrated, the same is more to be taken care of, than the
weak; because in God\'s word is more, than in the whole world.

If they threaten death, Christ has more life than the devil has death.
If they will take goods, Christ is richer than they. If they want to be
ungracious lords and nobles, let them bind up their grace, so that it
does not follow us, until Christ\'s grace is no longer suitable.

Stand firm, therefore, and do not turn to anger, wrath, displeasure,
trouble, harm, or danger, because God is not against you, but with you.

First of all, you have the clear text that sister-daughter is not
forbidden before God.

Secondly, that even before the pope it is not forbidden higher than for
the sake of favor and money, and not for the sake of God, that whoever
keeps it \[keeps it\] not for the sake of God, but for the sake of
money.

Now hold them against each other, God and Pope, which is the greatest?
which is more to be believed and followed? and which has more honest
cause for itself? God leaves it free for the sake of His grace and our
conscience. The pope bequeaths it and holds it captive for the sake of
money and his tyranny.

Thirdly, you have the powerful example of Abraham, who confessed his
Sarah for his right sister, on account of his father and not on account
of his mother, Gen. 20. This must be that \[she\] was his stepsister,
or, as the text reads, his brother Haran\'s daughter. But Abraham is far
more than all the popes. If he has not gone to the devil about it, but
has pleased God in such a marriage, then no one will stand in danger
according to your example. If they are angry and blaspheme the work and
example of the holy archfather Abraham, let them be angry.

God, whom Abraham pleased and served with it, will find them well. Only
despise their anger and blasphemy as much as they despise and blaspheme
your marriage. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, *quinta
Januarii* 1526. *Martin Luther.*

**828** Letters from the year 1526. no. 950. 951. 952. **829**

**No. 950 .**

Torgau. January 6, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector asks Luther whether he should write again to the Lübeckers
about the imprisoned preacher. - Luther\'s concern, which is no longer
present, must have turned out favorably, because the Elector wrote again
on 20\'. January.

The concept is in the Weimar Archives, X, fol. 109. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 98 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 304.

By the Grace of God John, Duke of Saxony and Elector. Our greeting
before. Venerable and learned one, dear devotee! We have read the
contents of your letter in addition to the reply sent by Lübeck to the
preacher\'s half, which will be kept in prison with them, and although
we have heard your concern, why it would not be convenient to write
further to the preacher\'s half touched by Lübeck, but since you have
not read their answer, and we, if it is to be done according to the form
of the same, would not be disinclined to prescribe the poor man once
again, we have not refrained from sending you a copy of the touched
answer and to hear your objections to it. For even though the Lübeckers
justify their action by Imperial mandate 2), we have not failed to send
you a copy of our reply. Maj. mandate 2), they nevertheless continue to
charge the preacher with it, and also indicate how they would have had
to secretly imprison him for it, so that they now do not know how to
release him for obvious reasons. Therefore, our gracious request is that
you see the letter from Lübeck, and then let us know your concern as to
whether or not he should further be \[prescribed\] 3) and what should be
written about. For we will note your misgivings, which we will therefore
duly abide by and show ourselves to, and in your gracious opinion have
not wished to restrain you from doing so. Date Torgau, Saturday *trium
regum* \[6 Jan\] Anno 1526.

**No. 951 .**

Wittenberg. January 7, 1526.

**All Amsdorf.**

Luther asks him for assistance for a man, that he may help him to his
rights.

1\) \"with ichten\" == any.

2\) The Worms Mandate.

3\) Added by us.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 310; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 86 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 305. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 997.

Mercy and peace! This Georg Schmid has approached me with complaints,
which I am sending to you, my dear Amsdorf, so that you may see whether
what he says is true, then advise him and move the authorities. Thus he
swears, thus he begs. Then he is a person who inspires great confidence,
so that I, as much as one may believe a man, almost believe, although it
is unbelievable that your authorities exercise such great tyranny that
they should not only deny the right, but also an answer, and act wisely
by force alone. Yes, I have not been able to become free from man in any
other way than by writing to you and the authorities. He is ready to
stand in judgment, to let himself be accused and judged by anyone and to
receive what his deeds are worth. You do what Christ gives, so that he
may either find help if he is innocent, or be convicted if he is guilty,
and be at ease in the Lord. Wittenberg, January 7, 1526.

Martin Luther.

**No. 952 .**

(Wittenberg.) January 9, 1526.

**To Leonhard Beier.**

Luther speaks approvingly of Beier\'s intended marriage to a former nun.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Guden*. 214, fol. 20. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 68; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 86 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 306.

Grace and peace in Christ! It has indeed pleased and seemed good to me
that you married Gertrud full of Mylen 4) if the Lord granted it.
Therefore, go according to my advice and according to my wish. Wish for
it in the name of the Lord. I like this woman in many respects above her
other comrades. I write about this matter to her relatives, as you
asked. May the Lord grant your counsel, amen. Tuesday after Epiphany \[9
Jan.\] 1526.

4\) Compare No. 915.

**830**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 953. 954.

831

**No. 953 .**

Wittenberg. January 12, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession that the Elector grant the exiled King Christian of Denmark
a place of refuge in the Electorate.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, C, p. 252, No. 13. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 98 and in the Erlanger Briefw., Vol. V, p. 306.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! His Royal Majesty, full of Denmark, has written and sent me a
message, and, among other things, has advertised and requested that,
because His Royal Highness is evil-minded, to take up again, in order to
avoid the unchristian nature and charm, 1) which His Royal Highness is
reproached with in the Low Countries, I 2) would like to ask E. C. M.
for help. K. M. in the Low Countries, I 2) wanted to ask E. C. F. G. for
help, so that S. K. M. may be preserved here with little need, until God
sends it otherwise. Now I am of the hope that it should not be necessary
for me to stop, because it is before our eyes the great miraculous work
of Christ, which He has done in this man and has so changed and
converted him that we may recognize nothing else in him, but Christ
Himself as our guest, and who knows for what purpose God sends this,
that He pushes such a great prince into misery and gives us into the
fold. But I know what may be said here, of which I would perhaps, when I
come to Torgau, like to tell E. C. F. G. by oral speech through those
who are to present it, only that E. C. F. G. will not refuse the
wretched man a gracious answer or consolation. Hiemit GOtt befehlt. At
Wittenberg, Friday after Epiphany \[12 Jan.\] 1526.

E. C. F. G. subservient

Martin\'s Luther.

1\) The governor Margarethe wanted to make the king, who was in the
Netherlands at that time, papal again.

2\) \"I\" put by us instead of: \"itself\". That it must be read in this
way is clear from the following: The thread is: The king has \"let
advertise and desire that \... I wanted . . . help stop\" 2c.
Immediately following: \"Now I am of the hope, it may not of
[my]{.underline} stopping\" 2c.

**No. 95 4.**

Torgau. January 15, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector\'s negative reply to the previous letter.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. C,* p. 252, No.
13. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 99 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 307.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! When you now
wrote to us, with avoidance, what royal dignity of Denmark, our dear
lord and uncle, had sought from you by writing and advertising. Dignity
of Denmark, our dear lord and uncle, had sought from you by writing and
advertising, which their royal search and advertising basically extends
to the fact that their royal dignity is not to be found in Denmark.
W.\'s search and advertising basically extends to the fact that her
royal dignity is considering to make a choice from some of the things
you have written. We have heard all the contents that her Royal Highness
of the place may have her fair entertainment through us. When then the
said royal. W., as our lord and grandfather, is inclined to show me
friendly courtesy in this matter, but since it is not known to you in
any doubt what form your royal family took before, during the life of
our dear brother, Duke Frederick, of blessed and praiseworthy memory,
when your royal family had its being in Wittenberg for some time,3) was
impetuously approached by its creditors for payment, as well as at that
time your royal family had its being in Wittenberg for some time, it is
not known to you in any doubt what form your royal family took before,
during the life of our dear brother, Duke Frederick, of blessed and
praiseworthy memory. Therefore, we fear that if her K. W. would again
settle in Wittenberg and be in our country, the same search would be
left behind by her creditors as little as before, and it would probably
result in a burdensome access and injustice for us, also for our lands
and people. From all this, as you have to realize, it will be difficult
and painful for us to maintain our lord and uncle, the king, in this
place. If, however, their sovereigns will settle matters with their
creditors and those to whom they are indebted, and set them on their
way, so that they will be satisfied and we will be credibly informed of
it, we then want to take action against their sovereigns. We will then
kindly and unquestioningly show ourselves against their royal dignity at
the request and request that has now been made.

3\) Christian was in Wittenberg on October 10, 1523, and remained there
until November, for on Nov. 6 he wrote a letter from there to the
Elector. The debts he incurred will have been applied to his armaments
for the reconquest of Denmark.

**832**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 954 to 957.

833

We did not want to restrain you in your gracious opinion, because we are
inclined to be gracious to you. Date Torgau, Monday after Erhardi \[Jan.
15\] Anno 26.

**No. 955 .**

Torgau. January 17, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector demands from Luther and his colleagues an objection to the
marriage case of the pastor of Allstädt, Jodocus Kern.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 528.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 100 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 308.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! Between the
priest of Allstädt 1) and his wife, there have been misunderstandings
and discord due to their marital relationship, for which reason we have
ordered our castle to interrogate him on the same matter. He has now
sent us a record of the proceedings he has had and what each party has
brought forward, which we are sending to you in safekeeping together
with a document that the said priest at Allstädt has now sent to us. And
since this transaction must be proven and acted upon by divine
Scripture, and thus well worthy of good consideration, it is our
gracious request that you, along with other scribes, diligently survey
and move what will be necessary to report to the pastor and his wife,
and send us the same of your and the others\' concerns, which you will
draw to this end, along with the enclosed writings, so that we may
continue to give our minds to our treasurer at Allstädt.

1\) In Nuremberg in 1524, Jodocus Kern had married Ursula Tepler \*), a
nun who had left the Engelthal monastery, but who did not accompany him
to Saxony, but wanted to follow him when he found a place to live. When
he was gone, however, letters from her former prioress aroused her
conscience, so that she only followed her husband at the urging of her
relatives when he became Münzer\'s successor in Allstädt. The relatives
advised him to keep her firm so that she would not disgrace the word of
God. Kern seems to have followed this advice, because he forced her to
eat meat on Char Friday 2c. Finally she escaped to Mansfeld. After
several futile attempts to persuade her to return, the Schösser at
Allstädt received orders to interrogate her, and both spouses had given
him their answers on January 11. She did not listen to the admonition to
return to her husband.

\*) Thus Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 26. The Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p.
87, note 1: \"Tagler\".

have to report. For we have written to him to inform the priest and his
wife that they are to stand still with the matter until further notice
from us, which is to be given to them 2) shortly. We do not want to
leave this unopened in your gracious opinion, and do us the favor of
recognizing this with grace. Date Torgau, Wednesday Antonii \[Jan. 17\]
Anno 26.

**No. 956 .**

(Wittenberg.) January 20, 1526.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 514, no. 99.

**No. 95 7.**

(Wittenberg.) January 25, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther recommends Balthasar Ritter, who had left the monastery of
Dobrilugk, as the future pastor of Wahrenbrück.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji,* fol. 40b. A. 2. 1526.
28. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 101 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 311.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The people of Wartinbrug 3) E. C. F. G. have written for a
preacher, because the present one is not competent to preach the Gospel.
Since the parish is in fief to the Abbot of Doberlech4) and he himself
is also inclined to appoint this Baltzer Ritter, letter-writer from the
same monastery, who is willing to leave the monastery for such a reason,
I think it would be a good idea not to refuse, but rather to appoint a
new preacher.

2\) \"of them\" is a conjecture of the Erl. Exchange of Letters.
Burkhardt: \"darinen\".

3\) Burkhardt has the following note on this: \"The pastor Köler and the
castle of Liebenwerda had examined the pastors of Wahreubrück and
Friedersdorf, and found the former unfit, since he was very unclear in
his sermons and did not want to administer the sacrament under either
form, because, as he claimed, it had not been \'recognized\' so far. The
examiners, however, did not enforce Luther\'s will; the congregation had
already accepted Jakob Krüger as a clergyman before the purchase of the
Elector\'s order.\" - That \"Wartinbrug\" and \"Wartinburg\" in the text
are not to be understood as \"Wartenburg\", which is only one and a half
German miles away from Wittenberg, is shown not only by the feudal
affiliation of the parish to the monastery of Dobrilugk, but also by the
choice of the examiners from Liebenwerda.

4\) This is Dobrilugk, in Lower Lusatia, where there was a Cistercian
monastery.

**834**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 957 to 960.

835

1\) Therefore, my humble request to E. C. F. G. is that you allow those
at Wartinburg to accept this man, so that they may come to the parish
with good grace. E. C. F. G. will know how to keep to this. Hiemit GOtt
befohlen, Amen. Thursday St. Paul\'s \[Conversion\] \[Jan. 25\] 1526. E.
C. F. G.

subthird

Martinus Luther.

**No. 95 8.**

(Wittenberg.) January 25, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther gives the concern he requested on January 17 about the marriage
case of the pastor at Allstädt, Jodocus Kern.

The original is in the Archives at Weimar, *Reg, O*, p. 528. Printed in
Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 26; in Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 313 and
(erroneously) in the Protestantische Kirchenzeitung, 1857, column 102,
no. 5.

To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Johans, Duke of
Saxony and Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my
most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have humbly received and overlooked all the correspondence sent
to E. C. F. G. concerning the pastor of Allstädt and his wife. And
because E. C. F. G. desires our concern in this matter, we consider it
best to have the woman brought to her friends in Nuremberg and there to
try her for a while to see if the devil will give way to God\'s good
admonition, since it is to be feared that she will remain with the
people where she is now, and does not allow herself to be spoken or
written about in any way, because there she has ears, eyes and all
senses and hearts full of contradiction without interruption, and in
addition is a woman who, through the natural nature of female weakness,
also has the temptation of both the devil and men against her, so that
great wonder and joy are the result.

1\) Burkhardt: \"kome\".

That should be there, that it should stand, and probably a strong man of
spirit would waver in such a case. But if they cannot persuade their
friends, what can be done? So let them go and live according to their
will, and then let the priest be free, as if she had died, to do as he
pleases. Whether or not the loose spirit causes a great deal of trouble
through this deal, one has to command God, who will probably make
something good out of it. The Gospel will not and cannot be without
offense, but woe to him through whom such offense comes, Matth. 18. We
have informed E. C. F. G. of this matter humbly. Hiemit GOtt befohlen,
Amen. Thursday St. Paul \[Jan. 25\] 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient Martinus Luther.

**No. 959 .**

Zwynarde. January 28, 1526.

**King Christian II of Denmark to Luther.**

(Regest.)

The king reports to Luthern the departure of his wife with a detailed
description of the sufferings and circumstances that preceded her death.

Printed in *Spalatini annales ap. Mencken*, II, 652 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. V, p. 313 ff.

**No. 960 .**

Wittenberg. February 2, 1526.

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt.**

Answer to a letter of recommendation received, and from Luther\'s
writing: \"Deutsche Messt und Ordnung Gottesdiensts.\"

From the original in the royal library in Munich in De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 88 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 317 f.

To Justus Menius, evangelist of the people of Erfurt, his brother in
Christ.

Mercy and peace! When he comes whom you have recommended, I will not
lack anything, my dear Justus, if I can only be of use. I wonder,
however, how it happened that the booklet about the nature of our
ceremonies 2) has not yet been published.

2\) *ceremonialis nostrae farinae*, that is the \"Deutsche Messt\" 2c.,
St. Louis edition, vol. X, 226.

**836** Letters from the year

1526\. no. 960. 961. 837

which has been wandering around for more than a month since its
publication, in which the last melody of the Epistles and Gospels 1) is
more pleasing to me, although ours do not use it; but I would like you
and others to use it. Fare well and pray for me. Wittenberg, on the day
of the Purification \[of Mary\] \[Feb. 2\] 1526. Mart. Luther.

Efforts will be made that \"the council and master four\" 2) will be
written.

**No. 9 61.**

Wittenberg. February 9, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

About the cancellation of the papal ceremonies in the Altenburg
monastery.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p. 339; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XIX, p.553; in Walch, vol. XXI, 145; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 88 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 367.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! In response to E. C. F. G.\'s letter concerning the ceremonies of
the convent at Altenburg, I humbly express my concern. First of all, I
am pleased with the way the preachers in Altenburg have expressed their
concerns. However, to strengthen E. C. F. G.\'s conscience in the matter
and to attack the idolater more gently, I hereby offer this addition to
E. C. F. G.: namely, that E. C. F. G. lets himself be heard that E. C.
F. G.\'s conscience hardly wanted to be, and that E. C. F. G.\'s
conscience should not be, and that E. C. F. G.\'s conscience should not
be. conscience would hardly want to be, and quite unfit before God, to
allow such their being any longer; as it is then also all the more true;
for which reason I graciously suggest that they either abstain
completely, or if not, that they keep their doings secretly without
annoyance.

Such conscience have E. C. F. G. two reasons. The first, because the
C.F.G. is certainly informed by God\'s Word that such blasphemous
worship is unlawful and condemnable, and yet, as a secular authority,
must protect it, and, having hitherto been provided with interest and
goods, must manage it, would finally be in front of

1\) St. Louiser edition l. c. 251 ff.

2\) \"Meister vier\" are probably the quarters and craftsmen.
Seidemann-De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 558, note 10.

God will also bring all her abominations home to E. C. F. G.\'s
conscience and weigh them down, as he will provide money, goods,
protection and all works of approval for such abominations. And if such
an abomination could or would go without C.C.F.G. protection and
preservation, it would be excused and would have to let it go; but since
it cannot remain without C.C.F.G. protection and preservation of the
place, C.C.F.G. conscience would always have to be involved and guilty,
as it could prevent it, and does not. The other reason is that a secular
ruler is not to tolerate that his subjects are led into disunity and
discord by obnoxious preachers, from which there would ultimately be a
fear of riot and disorder, but in one place there should also be the
same preaching. For this reason, the Nuremberg monks have stopped their
monks and closed the monasteries.

But whether they will plead their consciences, that shall not help them;
for they are first required to prove their consciences and presumptions
with the Scriptures, or to be instructed. For this reason they have
refused, and have publicly declared that they do not wish to engage in
scriptural disputation, but will remain in their established custom, as
proven by the Christian church. Thus they give sufficient testimony
against themselves that they fabricate such consciences and only pretend
to do so. For a right conscience does and desires nothing better than
that it may hear the teaching of the Scriptures and dispute its matters
with the Scriptures. But they willfully despise the Scriptures;
therefore it would be right for them to be silenced or not to suffer,
for the same reason, as those who have nothing good in mind, because
they shun the light and will not wait for the Scriptures.

But for more glimpses, E. C. F. G. may offer them once again, yes, even
demand with seriousness, that they try themselves with the preachers at
Altenburg in the Scriptures, and act with Scripture against Scripture.
If they can stand with the Scriptures, then so be it; if not, then,
according to the Nuremberg example, they are freshly commanded to be
silent and to refrain, and thus the same sermon and manner will be
carried out at Altenburg.

But lest they say that mau forces them to believe, that is not the
opinion; son

**838**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 961. 962. 963.

839

They are only left with the public annoyance that they themselves cannot
maintain, and must confess that it is not founded in Scripture, and yet
they want to keep it, wantonly to ruin other souls and to harm country
and people, also to shame and ridicule God and His Gospel. They let them
be content that they are left with body and soul, with protection and
honor in the country, and that they may worship and serve in their
chambers whom they want and as many gods as they want; publicly, they
should not blaspheme the right God and deceive the people, because they
prove from the Scriptures that they have the right and justification to
do so.

This is what E. C. F.. G. wanted to give an answer to her request, put
all this in E. C. F. G.\'s favor and judgment. Hereby commanded by God,
Amen. At Wittenberg, Friday after Dorothea \[9 Feb.\] 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 9 62.**

(Wittenberg.) February 9, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Melanchthon\'s salary.

The original is in the Archives at Weimar, *Reg. O,* p. 143. Printed in
the Leipzig Supplement, p. 43; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 90; in Walch,
vol. XXI, 144 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 369.

To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke John, Elector of Saxony. For his
churfürstl. Gn. himself.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! E. C. F. G. has ordered in the regulations of the university to
give M. Philippsen 200 fl. per year. Now the man complains about taking
this, for the reason that, because he is not able to read the Scriptures
so rigidly and daily, he would not like to take it with a good
conscience, and thinks that E. C. F. G. demands such strict reading from
him, so my saying and interpreting does not help him at all: for this
reason, my humble request is that E. C. F. G. would purify and interpret
her mind toward him herself, rather than that she be satisfied that he
is reading the theology.

He should help him with the disputation and reading, as was done before,
but as much as he can, even if it is only once a week, or as much as he
can. For even if E. C. F. G. gave him such pay for a year or two, he
would be well worth it, since he had previously read the Scriptures for
two years without pay, with great labor and fruit, and perhaps also
partly spoiled himself with it. I would like to bring the Scriptures
back here in the Schwang, because we are looking for understanding of
the Scriptures in all places. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Friday after
\[9 Feb.\] 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 9 63.**

Wittenberg. February 12, 1526.

**To Eberhard Brisger in Altenburg.**

From its economic and domestic affairs.

Handwritten at Wolfenbüttel in *Cod. Gud*. 2l4, fol. 62. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 312; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 91 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 319. German in Walch, vol. XXl, 1000.

To Magister Eberhard Brisger, pastor at Altenburg.

Grace and peace! What I have done in your matter, even before you asked
me, with Nicolaus Demuth, my dear Eberhard, you will recognize from this
letter of his. I am overwhelmed with expenses and financial
expenditures, otherwise I would have laid out for you in the meantime.
But I am very surprised that you have been so involved in debts; but you
are right to acknowledge that it is a temptation from God. Now all that
is left is for you to bear this wisely and await the end of a happy
outcome, which you do not see, nor does it behoove you to see. He will
not leave thee, nor let a bird die of hunger. That your salary should be
reduced and your wood denied is a thing worthy of the despisers of the
word, for so they have deserved that their perishable possessions should
not serve the word.

But that of your wife moves me more, but one must also suffer this
danger and ask God to avert what is feared. Certainly can not deny

**840**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 963. 964. 965.

841

that there is danger if the fruit is not felt; but if she has felt it at
first from time to time,1) one may still have good hope, because (as I
hear) the fruit tends to rest for a while; unless, for instance, your
wife does not understand what it is to feel the fruit, about which one
must investigate. Greetings to you and your chain, mine, whose fruit has
been felt for about six weeks, thanks be to God and praise. We wish and
pray the same for you and yours, and may Christ grant that we may see
the children with joy, amen. Farewell and pray for me. Greetings to
Spalatin in the Lord. Wittenberg, Monday of Carnival Week
(*Bacchanaliorum*) \[February 12\] 1526.

Martin Luther, v.

**No. 964.**

Torgau. February 13, 1526.

Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

The Elector\'s gracious answer to Luther\'s two letters of February 9.

The original is in the archives at Weimar, Reg. O, p. 124. 22. 15 a.
Printed in Burkhardt, p. 102 and rm Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 320.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We have heard
your letter and concerns about what is to be reported to the Chapter at
Altenburg concerning the ceremonies, singing and the reading of the
Mass, and have graciously noted this from you; accordingly, God willing,
we want to continue to show ourselves Christian and unquestioning in
these matters. When you also wrote to us on a note on behalf of Philip
Melanchthon, we read it out, and our minds were not, as they are not,
that Philip should be bound to read daily against the pay in the
Scriptures, as he perhaps thinks, for we have ordered him the same pay
more out of grace than that we should bind him to the work that is
somewhat infallible to him on account of his body, as we also write to
him in this regard. 2) We do not want to restrain you in your gracious
opinion, because we are inclined to be gracious to you. Date Torgau, on
Tuesday after Estomihi \[February 13\] Anno Domini 1526.

1\) Instead of *sensisti, sensit* or *senserit* will be read. 2) This
letter is missing.

**No. 965.**

(Wittenberg.) February 18, 1526.

To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.

On the writings published against Zwingli and Oekolampad and the death
of Queen Elizabeth of Denmark.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. and in *Cod. Jen*. B 24, fol. 161.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 311; in Unsch. Nachr. 1721, 873 (with
the wrong year 1529); in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 92 and in Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol. V, p. 321. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 997f.

To Johann Agricola, the extremely faithful educator of the youth in
Eisleben, the servant of Christ, his extremely dear \[friend\] in the
Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Again, I have nothing to write, my dear
Agricola, but I write to greet you and your wife, because what you asked
for in your last letter, I believe, has become known to you in the
meantime, namely that of the Strasbourg heretics; God convert them. For
against Oecolampad and Zwingli, excellent things have been written by
the very learned men of Swabia 3) (this book is published here anew),
moreover, Billicanus has also written briefly (whose book I send here),
but those have written extensively and learnedly. I hope that theirs
will finally be hopeless, which they have so confidently praised so far.
This one heresy now has five sects,4) all of which have the same
opinion, but with different grounds of proof; therefore they will soon
perish.

That royal woman and in truth a queen, Elizabeth, the wife of the king
of the Danes, departed from life, as the king himself wrote to me, but
she departed in a great faith, having received the Lord\'s Supper
according to the right custom of Christ, and could not be persuaded,
though she was strongly challenged by the great ones, that she should
return to the faith of the pope,

3\) The so-called Syngramma Suevicum, St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 520,
no. 14.

4\) Namely Carlstadt, Zwingli, Oecolampad, Krautwald and Schwenkfeld,
and Petrus Florus in Cologne. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, annex, no.
128.

**842** Letters from 1526. no. 965. 966. 967. **843**

namely Christ also wanted to bring a queen to heaven once. I commend the
teacher of the high children to you, and greet your Elsa and all of
ours. My chain also greets you with yours and often remembers you with
reverence. Farewell forever. February 18, 1526.

Martin Luther.

**No. 966.**

(Wittenberg.) February 21, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks for support for the parfüßermönche in Wittenberg.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* p. 108. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 43; in Walch, vol. XXI, 144; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 93 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 370.

> Meim gnädigsten Herr, Herzog Johanns, Churfürsten 2c. To Sr. C. F. G.
> himself.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Here the poor brothers are complaining about the Barefoot, as E.
C. F. G. will hear from their petition. Now it is only right that others
should enjoy the monastery, as some already have good parts of it, so
that they are not pushed into misery in their old age, which would bring
E. C. F. G. great displeasure and calumny along with all of us and the
Gospel. I know very well that E. C. F. G.\'s mind is not like that, but
the poor people cannot be cared for like that,^1)^ so they are not cared
for like it would be Christian and fair that E. C. F. G. would be
reported sufficiently. Please, therefore, let E. C. F. G. order the poor
people from the monastery property to be provided for as long as it
lasts; who knows how long they will live? And perhaps among them there
might be one who would be the judge of us all on the last day. Hereby
commanded by God, Amen. Wednesday after Invocavit \[February 21\] 1526.
Martinus Luther.

1\) In the original \"furkommen\", which here is probably as much as:
\"to get away\". Dietz does not have this meaning.

**No. 96 7.**

(Wittenberg.) (February 25?) 2) 1526.

**To Amsdorf.**

Luther reports that he has not yet been able to find a position for Joh.
Honhof. About the baptism of Carlstadt\'s second son. About the writings
against Zwingli and Oekolampad.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 311 d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 94
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 323. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 999.

Grace and peace in the Lord! There was no opportunity, my dear Amsdorf,
to help this poor Johann Honhof to a position. For there are many here,
so that if one could measure according to the number of the Scriptures,
one could turn the gospel around and say \[Matth. 9, 37.\]: There are
many workers, but the harvest is small. But the miserable and needy
belly makes such people much, in the spirit nevertheless remain few
workers. Yesterday we baptized a son to Carlstadt, or rather we
rebaptized the baptism. 3) Godparents are Jonas, Philippus, my Käthe; I
have been a guest with others in a hurry. This happened in Segren on the
other side of the Elbe, where Carlstadt is located. Who would have
thought in the previous year that it could happen that those who called
baptism a dog\'s bath should now ask for it even from their enemies!
Whether 4) they desire this from the heart or sincerely must be left to
God, but these are great miracles when one sees how the works of God run
counter to the works of men. Farewell and pray for us. On the day of the
bride of Bruno 5) 1526.

Two books against Zwingli and Oekolampad are published by us, one of the

2\) This date is Seidemann\'s assumption in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 453.

3\) D. Caspar Glatz wrote to Spalatin that Carlstadt\'s wife, after she
had given birth to their second son in Orlamünde while Carlstadt was
away (i.e. after October 1524), refused to perform the baptism and gave
him the name Andreas herself.

4\) Instead of *Sive* we have assumed *Si.*

5\) The Erl. Briefw. remarks: \"*Bruno* is probably Bruno Brauer, the
later pastor at Dobien near Wittenberg,\" and Seidemann-De Wette, vol.
VI, p. 453, note 3: \"Was Bruno\'s first wife called Walpurg?\" His
determination of the time is based on this. \"Walburg\" (see St. Louiser
Ausg., vol. XV, 127) is February 25.

**844** Letters from the year 1526. no. 967. 968. 969. 845

Theobald Billican, the other of the 14 ministers of the Word in Swabia,
who \[books\] are very learned and exceedingly loud, and guard the right
faith in the Sacrament excellently; you will see them with joy if you
have not seen them yet.

**No. 96 8.**

Wittenberg. March 9, 1526.

**To Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the miller Christoph Mocha zu Segren.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108. 41. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 44; in Walch, vol. XXI, 148? in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 95 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 371.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my
> most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I humbly inform E. C. F. G. that the good, poor man, Christophel
Mocha, of Segrehn, has recently been noticeably damaged by E. C. F.
G.\'s order. The fault lies with the commanders, who neglected to let
the good man come neither to interrogation nor to evidence, but let the
day of assistance go by postponing the inspection of the mill. Now he
has good churfürstl. Now he has a good fief over the same mill, which I
have seen and want to prove with the whole village that he is being
wronged; therefore my humble request is for him, as he has asked me,
because he is a poor man, has many children and little, that E. C. F. G.
wants to help others. F. G. want to give orders to others, who could
wait for it and would be suitable, as the captain of Heimchen and
possibly a nobleman, that they inspect and recognize it, so that the
good man does not suffer such damage and violence to further ruin. E. C.
F. G. has also promised to build him several logs of wood, but it has
not been done, and it will be delayed until the locksmith does not want
to know anything about it.

E. C. F. G. will know how to graciously comply with this. Hiemit GOtt
befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Friday after Oculi \[March 9\] 1526.

> E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 969 .**

Torgau. March 16, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Answer, how the complaint of Luther about the reprinting of his books
fei. - The letter of Luther in this matter is missing.

The concept is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. N,* fol. 109. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 103 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 324.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We have received
your letter, in which you inform us that the foreign printers are to the
detriment of those in Wittenberg, and that they should print your books
with such carelessness that you yourselves do not know them, with
further content and your request. Now we would be inclined to grant your
request by sending out notices to several places, also to the printers
at Wittenberg, in the same way as the Pope, Imperial Maj. and Venetian
printers. Maj. and the Venetians are wont to do to their printers,
freedom and pardon should be granted. We fear, however, that if we were
to do so,^1)^ it would introduce an inaccuracy, but we think that it
should be so, if something special new were to be printed by you in
Wittenberg, that we would be notified of it beforehand; so we are
graciously inclined to give the printers a special pardon for this, in
which a named time is to be expressed, that within the same time no one
is to reprint the same materials (marteri) in our princedoms. Similarly,
we will gladly encourage others outside of our country, so that this may
remain with their printers as much as possible. If you now think that
the printers, even you yourselves, are sufficient for this, we will
graciously respond to your further request. In our gracious opinion, we
do not want to hold you to this. Date Torgau, on the 16th day of March,
Anno Domini 26.

1\) \"thäten\" (in the concept perhaps: \"teten\") put by us instead of:
\"liten\" in Burkhardt and \"litten\" in Erl. Briefw.

**846**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 970. 971. 972.

847

**No. 9 70.**

Königsberg. (Around March 24) 1526. 1)

**Duke Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.**

(Regest.)

The duke, who \"by the help of God and Luther has come to the light of
true knowledge,\" invites him to his wedding, scheduled for June 24 (it
did not take place until July 1), to Elisabeth, the eldest daughter of
King Frederick I of Denmark.

Printed in the manuscript: \"Das erste Fürstliche Ehliche Beylager,
Welches Ihre Fürstl. Serene Albrecht Marggraff zu Brandenburg, first
Duke in Prussia glorious commemoration held here in Königsberg, and to
which he among other distinguished gentlemen and friends also especially
Mr. D. Martinum Lutherum graciously invited. Königsberg 1646.\" 1 sheet
in quarto; in Bock, Grundriß von dem merkwürdigen Leben Herrn Albrecht
d. ä. von Preußen, Königsberg 1745, p. 206; in Tschackert in Zeitschrift
für Kirchengeschichte, XI, 281 and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. V, p. 325.

**No. 9 71.**

(Torgau.) (Around March 27, 1526.)

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Credentials for D. Hieronymus Schürf and Melanchthon for the negotiation
with Luther about the Mainz Rathschlag.

According to the original concept in the archives at Weimar printed by
Burkhardt, p. 104 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 327.

Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! We have ordered the Reverend
Hieronymo Schürf, Doctori, and Philippo Melanchtoni, our councillor and
dear faithful, to talk to you about our opinions. We therefore request
that you give them credence in what they will tell you, and since the
matter, 2) the booklet, which is based on the advice of the clergy, 3)
is understood, and you well know how

1\) Other invitations to this wedding went out on March 23 and 24; this
one will have happened at the same time.

2\) We put the comma after \"Sach\".

3\) At the beginning of December 1525, deputies of all suffragans had
gathered at Mainz, summoned by the cathedral chapter, and decided to
proclaim the emperor by a special legation against Lutheranism. A copy
of these resolutions came into the hands of Count Albrecht of Mansfeld,
who communicated them to the Electoral Court. At the meeting of
Landgrave Philip with the Elector at Gotha on February 27, this Mainz
advice and the possible countermeasures to be taken were also discussed,
and it was decided to communicate the same to Luther so that he would
\"denounce the Capitel unchristian and

Therefore, we request that you let yourselves be heard with answers
against them, so that it may be unobjectionable to us and you, as well
as to our cousin, Duke Jörgen, to no unfriendly will. You do our
pleasing opinion. Date 2c.

**No. 9 72.**

Wittenberg. March 27, 1526.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

On economic and other matters. Luther refuses to draft a general order
of worship.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe No. 25
(with Hausmann\'s inscription: *De vasculo vitreo, de ordinario* (of the
little glass vessel; of the \"order\"). Handwritten at Zerbst in the
*Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol. 19. Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 312
d; by De Wette; vol. Ill, p. 96 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 328.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1001.

> To Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the city of Zwickau, his superior
> in Christo.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I thank you for the little vessel, my dear
Nicolaus, and I did not expect that it would be made with so much work
and effort, namely a wicker one would have been sufficient. But now you
have made it all too dear and valuable to my Käthe, as women are wont to
be. I admire the minerals very much, but I don\'t want to deprive you of
them. You have people to whom you can give if something is left over, so
that you don\'t lose it to my curiosity.

I have given this brother a carefully written letter to the prince; I
hope it will be useful to him.

You want me to make a general order of ceremonies, but how can I do that
with so much business? Would that

self-servingly noble pranks\". Luther set about publishing the
Rathschlag with a preface and epilogue. The beginning of the text had
already been printed when the Elector, fearing a new flare-up of Duke
George, prevented further printing. Nevertheless, Duke George received a
copy, and a heated correspondence ensued that lasted into November.
Luther\'s writing, insofar as it still exists, can be found in the St.
Louis edition, Vol. XVI, 339 ff, No. 826.

**848**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 972 to 976.

**849**

God, that you would design a form and send it to me, so that you too
would do something in this matter, according to the gift of God given to
you. Farewell, my dearest brother. My rib greets you. Wittenberg,
Tuesday after Palmarum \[March 27\] 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 9 73.**

Wittenberg. March 27, 1526.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2641, annex, no. 128.

**No. 9 74.**

(Wittenberg.) (After March 27, 1526.)

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther offers to stop the printing of the Mainz Rathschlag.

The original is in the Archives at Weimar, X, p. 71. 6.18. 6. Printed in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 99 and in the Erlanger Ausg. vol. 53, p. 372.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke John, Elector of Saxony. To S. C. F. G.
> himself Handelt.

Grace and peace! Most gracious sir, I had intended not to think about
Duke Georgen any further, because his thought is in \[the\] next printed
quatern of the council. ^1)^ And if it would please E. C. F. G. to
refrain and not to express it fully, I would be satisfied, and allow
myself some time. For however C.C.F.G. wishes to proceed or pay with it,
it shall be done. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 9 75.**

Wittenberg. April 8, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Repeated intercession for the Miller Christoph Mocha to Segren.

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 359, note 3 - From this passage it
is evident that the entire Rathschlag, as far as it has been printed at
all, is included there.

The original is in *Cod. Gothan*. (mutilated). Printed by De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 304 (placed in the year 1528 because he did not decipher the
year); in the Erl. Edition, vol. 53, p. 444 (according to De Wette) and
in Burkhardt, p. 105. - The words in square brackets are added by
Burkhardt, those in round brackets by us.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have previously written to E. C. F. G. also for Christophel
\[Mocha zu Segrehn\] 2) and requested that E. C. F. G. would graciously
have his matter examined for the mill. Now he comes and asks for more
(and asks) for shells; has gone, how he can do it all better orally. He
is also promised to build some wood beforehand. But because it is in
arrears, the locksmith does not want to know anything about it.
Therefore, I ask for him humbly. He is a poor man and has a house full
of fine, pious children. E. C. F. G. would graciously show himself
against him. Hiemit GOtt besohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Sunday after
Easter \[April 8\] 1526.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 9 76.**

(Wittenberg.) April 14, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

About the sending of two preachers, one to Gera, the other to Arnstadt.
Intercession for a poor person.

From the Weimar Archive in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 46; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 100 and in the Erlangen Edition, vol. 53, p. 373.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke Johann, Elector. To Sr. C. F. G.
> himself.

Grace and peace. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious Lord! E. C.
F. G. has written to me for two preachers, one to be assigned to Gera,
the other to Arnstadt, so I have asked around, and two are available.
Now I am reported that the Lord

2\) Here De Wette shows a gap, while Burkhardt has inserted these words
in round brackets. The Erl. Briefw. does not indicate a gap.

**850** Letters from the year 1526. No. 976 to 979. **851**

1\) refuse, and have not requested E. C. F. G. to appoint preachers,
because they alone should have the right, and I also do not know whether
they have requested it, and how E. C. F. G. has the power. I say this
because I would like to present the preachers in such a way that there
would not be any displeasure afterwards; however, E. C. F. G. will know
how to dispose of all this.

There is also, most gracious Lord, here a supplication from a poor
person whom I cannot help with as much effort as I have had; for this
reason, I humbly ask E. C. F. G. to promote his cause with those at
Jessen with a small letter. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Saturday after
Quasimodogeniti \[April 14\] 1526.

E. C. F. G. most subservient Martinus Luther.

**No. 9 77.**

Wittenberg. April 14, 1526.

**To Valentin Krautwald in Liegnitz.**

Luther\'s verdict on a paper sent to him by Krautwald on the Lord\'s
Supper.

Handwritten in Breslau, in Rhediger\'s collection of letters, VII, no.
6. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 71; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 122 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 337.

Martin Luther to Valentin Krautwald (*Cratoaldo*).

Grace and peace in the Lord! As you wished, we have read your booklet,
my dear Valentine, where you teach in other words, namely: in image and
in truth, a thing that is quite well known in all streets. For who does
not know that there is a twofold food, of the body and of the soul? What
is the need to deal with these things in so many words and so anxiously?
But what should be proved and what I had asked for, you completely
ignore. But I had asked for this - that, as the passage John 6 is clear,
that he speaks of a twofold meal, so also you would like to prove that
Christ in the evening

1\) The ruler in Gera was Heinrich der Beharrliche von Reuß; in Arnstadt
Günther XXXIX von Schwarzburg, both churfürstliche vassals, but fierce
opponents of the Reformation.

I see your words and the forcible application of Christ\'s words to what
is written in John 6. I see your words and the forcible application of
Christ\'s words to what John 6 says; but that application or
*assimilation* (*assimulatio*) is not proven, nor can it ever be proven
from the words of the Lord\'s Supper. Therefore I cannot admit yours. I
therefore still beg you, if my request can find any place, to desist
from this opinion, which already corrupts more than enough souls, lest
you also become guilty and increase the corruption in the church; but if
you are given over to your judgment,\' that you may do harm, do harm as
much as Christ permits. I remain of the opinion that the words are to be
understood in a simple way. You may see, I am innocent of your blood and
of those whom you corrupt and will corrupt. Be well and return to a
sound mind, or stop calling us brethren or participating in any naming
of Christ. We do not want to agree with your teachings, nor can we.
Wittenberg, on the day of Tiburtius 2) \[, Valerianus and Maximus\]
\[April 14\] 1526.

**No. 9 78.**

Wittenberg. April 14, 1526.

**To Caspar von Schwenkfeld.**

Similar content as the previous letter.

Handwritten at Breslau in Rhediger\'s collection of letters, VII, no. 7.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 45; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 123,
with the wrong date: \"August 11\" and likewise in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 53, p. 383.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1660, no. 33.

**No. 9 79.**

(Wittenberg.) April 14, 1526.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Luther asks him to have the privileges promised to the printers in
Wittenberg made out and sent to them, for the chancery costs he says
good.

2\) It is not *this Tiburtii et Susannae,* II August, as De Wette has
incorrectly reduced it. The resolution given by us after the Erl.
Briefw. is also confirmed (except by the following letter) by
Bugenhagen\'s letter to Krautwald and Schwenkfeld of April 13, in Vogt,
Bugeichagens Briefwechsel, No. 19.

**852** Letters from 1526. no. 979. 980. 981. **853**

From the autograph (erroneous, in our opinion) in the Leipzig
Supplement, p. 45; in Walch, vol. XXI, 154 ; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
124 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 383. In the latter two with
the wrong date: \"August 11\".

> To the respectable, highly esteemed Mr. Gregor. Brück, the right
> Doctor and churfürstlichem to Saxony Chancellor, my favorable master
> and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Respectable, dear Lord Chancellor! Our
printers are sending you 1) a messenger to fetch the freedom promised to
them, of which M. Philipps will also speak to you; therefore, it is my
diligent request that you 2) help them to produce and send the same, but
indicate what is to be given to the chancellery for this purpose,^3)^
\[it\] shall be sent to you without delay. There I sit down, and if that
is not enough, M. Philipps shall also sit down for it. Hiemit GOtt
befohlen, Amen. Saturday *Tiburtii* \[April 14\] 1526.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 9 80.**

(Wittenberg.) April 18, 1526.

**To Johann Agricola.**

Luther recommends the Wendalin Faber as a teacher at a German school to
be established. From the vessel received from Zwickau.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenberger*. Printed after the Schmid collection
at Helmstädt in Schütze, vol. II, p. 69 and in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
103; after the *Cod*. *Ratzenb*. in the Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 339. We
have translated according to De Wette.

> The; Mr. Johann Agricola, the instructor of the youth \"at Eisleben,
> his brother in the HErrn.

Grace and peace! Lest so many and so great things come, so much and so
great you fear them, my dear Agricola, once again grace and peace. By
the way, according to our testimony, Wendalin 4) is also worthy of being
revered, not only cherished and cared for, because of his loyalty. He is

1\) \"you\" put by us instead of: \"him\".

2\) \"them\" put by us instead of: \"him\".

3\) Ads\" put by us instead of: \"Anzeigers\".

4\) Wendalin Faber, recommended here as a teacher of the elementary
school in Eisleben and soon accepted, later became the castle preacher
of Count Gebhard von Mansfeld in Seeburg and as such signed the
Schmalkaldic Articles. In the antinomian controversy he was Agricola\'s
opponent. He delivered this letter.

But there, so that, if there is any hope of establishing a German
school, he may take upon himself the work and the burden of teaching the
children, as it is said that one has heard something from you that such
a salary can be procured from the grass or from the authorities. You
will therefore do what you can, and may you not desist from assisting
the man who, according to my judgment, is holy in Christ. So much from
him. That little vessel of Zwickau, oh how much and how much it has
changed from what you saw, 5) when you saw it. But of this and the
goblet given to me by Meinhard 6) another time. For I did not want that
today and in such a short letter these wonderful things are treated.
Fare well with Elsa and with her 7) grapes in the Lord. On April 18,
1526, your Martin Luther.

**No. 981 .**

(Wittenberg.) April 20, 1526.

**To Johann Rühel.**

About a gift made to Luther\'s wife, which is unpleasant to Luther.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 271; in the Altenburger,
vol. Ill, p. 517; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 550; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 149; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 103 and in the Erl. Edition, vol.
53, p.375.

Grace. Dear Doctor and Brother-in-Law! That you have given to my
daughter here in Wittenberg,^8)^ I have been murdering inside for a long
time.

5\) What kind of vessel it might have been, we are not able to guess. In
No. 972, Hausmann has described it in his inscription as a \"glass
one\", for which a wickerwork, as Luther writes, would have been
sufficient; in the letter to Agricola of May 11, it is called a
\"tin-glass one\". But it was so beautiful that Luther\'s wife had taken
it so much to her heart that, when Luther wanted to send it as a gift to
Agricola, she got rid of it with the help of Jonas and Bugenhagen. In
No. 999 it is called \"a glass\" (*vitrum*).

6\) Christoffel Meinhard, a citizen of Eisleben who had formerly been a
follower of Münzer.

7\) Here we have assumed with the Erl. Briefw. *suis* instead of *tuis*
assumed.

8\) The Archbishop of Mainz, as reported in the Tischreden, Cap. 31, ?
2, (St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 975), the Archbishop of Main had sent
20 gold florins to Luther\'s wife through a doctor in 1525. Kolde,
\"Martin Luther\", vol. II, p. 205 refers our letter to it and the Erl.
Briefw. assumes this. But this seems very doubtful to us, not only
because of the year 1525 (which might be wrong), but mainly because of
what Luther says here about the \"Firmelung\" and the \"firmelen\",
which can hardly go to the Cardinal of Mainz.

**854** Letters from the year 1526. No. 981 to 985. **855**

I could not do otherwise, you would have taken it away again, as I
asked. But since the man causes such trouble through the confirmation, I
was willing to send it all back to you, and I have not yet decided to
keep it. For I should be guilty of other people\'s sins if I took it
from him who so publicly mocks Christian doctrine. And I tell you that I
am moved by such a thing, and that I almost leave the Psalter and Psalms
behind. But it was not necessary to \"confirm\", it would have been done
by someone else. Dear Lord, let us not grumble here. If we are serious
about God\'s word, then it does not suffer from jiggery-pokery. The
psalms are not yet finished, for I have too much to do. It is not
speaking and doing one thing. Your Psalterlin shall become yours. Hiemit
GOtt befohlen, am 20. April 1526. Martinus Luther, Schrift D.

**No. 9 82.**

Torgau. April 21, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

(Regest.)

The Elector informs Luther that Erasmus has complained to him about
Luther\'s harsh letter. Now he sends a copy of Erasmus\' letter to
Luther and requests that he, along with Melanchthon, raise a concern and
indicate to him what he should reply to Erasmus.

The concept is in the Weim, Archiv, *Reg. N,* p. 109. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 106 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 340.

**No. 9 83.**

(Wittenberg.) April 22, 1626.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2231, annex, no. 5.

**No. 9 84.**

(Wittenberg.) April 23, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther sends the suppressed writing from the Mainzer Rathschlag (St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 339 ff.), as far as it is printed, and
indicates to the Elector what is to be answered to Erasmus.

The original is in the Archiv zu Weimar, X, p. 110. 43. 3. Printed in
the Leipzig Supplement, p. 44, incomplete, and likewise in Walch, vol.
XXI, 150. Complete in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 105 and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 53, p. 376.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke Johann, Elector of Saxony 2c. For the
> attention of S. C. F. G. Handen.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Herewith I send E. C. F. G. the booklet of the Council, as much as
it is printed; 1) because on E. C. F. G.\'s letter the other one has
remained in the pen and has been kept as E. C. F. G. requested.

To Erasmus\' writing it seems good to us that E. C. F. G. does not let
himself get involved in the matter, as the *Vipera* seeks, but answers
in such a way: as he himself well knows that E. C. F. G. may not nor
should be judge in the spiritual matter; therefore he should have spared
E. C. F. G. such a request 2c. But E. C. F. G. wants to add: that, even
if it were a secular matter, he would still have repaid Luther with a
writing that went out into all the world, as he knows that a greater
judge belongs to it than a prince, nor is the right way to punish
someone by someone\'s writing or complaint alone, but court, complaint
and answer should be made as is due, 2c., which is stated in E. C. F.
G.\'s letter. C. F. G. favor. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Monday after
Jubilate \[April 23\] 1526.

> E. C. F. G. subservient

Mart. Luther.

**Nv. 983.**

Wittenberg. April 25, 1526.

**To Vincentius Obsopöus, schoolman in Ansbach.**

Preface to the prophet Jonah. He praises Obsopoeus\' translations and
exonerates Secerius from an accusation.

First printed in a single edition of the interpretation of the prophet
Jonah published by Joh. Secerius in Hagenau in 1526, the title of which
we have included in the 14th volume of our edition, Col. 836. Further in
Seidemann-De Wette, vol. VI, p. 77 and in the Erlangen edition, *Opera
latina varii argumenti, tom*. VII, p. 504.

> Martin Luther au his \[friend\] in the Lord, Vincentius Obsopoeus.

Grace and peace in the Lord! That among other things which are of thee,
thou shalt also

1\) not only \"the first printed sheet\", as the Erl. Briefw., Vol. V,
p. 344 states.

**856**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 985. 986.

**857**

You have translated the prophet Jonah, which I have treated in a German
interpretation, into Latin, my dearest Vincentius, that is very pleasant
to me, so much is missing in it that it should be annoying to me, which
you have sometimes suspected. Those people are certainly annoying to me
who not only translate what is contemptible, but also all the good
things of others in such a way that they completely reverse them, since
they are ignorant of languages and extraordinarily industrious, not to
mention how much they not infrequently err in meaning, so much so that
they express negatively what is affirmative, and vice versa. But I see
that you, along with few others, have been given this not insignificant
gift, that you translate my German writings purely, actually and
carefully into Latin. Therefore I am glad that my Jonah speaks through
you in Latin. Not as if the honor tickled me that this work should be
spread out in a foreign language, which I would hope in vain in this
time, which so despises poor Luther by all and everywhere, that I could
dare to sing or rather lament with Christo in truth thus \[Ps. 22, 7.\]:
\"I am a worm and no man, a mockery of the people and contempt of the
people.\" But, what I rejoice in with a clear conscience, is this, that
godly and pious readers will read nothing evil, nothing heretical,
nothing seditious in my Jonah, but godly, healthy and wholesome things,
while meanwhile those restless and forward spirits with insolent
blasphemies put the whole world in confusion and draw even the godly and
calm minds into their monstrosities. For this is the mischievousness of
Satan, that, if he cannot destroy all, yet he gives trouble to all with
ungodly doctrines, and afflicts all, so that they do not apply
themselves purely and freely to the pure doctrines of Christ alone. In
this respect, I wish you happiness for the second time, who in such
great turmoil of the angry prophets do not give way, nor are you annoyed
by my inability, but simply choose what is pure and well-founded, in
which you work with us, even 1) with Christ, for the spread of the
knowledge of salvation.

1\) As the Erlanger Briefw., Vol. V, p. 345 notes, instead of *uno is to
be* read *imo*.

That is, of the faith that clings to Him. Hail, brother! Continue as you
have begun, and the Lord will multiply and sustain you. But it pleases
me that you give the booklet to Johann Secerius at Hagenau to print,
because this man is worthy of much greater service, and above all a
faithful and careful printer. For the fact that he is disgraced by
certain people, as if he were Secerius, whom I accused of theft in the
preface to a certain postilla 2), I believe has happened either through
ignorance, or because they have been deceived by the ambiguous name, or
through the malice of men, who under this pretext wish to harass the man
in an undeserved manner, as Satan is everywhere wont to do nothing but
harm. For in the same preface I testify clearly enough that in
Wittenberg there was that \"typesetter\" (*secerium*) in our print shop
who is called *locator, who* stole an incomplete copy without my
knowledge. Therefore, by this my testimony, I want to have excused my
Secerius, the printer of my Latin Jonah, to all pious people, so that he
will not be burdened by fate or rather by the misfortune of the same
name. I wanted to add this to this letter out of a sense of duty. But
you, my dear Vincentius, are quite well in Christ. Wittenberg, on the
twenty-fifth of April, Anno 1526.

**No. 9 86.**

Wittenberg. April 26, 1526.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

Luther praises Gerbel and his friends for remaining free of the
sacramental mystery. He invites him to be godfather to the expected
child.

Handwritten in Hamburg, Mg. 11, fol. 522 and in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod.
Helmst.* 285. Printed in *Wolf, conspect. supell. epist.*, p. 51; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 116; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 106 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. V, p. 345. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1003.

2\) See the preface in the St. Louis edition, vol. XI, XLVI, in the
second paragraph: \"der Setzer\". This was the name of the Hagenau
printer whose name was changed to *Secerius.*

**858** Letters from the year 1526. no. 986. 987. 988. **859**

> His brother in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Gerbel, the servant of the Lord at
> Strasbourg.

God be praised and thanked that Christ has at least preserved you with
some others, among whom to my joy is also my Lonicer, from those who
hate to be called \"heavy spirits\" while they continue to be so. And
that Oekolampad is seized by this plague before all is a great pain to
me, because God has made this man skillful in handling our affairs, both
by knowledge of languages and by his reputation in more than one
respect; God convert him by His 1) grace. By the way, what you desire,
that I should write against them and treat the Lord\'s Supper, that is
also my highest desire, but so far neither my time nor my strength has
permitted this. Christ will help in due time; in the meantime, it is
good that they should be fully revealed and brought out into the open.
It is easy for the truth, namely Christ, to triumph, even though he must
be crucified for a little while and not be seen. I give thanks to my
Christ, who not only strengthened me in the right opinion, but also did
not let those spirits disgrace his own with anything but a sham, and a
weak one at that, and left a great opportunity for a triumph. Farewell
and greet your rib, and invite it to be my godmother on Pentecost, if it
should be a girl; but if it should be a boy, then you shall be my
godfather, if God is gracious to me and has thought me worthy of it.
Greet my Lonicer. My necklace greets you. Farewell. Wittenberg, Thursday
after Jubilate \[April 26\] 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 9 87.**

(Wittenberg.) April 26, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the imprisoned preacher Amandus in Pomerania.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, 108. 41. Printed in
the Leipzig Supplement, p. 44; in Walch, vol. XXI, 150 ; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 107 and m the Erlangen Edition, vol. 53, p. 377.

1\) There is a gap before *gratia.* We have assumed *sua* with *Strobel-
Ranner.*

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Elector, and Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave in Meissen,
> my most gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The Highborn Prince, Duke George of Pomerania, has had an
evangelical preacher, named D. Amandus, appointed through the dealings
of evil people, and has suffered much unhappiness. Now his people ask E.
C. F. G. for an intercession to the above-mentioned duke for the good
man. Although they accuse him of being rebellious, the city of Stettin
and the preachers there give a good testimony about him; so I also
interrogated him here the other day, and know him well; he also had good
letters with him: for this reason, I humbly ask E. C. F. G. to do a
Christian work, and to seek to help Christ in his poor in prison, and to
provide us with an intercession for the prisoner, which we should
provide. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Thursday after Jubilate \[April 26\]
1526.

E. C. F. G. undersigned Mart. Luther.

**No. 9 88.**

Altenburg. (End of April?) 2) 1526.

**To Friedrich Myconius.**

Luther expresses his suspicion that the papist princes are uniting for
war against the Protestants.

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. 1048, p. 1, No. 1. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 314d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 100 (in March or April) and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 347. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1002.

> To the brother Frederick Mecum, to be highly honored in Christ, the
> faithful and completely sincere servant of God.

Grace and peace! Since Oswald, your mayor, leaves and returns to you,

2\) This date has been set by the Erl. Since what is said in this letter
can only refer to the negotiations of the Leipzig meeting of the
Archbishop of Mainz and Henry of Brunswick with George of Saxony, which
took place around Christmas 1525, but only became known to the Elector
in mid-April, our letter will fall towards the end of April.

**860** Letters from the year 1526. No. 988 to 991. 861

my dear Frederick, I did not want to be guilty of him coming empty, at
least without a written greeting. For if you are well and the Word of
God is prospering, I cannot hear anything more pleasant; we are well, as
much as the Lord gives. But I commend myself to your prayers, that
Christ may not forsake me in temptation. By the way, you see how Satan
is raging against the Catholic princes; the godless bishops are
conspiring (as they say), and that even war is threatened, Philip writes
me, is the truth. ^1)^ Therefore, you will see to it that the people are
exhorted to fight valiantly in the faith and to pray to the Lord, that
they may be overcome and restrained by the Spirit, and that they may be
compelled to keep peace in the flesh. At least I recognize from the
writings and sayings of many that it is highly necessary, the highest
necessity, to pray earnestly, because Satan is thinking of attacks.
Therefore, I ask you to impress this matter upon the people as a serious
and necessary one, since they are placed in the midst of Satan\'s swords
and rages, and are in danger. The Lord be with you with his grace and
with his power. Amen. Altenburg, 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 9 89.**

Torgau. May 1, 1526.

Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

The Elector asks Luthern to give his consent in Hufener\'s marriage
case.

The concept is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. O,* p. 506. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 107 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 348.

Our greeting before. Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! Our citizen
Jakob Hufener 2) has sent us with a letter of his

1\) We have used the Erl. Briefw. the reading of the Codex: *vera*,
adopted, instead: *Jena* in the editions. - Around this time,
Melanchthon was at the court of Torgau, as we see from a letter to
Agricola (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I, 795), where he may have received this
message.

2\) Hufener\'s wife had run away and joined the knight Hans Schott, who
took her (a née Anna? Auerbach) in and married her, since her husband
had also committed adultery and she had received a marriage dispensation
from the preacher at Torgau. (Burkhardt, l. c.) -Am

You will find out and note his search from this. Since you then indicate
how you previously acted in the matter between him and his wife,
therefore you have special knowledge of the occasion, our gracious
request is that you report and indicate to us your concern as to what we
should do and refrain from doing at his request. In this you do us a
gracious favor. Date Torgau, May 1, 1526.

**No. 990 .**

(Wittenberg.) (After May 1, 1526.)

To Elector John of Saxony.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 688. 3)

**No. 991 .**

(Wittenberg.) 2. May 1526.

To Spalatin.

Recommendation of Laurentius Fabri; of Mutian\'s death and Jonas\'
illness. In the postscript of the Hyperaspistes of Erasmus.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, manuscript in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 255. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 50; by De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 108 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 349. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1005.

> To his \[friend\] in the Lord, Georg Spalatin, the extremely faithful
> bishop of the people of Altenburg.

Grace and peace! I am sending this Laurentius Fabri, my dear Spalatin,
as you asked and the prince wrote to me at your request that I should
send him to you. We consider him suitable, you can therefore safely send
him to the Cronswitz^4)^ nuns, or if any other standing (*auctoritatis*)
is required, you can easily bring it about.

July 15, 1528 Melanchthon writes to Camerarius: \"I want you to know
that in these days the verdict against Hans Schott has been passed that
he should send his wife back to the citizen of Torgau. (*Corp. Ref.* I,
989.)

3\) There as in De Wette without date. Burkhardt, p. 116, and the
Erlangen Briefw. place the letter in the beginning of May, - instead of
\"Haffener\" is to be read \"Hufener\". - Should the settlement of this
matter, as can be assumed from the last note to the previous letter,
really have taken place only in 1528?

4\) In Cronschwitz there was an Augustinian nunnery, the richest and
most prestigious in the Voigtland. The convent was abolished in 1536. In
1542, Hans von Bora, Luther\'s brother-in-law, became the administrator
of the property.

**862** Letters from the year 1526. no. 991. 992. 993. 863

That Mutian died so 1) I was very pleased to hear, as you write.

Our Jonas is sick (as they say) with kidney stone and at the same time
with vain defect of the liver. You pray for him. My chain will multiply
me with offspring around Pentecost. You pray to Christ that he may make
her a happy child-bearer, as I also pray for you by your chain, with
which you may be well pleased. Wednesday after Cantate \[May 2\] 1526.

Martin Luther.

I have not read the protector of the diatribe, but I hear that he is an
adder, and I am glad that the larva is pulled off him, and at the same
time he is given as a proteus all the day. But Philip, the Prince of
Hesse, has sent me a copy, and asks the same as you.

**No. 992.**

(Wittenberg.) May 8, 1526.

**To Georg Mohr,^2)^ Pastor at Borna.**

This letter does not refer, as De Wette states, to Emser\'s translation
of the New Testament, but to a translation of the *Hyperaspistes of*
Erasinus made by the same, in which he had given *facere legem* by:
\"make law\" instead of: \"fulfill the law\". See St. Louis edition,
vol. XVIII, 1759, second paragraph.

Handwritten in *Cod.* Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 272;
in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p. 517; in the Leipzig edition, vol.
XXII, p. 550; in Walch, vol. XXII, 155; in De Wette, vol. III, p. 109
and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 378.

> *Magistro Georgio Mohr, servo Christi apud Boruam, suo in Domino
> fratri*.

Grace and peace in Christ. Of course, Emser did not correctly translate
*facere legem*, make law. I have spoken in the way of Christ Joh. 7,19.:
Nemo *ex vobis facit legem,* that is, *implet,* Dazu *consequentia et
praecedentia, ac tota disputatio satis monstrat, non de condendis, sed
servandis legibus me loqui; quia de vi liberi arbitrii loquor toto
libro. Sed eat impius* \[the following and the before

1\) His last words are said to have been, \"O JEsu, behold your
servant.\"

2\) About him, see St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 14 a.

and the whole discussion shows sufficiently that I do not speak fully of
laws to be given, but of laws to be kept, because I speak in the whole
book of the power of the free will. But away with the ungodly\]. I do
not mind if you write against the Leipzig seducer; but he will not be
silent. But do not harm that his foolishness comes to light. Only see to
it that you remove his writing from him, and do not speak much to him.
*Vale in Domino. Feria tertia post Crucis* \[May 8\] MDXXVI.

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 993.**

(Wittenberg.) May 11, 1526.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

Luther wanted to send the Zwickau vessel (No. 972 and No. 980) to
Agricola, but Käthe had appropriated it and put it aside. Several other
things are briefly touched upon.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratend*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 69; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. Ill and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 351.

> Semem brother in the Lord, Johann Agricola, the servant of Christ in
> Eisleben.

Grace and peace! I am sending you this little pewter-glass vessel before
it gets another master. For my Käthe was also very much inferior to him.
I like your judgment of Erasmus, but I like even more the progress of
your boys\' school, that one may at least hear a good word in the great
turmoil of this time. Wendalin is absent, but he will hurry to you full
of hall; so we have written and sent him your letter. You will help the
man as he is worthy, and you know \[how to help\]. You shall tell your
Elsa, if she does not know it yet, that D. Draco has become a husband,
and it is said that, in the hope of that, Syrus has followed here. Fare
well with all yours, and pray for me. Friday after Ascension \[May 11\]
1526.

> Mart. Luther.

Behold, as I was already about to hand over the letter to the bearer and
was looking for the small jar, my stalking Käthe had taken it away. I
would have found it, but I did not know where it was.

**864** Letters from the year 1526. No. 993 to 997. 865

they prevented it by a conspiracy of the provost 1) and our priest, who
may have taken it to themselves. Therefore, wait until it is freed by
the childbed and will come to me again, and I will steal it.

**No. 994.**

(Wittenberg.) May 14, 1526.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Intercession for his former teacher Wigand Güldenapf because of his
pension.

From the Coburg Archives in Georg Paul Hönn\'s Coburg. Hist., vol. II,
p. 139 in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 44; in *G. H. Goetzius, de
praeceptoribus Imtheri, Ludec*. 1718, x. 13; in Walch, vol. XXI, 151; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. Ill and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 378.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! This
He Wigand, Briefszeiger, has given up the parish of Waltershausen to the
town council, according to a contract that E. F. G. himself has drawn
up, so that they are to give him 30 fl. annually from the parish goods.
Now it is impossible that he will not get such money, because perhaps
the council does not have the parish, as E. F. G. will hear further
report, that the poor old man must run for his food. Because he has been
my schoolmaster, and I would be obliged to do him all honor, I humbly
request that E. F. G. not let my schoolmaster forfeit such obligatory
money, but graciously help him so that he does not have to go begging in
his old age. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Monday after Servatii \[May
14\] 1526.

E. F. G. subservient

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 995 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 18, 1526.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1684, no. 177.

1\) Jonas; the pastor is Bugenhagen.

**No. 996 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 26, 1526.

**To Caspar Müller, Mansfeld chancellor.**

Request to be godfather to his expected child.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 45;
in Walch, vol. XXI, 153; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 113 (after the Cod*.
Jen. B* 24. n. f. 162) and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 379.

> To the honorable and prudent Caspar Müller, Count Chancellor of
> Mansfeld, my favorable lord and friend.

G. and F. in Christ. I would gladly ask M. G. Lord to sponsor me, but I
am afraid of the pomp that would be attached to me, as if I wanted to
distinguish myself with a monk\'s and nun\'s child and have great lords
as sponsors: therefore I will remain here, and ask you to ask M. G. H.
Chancellor called Caspar Müller on my account that he wants to humble
himself, and so God will give me fruit. G. H. Chancellor, Caspar Müller,
for my sake, that he will humble himself, and if God gives me the fruit,
that he will take care of it and be its spiritual father, so that it may
be born into Christianity. But I cannot set the time, it would be too
long for me to send a messenger after the birth; but if it pleases, take
one who represents your person, but that you have the name and the deed.
The wistful mother reckons to me about St. John\'s day, and that is also
true *cum tempore conceptionis*. I have counted according to the first
feeling, but I have missed it; for she has now felt over twenty weeks.
Hiemit GOtt befohlen. Saturday after Pentecost \[May 26\] 1526.

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 99 7.**

(Wittenberg.) May 26, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks for the promotion of the Dohna disputes by
churfürstlich-richterlicher Spruch.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ee,* fol. 19a, G 48a.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 108 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 353.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The noble Lord Henry of Don 2c. came to me and asked me for
advice.

**866**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 997. 998. 999.

**867**

1\) because it has been hanging in the court for so long, and would like
E. C. F. G. to take it to him and decide. Now I do not know how to
refuse him such a request, and because the cost will be too heavy for
him, I ask, as much as it suits me, if it is not burdensome to E. C. F.
G. that I do not understand anything, E. C. F. G. would graciously see
whether he would like to come to the final judgment by E. C. F. G.
himself; that will please God. Hiemit Christo befohlen, Amen. Saturday
after Pentecost \[May 26\] 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 99 8.**

Wittenberg. May 29, 1526.

**To Johann Gülden (*Aureus*).**

Luther exhorts him to teach faith and love above all.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 316; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 113 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 354. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1007.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It has been reported to me about you, my
dear Johann, how you handle the word a little too strictly,^2)^ and have
been asked to admonish you. Therefore, if thou wilt suffer it, I beseech
thee that thou mayest teach that which is most important (*seria*)
first, that is, that thou mayest urge faith and love. For if these have
not taken root, of what use is it that we labor in the treatment of
foolish ceremonies, by which nothing is accomplished, but that we tickle
the unstable minds of the exceedingly foolish great multitude, which is
frivolous and fussy, to no fruit, not to say to the detriment of the

1\) Bernhard and Heinrich, Burgraves of Dohna, had already been in
dispute with Count Wolf of Gleichen since 1515 because of a claim for
ancestral manors (Burkhardt).

2\) Melanchthon writes (about Oct. 1527, *Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I, 898, No.
472) to Spalatin: \"I did not want to follow the nonsense of Gülden
(*Aurei*) and his equals, who think that only this means to teach the
gospel rightly, if one proceeds with the highest strife and the highest
bitterness, as it were by the fist, against those who do not have the
same opinion with nns.\"

Glory to God and the Word. Well then, arrange it with your colleagues in
such a way that you govern and do everything with a united heart and in
a unanimous manner. Do not despise those of whom you do not know what
kind of people they may be, but entice them with all calmness and
humility, and do not insist or boast about how right the things are that
you deal with and intend to do. This will be seen abundantly afterwards:
Nothing is made alive unless it is first given over to death. Take this
admonition of mine to the best and be well. Wittenberg, Tuesday after
Trinity \[May 29\] 1526.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 999 .**

(Wittenberg.) 2. June 1526.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

The teacher expected in Zwickau for the girls\' school (Hausmann calls
her in the inscription: *Hanna a Salw*) Will not go there. The prophet
Habakuk is not yet ready. Wittenberg is fortified. Once again from the
glass from Zwickau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
25 b. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 45; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 117;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 114 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 355.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1359.

> To the man of God, Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at Zwickau,
> his exceedingly dear \[friend\] in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! The virgin Hanna has moved from us to your
people, so you cannot expect her to be a teacher at the school. Perhaps
she would not take this office upon herself, since she fears that she
would not be up to it and would not appear suitable for it. But we have
no other teacher who is just as learned.

I would have loaded Philippi 3) with the prophet Habakkuk, but he will
hardly be ready in eight days. There is no news except that our city is
fortified, though we know nothing of enemies. Again, my rib, Jonas and
\[?\] 4) the Rector, and all our men and women greet you.

3\) Perhaps the brother of Hansmann (De Wette).

4\) In the summer semester of 1526, Jonas himself was Rector (Erl.
Briefw.).

**868** Letters from the year 1526. no. 999 to 1002. **869**

My chain stubbornly holds on to the glass, which you decorated and gave
to me, in your memory; otherwise M. Johann Eisleben would have wrung it
from me through his request. Farewell, dearest Nicolaus. Saturday after
Trinity \[June 2\] 1526. ^1)^

Martin Luther.

> **No . 1000.**

Strasbourg. June 5, 1526.

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

(Regest.)

He reports that after the disputation in Baden, almost all Strasbourg
adhered to the Sacramentarians, with the exception of some Hedio.
Because Zurich, Basel and Strasbourg had adopted the same opinion,
orthodox writings either did not reach them or were suppressed for a
long time by the Strasburgers. Much could have been prevented by
immediate publication of Luther\'s letter to the Strasburgers (No. 925
and 926). The discord over the Lord\'s Supper harmed the progress of the
Gospel much more than the peasant revolt had harmed it. He, Gerbel, had
to suffer both from papists and evangelicals, but wanted to remain firm.
Luther should let Erasmus go, and treat the matter of the Sacrament with
the firmest possible proofs, reasons and scriptural passages. Therefore,
he sends several arguments on which Oecolampad relies the most, and with
which he had cornered Eck the most at the disputation in Baden. Finally,
about his conjugal life: he had lost a beautiful hope because of the
miscarriage of his wife.

Handwritten at Strasbourg in *Thes. Baum*, vol. II, p. 250. Printed in
Kolde\'s p. 81 and in Erl.

Briefw., vol. V, p. 356.

**No. 1001 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 8, 1526.

**To Johann Rühel in Eisleben.**

Luther sends him a book and reports the birth of his first son.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 45;
in Walch, vol. XXI. 152; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 115 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 380\....

> Kindly written to my lord and brother-in-law, Doctor Johann Rühel at
> Eisleben.

Grace and peace in Christ! I hereby send you the little psaltery, dear
Doctor.

1\) In the original, by Luther\'s transcription: 1528. Walch has
(obviously incorrectly) placed the letter in the year 1522; likewise
Schütze. That it belongs to the year 1526 is certain from the next
letter to Hausmann on June 13, 1526.

and brother-in-law; with whom I am able, I also want to the Psalms. I
have attacked the anathema, 2) I have also been trained for service and
school, 3) therefore be satisfied. I also want to tell M. Eisleben on my
account that my dear Käthe, by the grace of God, has brought me a Hansen
Luther, yesterday at two, since the day is called Dat 4) in the
calendar, and that he should not be surprised that I let him run with
such an order; for he should think almost at this time of the year what
it is to have sons. Greetings to your dear son-bearer and Eisleben\'s
elf. Hiemit GOtt commanded, Amen. Now this letter the sick Käthe demands
me. Friday after Bonifacii \[June 8\] Anno 1526. Martinus Lutherus.

**No. 1002 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 13, 1526,

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Of the promised Habakkuk and the birth of his son.

The original is in the Anhaltische Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
27. Handwritten in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 20 b, at Zerbst.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. 11, p. 316b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 116
and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 359. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1008,

> Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the faithful servant of Christ at Zwickau.

Grace and peace! Habakkuk (as I promised your Philip) is not yet
finished, so I will be drawn to it; but it will be finished (as I hope)
in the next week, and I will not deceive Philip with the promise. There
is nothing new, except that Christ has blessed and strengthened my
daughter with a son, John, who is healthy and lively. Praise and thanks
be to his unspeakable goodness. The mother and child greet you very
much. May you be well in Christ. In haste, the Wednesday after Barnabas
\[June 13\] 1526. Yours, Mart. Luther.

2\) We do not know what Luther means by this. The assumptions of De
Wette and the Erl. Briefw. do not satisfy us.

3\) The *Cod. Ratzenb*. reads here: \"and for debt ausgesteupert\".

4\) dat == he gives. The Erl. Briefw. notes, \"According to the verse of
*Cisiojanus* for June, *Nic Marcelle Boni [dat]{.underline} Jun Primi Ba
Cyrini,* the 7th syllable is *dat,* and means the 7th day.\"

**870** Letters from the year 1526. No. 1003. 1004. **871**

**No. 1003 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 17, 1526.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther thanks him for his congratulations on the birth of the son.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen. a*, fol. 255. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 316 b; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 116 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 360. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1008 f.

> His brother in the Lord, M. Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at
> Altenburg.

Grace and peace! I thank you in the Lord, my dear Spalatin, that you so
heartily wish happiness to me, a happy husband (may God continue this),
who have received a son, Johannes Lutherlein, from a very good wife and
a very lovely woman through God\'s blessing, and have become a father
through God\'s wonderful grace. I grant you the same and beg for it,
also with a happier and greater blessing, since you are better and
higher than I am. ^1)^ But pray that Christ may preserve the child for
me against Satan, who, as I know, will not refrain from hurting me in
the Son if God allows him to do so. For even now the child is somewhat
afflicted, I do not know by what small illnesses, or rather (as one
thinks) by the indigestibility of the unaccustomed milk, with which the
child-bedewomen are first forced to nourish.

I am sorry that M. Eberhard\'s joy has been snatched away from him, but
God\'s will is good, but in a very hidden kindness, so that one cannot
feel anything more painful. By the way, when will you come to see us, to
see the old memories of our familiar intercourse and friendship? I have
planted the garden, I have built a well, both quite happily. Come, and
you will be crowned with lilies and roses. Be well in the Lord and pray
for me. On Sunday after Vitus \[June 17\] 1526. Mart. Luther.

1\) These last words are in the original, according to the ink, crossed
out by Spalatin.

2\) Brisger. Compare No. 963.

**No. 1004.**

(Wittenberg.) (June 20, 1526.) 3)

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for several people.

See No. 976. In the Leipzig and Walch editions, op. cit., this
Supplication is considered an appendix to Letter No. 976, which is
incorrect. This supplement has its own cover. (De Wette, Vol. Ill, p.
101.)

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, and Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious lord.

First of all, here is a supplement of one, named Jakob Holzwart,
formerly a choir pupil, whom E. C. F. G. kept for a year, with a promise
that, where it was invested, E. C. F. G. would do a better job of
taxation, as the supplement shows, and it seems to me that the
journeyman is skilful; but E. C. F. G. has placed all this in his
gracious will.

On the other hand, a nun named Elfe Gaudelitz, 4) from the Nymph
Monastery near Grym, was asked to get something back from the monastery,
after she had turned a lot into it; but the answer did not come.

Thirdly, God has sent us two Gardians from France, who have also been
robbed and are coming here for the sake of God\'s word, and the priest
and I are feeding them on the goodness and help of E. C. F. G.; if E. C.
F. G. wants to give them something for the sake of God, it would be good
if we could not. C. F. G. wants to give them something for God\'s sake,
a guilder or six, would be good, if not, we have to get rid of them and
give what we can, and yet beg E. C. F. G. again the next time. God gives
us many poor people, and we ourselves are also poor, but still
unspoiled.

Fourthly, a pious man, Bastian Ligarius, has been sent to Arnstadt as a
preacher after St. Peter\'s Day with a supplement, which I intend to
send to E. C. F. G., according to E. C. F. G.\'s written request.

3\) This letter arrived in Torgau on June 21, as we can see from the
next letter.

4\) She received 40 fl. on June 22, 1526 and later on Dec. 18, 1528
another 30 fl. Between June 1526 and Jan. 1529 she had married a citizen
of Grimma, Bastian Gulmann.

**872** Letters from the year 1526. no. 1004. 1005. 1006. **873**

For, God willing, I will provide the two cities of Arnstadt and Gern
with two preachers, so that it shall please E. C. F. G.. This has now
lain here for three years; what I have been able to do, I have helped;
for what I do, I do out of E. C. F. G.\'s gift, because I have nothing
else. If C.C.F.G. also wanted to give him a donation for God\'s sake; he
is pious, learned and skilled, but bare and poor, I am not able to do as
much as is necessary. Put that also in E. C. F. G. mild kindness.

Finally, most gracious Lord, I ask for myself, as before, that E. C. F.
G. would not let the cantor\'s office dissolve like this, especially
because the present personnel have grown up on it, and should also be
worth the art, full of princes and lords to maintain, and yet probably
more than so many other things, where perhaps not so well need be
turned, they could well be in Wittenberg. In such and such persons, the
monasteries\' goods would be useful, and God would be pleased with them.

Let that be enough at once, E. C. F. G. graciously give me credit for
this.

**No. 1005 .**

Torgau. June 22, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector\'s reply to the previous letter.

The concept is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. N,* p. 72, No. 19.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 109 and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. V, p. 362.

By the Grace of God John, Duke of Saxony and Elector. Our greeting
before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! Yesterday, among other
things, we received a list from you, in which you were requested by some
to interdict the sürder against us 2c. We have heard this from all
sides, and as far as Jakoben Holzwart is concerned, who has come to you
with a Latin letter that we wanted to give him another twenty florins
for a year over the previous grace shown 2c., you know for a fact that
we are daily burdened with such issues at Wittenberg and elsewhere; we
want to make sure that the same student will make do with the previous
grace we have shown him, and now provide for himself for his own good.

For the sake of the nun. Elfe Gaudlitz, who was in the monastery at
Nimpschen (Nymptzshken), we are sending you an order to the
superintendents or \[the\] administrator of the same monastery, who is
to get along amicably with the same nun, where she brought something
into the monastery, so that she will be satisfied.

When you asked for two gardians sent to you from France, who are said to
have been robbed on the way, we hereby send you six guilders, which you
will deliver to them.

The two preachers you have appointed for us, one to Arnstadt and the
other to Gera, will be sent to Weimar in accordance with our letter.
What they now consume on the way and are still in need of, shall be
given back to them on their arrival, and thus be dispatched according to
need.

For the sake of the choir, Ern Conrad, 1) the bandmaster, reports to us
that it is almost badly tuned and equipped with the present journeymen
and boys, as we hear such things ourselves every day in singing. So we
have given Ern Conrad his final farewell at his humble request and let
him be satisfied. Since Conrat Fridrich 2) will no longer be with the
choir, it cannot be considered our concern that it be kept in good order
and government, to the extent that the journeymen, and in some cases
also the boys, are badly tuned; We also take care that with the food
they have had to receive so far, something better can be done after all
circumstances, and that God is also pleased with the world; because if
we are not all here, the same journeymen go the more part idle and spend
their time thus in laziness and without benefit. But we want to show
ourselves well in all this, as we will find it best and most convenient.
All of this we would not want to conceal from you, for we are graciously
inclined to you. Date Torgau, Friday after Viti \[June 22\] 26.

**No. 1006 .**

Wittenberg. June 27, 1526.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

Recommendation of Veit Amerbach as assistant to Agricola. From family
matters.

Handwritten in *Cod*. *Ratzenb*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 70; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 118 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 363.

1\) Conrad Rupsch (Ruppisch, Rupf) in Torgau had already been
Capellmeister under your Elector Friedrich; he died in 1538.

2\) Maybe: forever?

**874**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1006 to 1009. 875

> To Johann Agricola, the young people and the boys at Eisleben teacher
> and image

ner, his brother in your Lord.

Grace and peace! Veit 1) has come to me, my dear Agricola, your future
xxxxxxxx (collaborator (to speak Greek). It only remains that you
diligently recommend him to Count Albrecht, as he deserves, since he is
a good, indeed, a very good young\' man. At the same time you will also
receive him duly, we know that. What you wrote the other day, that my
mother would be prevented from coming, I received in time. Christ does
what pleases him and is good. John Luther\'s little child is healthy, as
much as it can be; the mother has suffered from lack of milk so far, and
still she barely moistens the palate of the child with a few (*raris*)
drops. Greetings to all of us. The grace of God be with you, amen.
Greetings in our name to your Elsa, for whom we pray for a happy birth,
Amen, On Wednesday after St. John\'s Day \[June 27\] 1526. Yours, Martin
Luther.

**No. 1007.**

(Wittenberg.) June 29, 1526.

**To Andreas Kaugisdorf in Eilenburg.**

Luther advises him not to leave his office.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B 24, fol. 176. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 317; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 118 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V,
p. 364. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1009 f.

> To the brother Andreas Kaugisdorf, preacher and shepherd in Eilenburg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It does not seem advisable to me to leave
the service of the word, unless you are forced by force or called
elsewhere. What is the matter with the wicked being in your district
with their Satan, since he does not stay away anywhere? But this
wickedness of Satan must be borne for Christ\'s sake; therefore, be
constant and patient, to keep the remnant and the

1\) Veit Amerbach was Agricola\'s assistant in Eisleben for several
years. Later he fell out with Melanchthon, returned to his fatherland
Bavaria and became a papist again. He died in 1557 as professor of
theology in Ingolstadt.

to receive the neglected in Israel. I will be thoughtful for Magnus; now
there was nothing I could do. Farewell and pray for me. Friday after
John \[June 29\] 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 1008**

(Wittenberg.) (Towards the end of June 1526.)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther reports to him the well-being of his wife and son, and that he
has written to the prince on behalf of a prisoner.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv (with the inscription
Spalatin: *Doc. Martinus scripsit pro captivo Luccauiense*. M. D.
XXVI.). Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 254. Printed in *Buddeus*, p.
50; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 117 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 365.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1010.

His M. Georg Spalatin.

Grace and peace! Since the messenger is in such a hurry and I am busy
with the printing press, I could not write what I wanted to Eberhard; I
will write at another time. By the way, my little house (*Johannellus*)
is well, together with its mother, namely as far as it is sufficient for
a child and a woman in childbed. Thanks be to Christ. Be well with your
(as I wish) soon coming chain. Mart. Luther.

I have written to your prince for Matthew of Luckau.

**No. 1009.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. July 1526.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther offers his thanks for a congratulation for his wife and child.
From some other things.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 255. Printed by Buddeus, p. 57; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
119 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 366. German in Walch, vol. XXl,
1011.

> To the Lord George Spalatin, the sincere servant of Christ, his
> brother in thy Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! My little deer John and his hind give you
great thanks, my dear Spalatin, for the service of your blessing, from
which he hopes and desires.

**876**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1009. 1010. 1011.

**877**

He wishes that it will bring him salvation and happiness. At the same
time, he also wishes you a similar deer from your hind, which can be
blessed in the same way, amen.

Finally, I wrote to M. Eberhard, although I did not know what I should
answer him, because you demanded it so urgently and amicably. Everything
is still well with us, in the usual way and as it can be. Caspar Schalbe
is a guest with us, since he is tormented by his own with the suspicion,
yes, with the accusation, that he has defiled a maid. Thus envy haunts
the poor man. He sends you his respectful greetings. Fare well in the
Lord and pray for me. On Tuesday after the Visitation of the Virgin Mary
\[July 3\] 1526. Mart. Luther.

**No. 10 10**

(Wittenberg.) 3. July 1526.

To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.

Of one of Carlstadt\'s writings, which he had published before he came
to Luther, and of the latter\'s stay in the country near Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
26. Handwritten in Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 21.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 317 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 120
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 366. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1011.

> His superior in the Lord, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the holy and faithful
> servant of Christ.

Grace and peace! The booklet of Carlftadt,^1)^ of which you write, my
dear Nicolaus, I have long since seen, because it was published before
its arrival at me 2), but now it is spread by the adversaries. But God
will have mercy

1\) Probably no other writing is meant than the one directed against
Luther\'s \"Against the Heavenly Prophets\": \"Anzeig etlicher
Hauptartikel christlicher Lehre, in denen D. Luther Andresen Carolstadt
durch falsche Zusag und Nachred verdächtig macht. The other writing,
which was assumed to be here: \"Von dem neuen und alten Testament\" (St.
Louis Edition, Vol. XX, 286), cannot be taken into consideration here
for this reason, because it is provided with a letter to the Christians
of Rothenburg and the date: \"March 16, 1525.

2\) Here again we have a confirmation that Carlstadt sought and found a
refuge with Luther. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, Introduction, p. 22
ff.

and also correct this disgraceful act. Incidentally, Carlstadt lives
with us near Wittenberg and farms in Berkwitz, a mile from our town. I
have hardly been able to obtain this from the prince against the entire
court with great and persistent entreaties. God finally convert him
completely.

My John Luther greets you again, together with his mother, and says
thanks for the service of the blessing of which you have made him
worthy. The grace of God be with you. On Tuesday after the Visitation
\[of Mary\] \[July 3\] 1526.

> Mart. Luther.

**No. 1011**

(Strasbourg.) July 10, 1526.

Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.

Gerbet reports what an evil influence the disputation at Baden had had
on the Strasbourg people, and urges Luther to write to the
\"Bedeuteter\" (*significatistas).*

Handwritten at Strasbourg in *Thes.* Printed by Kolde, p. 82, and in
Erl.

Briefw., vol.V, p.367.

Hail in Christ! Our preachers still insist on their opinion, with the
exception of Hedio, who stays away from this disputation as much as he
can, and handles this doctrine so cleverly that it is not easy to know
which of the two opinions he subscribes to. The others have become even
more stubborn after the disputation at Baden, of which the rumor has
undoubtedly reached you, because in no other piece did Oecolampad corner
Eck so much as in the doctrine of the Lord\'s Supper. For he demanded of
Eck that he should prove from Scripture the transformation of the bread
into the body of Christ. Then, even if he proved it as much as he could,
whether this could be done by the voice of any boy? Furthermore, when
Oecolampad asked if the body of Christ was present in the bread in an
invisible way, Eck answered that it was there in an invisible way. From
this, Oecolampad claimed, it follows that Christ had two bodies, one at
the table, because he lay at it, the other in the bread. Since Eck was
cornered by these and similar reasons, and had nothing to say, they
moved on to other things. Our people are undoubtedly already triumphant,
and have turned over the greater part of the city, as well as the
noblest men of the council. I see that the cause of this is that

**878** Letters from the year 1526. no. 1011. 1012. 1013. 879

countless writings of these people are offered for sale, of which, who
have the opposite position, hardly one or the other is read, whether it
is that they are suppressed by the masters, or whether it is that this
opinion has so established itself with the vast majority that they
refuse to hear or read another. I wanted, so that not so many souls
would be lost everywhere, that you would consider the matter carefully,
examine its proofs, reasons and scriptural passages with your usual
skill and refute them, whether perhaps some could be preserved and torn
out of that shameful opinion. For this poison increases daily more and
more, and I see many changed who were of a far different opinion before
the disputation at Baden. In my opinion, nothing has harmed the gospel
in a more dangerous way than this persistent discord of the learned
people. You do your duty, which is now required by the highest and most
extreme necessity. Fare well, my kind father, and love me as you are
wont to do. July 10, 26.

**No. 1012 .**

Weimar. July 11, 1526.

**The Electoral Councils to Luther.**

On behalf of the Elector, they requested a \"learned, skillful and
decent preacher\" for Mühlhausen, - Luther sent Johann Mantel, who had
previously served the church in Wittenberg.

The concept is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. Llp*. 157, No. 112.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 110 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 368.

Our kind services before. Venerable, distinguished, special lord and
friend! After the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr.
Johans, Duke of Saxony and Elector, our most gracious lord, has the
regiment in the city of Mühlhausen this year, 1) his C. F. G. has now
written to us from Eisenach and ordered us to write to you, that you
should seek for a skilful, learned and decent preacher and order him to
come to us, whom we have then ordered to be delivered to Mühlhausen.
Because, according to the local design, a skilled preacher is highly
needed,

1\) After the conquest of Mühlhausen in the Peasants\' War, the princes
George of Saxony, Prince John and Philip of Hesse had acquired the right
of protection, but in fact the regiment over the city, which they
exercised alternately. Duke Georg, who exercised it in the first year,
used it to reintroduce the Papal religion. Now the Elector followed him.

In place of and on account of our most gracious lord\'s gracious
request, we kindly request that you endeavor to find a learned, skillful
and decent preacher and assign him to us in the most beneficial manner,
and we will then promote him according to our lord\'s order. Lord\'s
order, we will then dispatch him to Mühlhausen, and decree so much that
he shall be provided with proper and necessary maintenance for the
place, and that he shall not lose any diligence in this. In this you
show our lord favor. Lord but favor, so we want to earn it for us kindly
for you. Date Weimar, Wednesday after Kiliani \[July 11\] *Anno Domini*
XXVI.

**No. 1013 .**

(Strasbourg.) (End of July 1526.)

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

Gerbel sends excerpts from a letter of Capito to Zwingli, which Faber
has falsified in his translation. He is thinking of leaving his position
as clerk of the cathedral chapter and seeks Luther\'s advice.

Handwritten at Strasbourg in Thes. Printed in Kolde\'s *Analecta,* p. 84
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 369.

Many things are now coming to light which, I have no doubt, will be of
use to you when you write about the Lord\'s Supper, namely that you can
see what Satan is up to and what he is up to, how badly he conceals,
that he does everything he does out of a desire for honor, even though
he praises I don\'t know what kind of spirit and a leniency unheard of
in the world. Capito has written a very long letter to Zwingli in the
past few days,^2)^ which is full of new things, some of which I have
written out that refer to you, because the rest is either foolish or not
worthy of being written to such a great man. Faber has translated this
letter into our language, but with such great faithlessness, likewise
with such great malice.

2\) June 11. Zwinglii opp., tom. VII, p. 515.- The messenger was
arrested in Wettingen on the Limmat for thoughtless remarks about the
cult of Mary and brought to Baden, where his letters were taken from
him, which Joh. Faber, who was present at the disputation, seized and
immediately translated into German with various forgeries and published.
In addition, he accused Capito both at the Strasbourg Council and at the
Speier Imperial Diet of highly treacherous activities. Capito not only
proved his innocence orally before the Strasbourg Council, but also
countered Faber in two writings that were published in Strasbourg on
August 12 and 21.

**880**

Letters, from the year 1626. no. 1013. 1014. 1015.

**881**

I do not know whether he did not understand the Latin or whether he
falsified the translation beforehand according to his liking. Therefore,
you may not believe that translation, for I have compared the Latin with
the German, which is virtually in conflict with each other. It is a
passage because of which Capito almost got into the greatest danger,
because Faber translated it differently than the matter stands. Among
other things, Capito closes the speech thus: *vehementerr opus esset, ut
disputationis* 1) *catastrophe extaret* \[it would be very necessary
that one could foresee an end of the disputation, or: that the turning
point of the disputation would occur\]. This is what Faber said: \"Then
it would be almost necessary that the disputation be reversed. The
Swiss, where the disputation was held, were very unwilling that Capito
should desire such shameful things. But surely you see how wrongly
*catastrophe is* translated in this place. But as the letter is foolish,
so it has also received an unrhymed and nonsensical translator. As for
you, this is: \"Summa Summarum, the pope with his satellites has fallen,
2) after his esteem has been driven out of the hearts of the people,
whom the advocates of the inculcated Christ support quite gently.\"
After many other things: \"Luther translated the Syngramma of the
Swabians into German and praised it in a magniloquent preface, in which
you and Oecolampad are discussed. 3)\" Don\'t you see, my dear Gevatter,
where people of such great sanctity come to, how miserably they disgrace
themselves before all the world? When Capito wrote this letter and
handed it over to some foolish person to bring it to Zwingli, it was
intercepted on the journey, opened and brought to the people full of
Faber through printing. Furthermore, the council of our city secretly
asks me to translate the Latin into our German as faithfully as I ever
could. I have done what I could, without regard to any person. All this,
my dearest father, I would have sent to you, if the annual meeting of my
own had not prevented me.

By the way, as far as I am concerned, I am in charge of a very difficult
office, which is contrary to my morals and my conscience. But I see

1\) namely the disputation at Baden.

2\) Here Gerbet has omitted the words: *exturbata existimatione in* his
excerpt; likewise *quem* before *leiniter.*

3\) *persecuti* in the text instead of *perstricti* in Capito is
probably only an error of the copyist (Erl. Briefw.).

I do not know whether I should leave it or not, and what kind of
position I should choose. For to be in idleness neither suffers my mind,
nor are the means sufficient. Therefore, according to your special love
for me, consider and advise what you think I should do and where you
think I should go. For if it could happen, there is no thing I would
rather devote myself to than the muses, than the sciences. I await your
advice and your authoritative word in this matter, and that as soon as
it is ever possible. You have advised many at my request; since I am now
asking myself, I have no doubt that you will help me in the most helpful
way. Farewell and greet especially my godmother in my name, then also
Philip, whom you will call in for this consultation, as a person who
undoubtedly loves me very much.

**No. 1014.**

(Wittenberg.) (July or August 1526?)

**To Johann Rühel.**

(Fragment.)

Printed by Neudecker, Die handschriftliche Geschichte Ratzeberger über
Luther 2c. Jena 1850, p. 235; in Seidemann-De Wette, vol. VI, p. 79 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 372.

My dear doctor and brother-in-law! I thank you for the new newspaper and
thought that the Reichstag would do no good. But I do not like to hear
the alliance against the emperor, because people, I worry, will be
missing.

**No. 1015.**

(Wittenberg.) August 8, 1526.

**To the City Council of Mulhouse.**

Luther sends Johann Mantel as a preacher.

From the Mühlhausen archive in *Cod. chart.* 186. 4th *Goth.*; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 122 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 382.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Mohlhusen, my
> favorable lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear Sirs! By order of our
most gracious Lord Duke John, Elector of Saxony 2c., we have a preacher
to be

**882** . Letters from the year 1526.

No. 1015 to 1018. **883**

whom S. C. F. G. wants to feast on you. The same now comes here, He
Johann Mantel, 1) our church in Wittenberg Lector, with whom you, as
much as God gives men, I hope, shall be provided as with a learned,
quiet, calm, pious man. For this reason, I ask that you receive him in a
Christian manner and keep him as I promise. May Christ, our Lord,
graciously look upon you after your miserable affliction and help you,
so that the mobs may cease and you may learn and do according to his
holy, pure word. I would gladly have come with you, but I do not want to
suffer the matter here. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. *Octav. August*.
1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 1016.**

Wittenberg. August 11, 1526.

**To Michael Stiesel in Tolleth.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1544.

**No. 1017.**

(Wittenberg.) August 28, 1526.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

About paternal authority. News. Luther reads about the preacher Solomon.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 618; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 125 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 377. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1012.

Grace and peace to the Lord! As you write, so I hold it in this case of
paternal authority, yes, so I have written before in several booklets;
this opinion I cannot change yet. This matter can also be put into no
other rules than those of equity, that is, that the power is mostly with
the parents, but that they can abolish it either according to their good
sense or according to the requirements of the matter, so that love is
given a place before the right and the laws. If there are people who
have a different opinion, we keep this custom. Therefore it is in vain,

1\) The Schultheiss of Eisenach was entrusted with Mantel\'s
introduction. But the Catholic council invoked an imperial ban of April
I and refused to anoint Mantel and to let him preach publicly, but kept
Gallus Möcben of Freiburg, who had been sent by Duke Georg. Cf.
Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 562, note 2.

That I should treat in new writings the matter which I have so
abundantly treated.

The Reichstag at Speier is held in the usual way that Germans hold
Reichstags: people drink and play; nothing more. There is nothing new
here, except that Wittenberg is being fortified with such great labor
that you would hardly recognize it if you compared the old with your
present. I am reading Ecclesiastes to Solomon, who is extraordinarily
unwilling and impatient about this reading: so many Hebrew idioms and
obstacles of the unknown language are there; yet by God\'s grace I tear
through. You pray for me and be at ease with your nipple, which God will
soon make a mother and you a father. My son is alive and well by God\'s
grace. Greetings from Philip, who is a little better, 2) and would be
even better if he stopped working. Tuesday after Bartholomew \[Aug. 28\]
1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 1018.**

(Wittenberg,) (end of August 1526,) 3)

**To Spalatin.**

Luther thanks for the news from the Imperial Diet at Speier, reports an
act of violence by the Elector of Brandenburg against the preachers at
Jüterbock and asks for his use for the singers.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, 189 and in *Cod. Jen. a,*

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 375 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 435
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 378. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1100
(not, as De Wette and him, according to the Erl. Briefw., states, again
Col. 1153).

> His in the Lord exceedingly dear Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ
> and his brother.

Grace and peace! You have done us a favor, my dear Spalatin, and your

2\) On Angust 3, Melanchthon wrote to Camerarius (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I,
808): \"I have lain down in the greatest danger for more than 12 days,
and not only I, but also the physician had despaired of my life.

3\) Aurifaber has placed this letter in the year l528, De Wette in March
1529. But the original bears Spalatin\'s inscription: *D. Lutherus pro
Cantorib. redeunti ex Comitiis Spirensib*. 1.5.2.6. Below this the
remark: *Martburgi redita*. Dominion p.

(that is Sept. 2). That the letter belongs to the year 1526 is also
shown by the content.

**884**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1018 to 1021.

885

It is your duty, mindful of us, to inform us about the present Diet 1).
For here, the enemies boast that all kinds of terrible things happened
upon the arrival of our prince: some say that he was expelled from
Speier, others that he was deprived of his electoral dignity, others
tell other things, although we neither believe nor fear them. Here we
are building bravely,^2)^ and by God\'s grace we are still in good
peace.

The margrave 3) has kidnapped and captured by 40 horsemen at Jüterbock
the preachers, who had been appointed by trickery outside the city,
therefore there is a tremendous and dangerous uproar of the people
against the authorities at this place, yes, the town councillors have
been forced to go and reclaim the preachers; it is uncertain what will
happen. One of the preachers taught there calmly and well with the
approval of the bishop of Magdeburg, Thomas Schneidwin, the brother of
the Schösser of Eisenberg.

I beg you, if you are able, to take the reed donkey as a comrade and
help the poor singers, as I have written to him, because it is unfair
and harsh that they are so merely pushed out. Fare well and pray for me.

**No. 101 8a .**

(Wittenberg.) 3. September 1526 (?) (I524). ^4)^

**To Thomas Neuenhagen in Eisenach.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1018, no. 132.

**No 101 9**

(Wittenberg.) September 13, 1526.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VII, 1544.

1\) Here Aurifaber has the marginal gloss: *Comitia Splrensia anno*
1528. In this year, however, no imperial diet took place at Speier.

2\) on the fortification works.

3\) Joachim I of Brandenburg.

4\) We are still of the opinion, which we expressed in the 19th volume
of our edition, Introduction, p. 47 f., that this letter belongs to the
year 1524.

**No. 11020.**

(Wittenberg.) September 13, 1526.

**To Johann Herwagen in Strasbourg and to**

**Joh. Secerius in Hagenan.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1578.

**No. 1021 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 19, 1526.

**To Spalatin.**

About the abolition of papist customs in the Altenburg monastery. A
rumor about the King of Hungary. About an error in the interpretation of
Isaiah 9.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 207. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 315; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 110 and in, Erlanger Briefw., vol. V, p. 392. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1006.

> To the servant of Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, evangelist at Altenburg,
> his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I wish you happiness that you have arrived safely, and
I ask Christ to grant you that you have brought a little Spalatin from
Speier.

It would be nice and quite just that your Baalites 5) would be forced by
a command of the prince to abandon their monstrosities, since they
falsely boast that he has commanded them and wants to uphold them.
Therefore, if they boast of a false obedience, let them be driven to the
right; you also cooperate in this, I will do the same.

Likewise, one assures so certainly and constantly that the king of
Hungary is slain that I am completely in doubt. But these are
monstrosities, if they are true, which foreshadow the Last Day, since
God is doing such works on the highest kings at this time. This is the
purpose of so many signs from Heaven that have been occurring over and
over again during these years.

Who does not see that there is an obvious misprint in the interpretation
of Isaiah Cap. 9? 6)

5\) The canons of the St. Georgenstifts in Altenburg.

6\) The passage to which Luther refers here is found in the Church
Postil, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XI, 1995, p 44 at the beginning, where
in the first edition it said by a misprint: \"that his mother had to
be\.... in the special power of the Holy Spirit\". In the church
postilion, \"to be born\" was left standing, but \"his mother\" was
changed to \"he of his mother\". This sermon was preached on Dec. 25,
1525, as we see from Buchwald, \"Andreas Poach\", p. XXIV.

**886** Letters from the year 1526. no. 1021. 1022. 1023. **887**

But I do not have my copy; without doubt, where one reads: \"to be
born\", there either has been written or should have been written: \"to
become pregnant\". This requires the whole interpretation and the thing
of which is acted. But who can shred a measure for all, that they do not
falsify or err? Fare well and pray for me. On Wednesday after the
Exaltation of the Cross 1) \[Sept. 19\] 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 1022.**

Wittenberg. September 20, 1526.

**To Agricola.**

Of economic affairs.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 73; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 128 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 394.

> To Johann Agricola, teacher of the youth at Eisleben, his brother in
> Christo.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Since I had nothing to write, I am writing
this, my dear John, especially since Philip is there as a living letter.
I am glad that he is going there, so that people will see that the cause
is being pursued by us with great respect and earnestness. God grant
that which is watered may prosper. Greetings to your taller \"Elfe\" and
your smaller 2) and your Hanna together with Philipp. I ask you to send
us more of those things that are like small medlars, in German:
\"Erlsbeere\" (*Eltzbeer*),^3)^ because my Kethe (*cathena*) devours
them greedily, but even more the Eberhardin, who is pregnant. To Count
Albrecht, if it can happen, recommend me. But greet D. Johann Rühl with
his own (*cum sua carne*) and Conrad, \"the scribe\", 4) Johann Dürer,
with your mouth, with

1\) De Wette has wrongly assumed \"Cross\'s invention\" and therefore
the date: \"May 9\". But at that time the Diet of Speier was not yet
opened, and King Louis of Hungary was killed only on August 9 in the
Battle of Mohacz.

2\) Agricola\'s wife, Elsa, and their daughter of the same name.

3\) In German there are many names for it: Arlesbeere, Arleskirsche,
Sperberbeere, Sperberapfel, Speierlingbeere, Sorbapfel.

4\) Spalatin calls him: *D. Caspar Conradus, scriba ducalis*. - Dürer\"
also means Thür, Dürr, Durch; he was Chancellor of Mansfeld.

my heart. I give thanks for the fur that has finally been delivered, but
it is all too dear; I will write about it at another time. All of you
fare well in the Lord, amen. Wittenberg, Thursday after the Exaltation
of the Cross \[20 Sept.\] 1526.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1023 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 21, 1526.

**To the musician Johann Walther.**

Luther wants to use him and two other cantors, whose cantor positions in
Wittenberg the Elector wants to abolish.

From the original in *Cod. chart.* 380. I. *Bibl. Goth.* in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 129 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 384.

*D. Johnnni Walther, Musis amico et amato,*

> *suo in Domino charissimo* \[To the Lord Johann Walther, the friend
> and lover of the Muses, his in the Lord exceedingly theur (friend)\].

*Gratia. et Pax.* My dear Walther, I will leave you to your trouble and
expense, and even write to m. gn. H. for you three abandoned *cantors*;
for it seems to me that dragging you out (it would be a different
matter) is of no use. For people should probably think that I would be
driven so hard by you; it is better that I turn myself in than that I do
it by myself. I have also called Spalatinus; he writes that he wants to
do the best. I am now writing to Mr. Conrad 5) also for the books and
for you to provide for the Schweblin 6) for the sake of the feud, as you
know. The books shall still serve for use and benefit as much as I can.
Only that one gives the people a form, since they could not pass.
Herewith God commands and greets me your dear Coste and says that she
will become a straight and jointed rib. *Feria 6. post Lamberti* \[21.
Septembers 1526.

*M artinus Luther.*

5\) Conrad Rupsch.

6\) \"das Schweblin\" will probably be Jakob Holzwart from Memmingen.

**888**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1024 to 1028.

**No. 1024.**

(Wittenberg.) October 14, 1526.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther reports on his literary works.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
28. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 30b.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 319b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 130
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 398. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1013 f.

> To the servant of God, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at
> Zwickau, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! Here was nothing new, my dear Nicolaus, what this
bookseller could have brought, because the book of warfare is not yet
finished, but it is promoted from day to day in print.

I deal with the fact that Zechariah is to follow Habakkuk and Jonah. The
preacher Solomon troubles me a lot, as if he did not want to be read,
but he is forced to be read; so much has this book been lying low until
now. You are right in saying that the world is going to ruin; I also
hope that the day of the appearance of the coming of the great God is
near, so much do all things everywhere glow, burn, waver, fall, tumble,
rage. But you be well and pray for me. On the Sunday after Dionysius
\[October 14\] 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 1025.**

(Wittenberg.) October 25, 1526.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tolleth.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1545.

**No. 1026.**

Wittenberg. October 28, 1526.

**To Johann Frosch in Augsburg.**

Luther consoles and strengthens him in his trials and tribulations,
which he had to endure in the fight with the predominantly strong
Zwinglischeü party in Augsburg (only Stephan Agricola \[Kastenbauer\]
was on his side), and promises that he will write against the
Sacramentirans.

1\) \"Ob Kriegsleute auch in seligem Stande sein können,\" St. Louis
Edition, Vol. X, 488.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 320 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 131
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. V, p. 400. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1014.

> To the Herru Doctor Johann Frosch,^2)^ the exceedingly faithful herald
> of Christ in the city of Augsburg.

Grace and peace! Christ keep you and yours, my dear frog (*Rana*), but
remember in this challenge that many must be angry, and few will be
chosen who will endure. Satan is now raging out of approval of God
because of the ingratitude and contempt of His word, which few
understand, as I have always foretold, it would happen that we
ungrateful people would be struck with wars and mobs. You be strong and
support your little group. They may rage, rule and triumph; he who is in
us is greater than he who is in them \[1 John 4:4\]. I am burning with
desire to confess my faith once again and to show their mockery with a
few words (for they themselves no longer hear), and I would have done it
long ago if I had not lacked the time and Satan himself had prevented
me. But I will make an effort, if Christ is gracious to me and you pray
for me to come forward. Your letter and that of Martin Weiss are with me
and are before me, because I have always been anxious to deal with these
matters publicly. Now the hurried messenger does not allow me to write
anything more. Farewell in Christ and comfort and greet the brethren.
Wittenberg, on the day of Simonis and Judä \[Oct. 28\] 1526.

**No. 1027.**

(Wittenberg.) October 29, 1526.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1546.

**No. 1028.**

Wittenberg. November 1, 1526.

**To Queen Mary of Hungary.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1.

2\) About Joh. Frosch see St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2409, amn.4.

**890**

Letters from the year 1526. no. 1929. 1030. 1031.

**891**

**No. 1029 .**

Wittenberg. November 14, 1526, ^1)^

**To Wolfgang Fueß, pastor in Colditz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 710.

**No. 1030 .**

Wittenberg. November 15, 1526. 2)

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for Caspar Schalbe of Eisenach.

From the Weimar Archive in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 55; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 269; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 401 and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 54, p. 50.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony,
> Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! M. Caspar Schalbe is still in misery and out of Eisenach, not
without great harm and trouble, as E. C. F. G. well know to consider: I
now humbly ask E. C. F. G. to put an end to the matter, and to order the
good man to leave Eisenach. C. F. G. would put an end to the matter,
give orders, and let the good man be helped home again; for if it were
true (as I do not hope), we are human beings, and may such afflictions
be corrected with a fair punishment. May God mercifully command him E.
C. F. G., Amen. Thursday after Martinmas, 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

1\) In the old edition of Walch, the date is: \"Monday after Martini\"
(November 12) instead of: \"Wednesday\" in De Wette and in the Erlanger.
The same error also in the St. Louis edition, but in the preface to the
10th volume, Col. 79, the correct date is set.

2\) This letter is erroneously placed in the year 1528 in the editions,
which Burkhardt, p. 112, has already pointed out. It certainly belongs
to the year 1526, as can be seen from the answer of the Elector on
November 26, 1526 and from a later letter of Luther to the Elector on
March 1, 1527.

**No. 1031.**

Wittenberg. Before November 16, 1526.

**To the Electoral Councils.**

Duke George had known how to obtain either the manuscript or the copy of
Luther\'s intended \"Gegenschrift Wider den Mainzer Rathschlag\" (St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 339 ff.), which had been suppressed by the
Elector, and already on July 4 he complained about it to the Elector
through Andreas Pflug, bailiff at Leipzig. The Elector promised to
approach Luthern about it and to send his answer to Duke George.
However, the Elector was already busy with his departure for the Diet of
Speier, and his letter to Luther did not arrive until after his return
from the Diet on September 10. On September 15, he apologized to Duke
George for the delay, and promised to write to Luther now, and on
November 16, he sent the copy of our letter to Duke George.

From a writing in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
120 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.53, p.381.

Grace and peace in Christ. Respectable and highly esteemed, dear lords
and good friends! This is my answer to your request, which you sent and
complained to my lord about the booklet I should have printed about the
priests\' counsel, and about Duke Jörgen, who complained as if he should
be reviled in it, to his lordship:

First, that you will excuse me against my most gracious lord. After His
Lordship had suggested to me that the same booklet, when it was started,
even by his own intention long before, rather than Duke Jörge might pray
for it, not to let it go out, nor to let it come from me (which is now
also dear to me myself, because God has let the bloodthirsty priests not
to carry out their murderous counsel before the Emperor. Maj., and did
more than I might have done with the booklet): so I would not have
provided myself with such complaints from Duke Jörgen, and not only
that, but because the same booklet was taken from me secretly and not in
any proper way, or copied, and would well like to suffer that it could
be learned how the same booklet was obtained and brought to me or
copied; for my Lord Elector or Duke would have it known. Lord Elector or
Duke Jörge himself would not like to suffer that letters or trades were
secretly transcribed in their offices.

**892** Letters from the year

1526\. no. 1031. 1032. **893**

or carried away without knowledge and will: therefore my need would be
to know the same. Thus writes St. Jerome, if they were disgraceful
books, but if they remain secretly in the box, they should not be
considered disgraceful books, whether they are secretly carried away by
book thieves or get out. I want to have such for my excuse against my
gn. Lord that the booklet has been secretly stolen or copied from me, so
that his Lordship will not think that I have stolen or copied it. G.
does not think that I have brought it out or sent it out contrary to his
churfl. G.\'s order or let it go out. Hereby God is commanded. At
Wittenberg, 1) 1526.

Martinus Luther.

**No 1032.**

Berkwitz. November 17, 1526.

Carlstadt to Luther.

He seeks Luther\'s use to be allowed to live in Kemberg.

The original is in the archives at Weimar, N 367, No. 183. 3 Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 112 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p.405.

Respectable, highly learned doctor, favorable and dear godfather! My
very willing services before and what good I am able to do. My Lord!
Your respectability is undoubtedly well aware that I complain many times
and why I have to leave the farm in Berckzaw 2). Because the departure
of my horses has not ceased, but recently a large, strong stallion
together with another stallion, which I would not have liked to sell for
15 fl., both died in one week, I have hurried and sold such property at
a good price, so that I would not become a beggar, and the field would
have to become deserted because of me. I hope that no one can blame me
or accuse me of being unstable because I have now lost 7 horses and
otherwise have lost great unbelievable wealth.

1\) The Weimar manuscript has as date, but again crossed out, \"die
Magdalenä\", that is, July 22, which De Wette and after him the Erlanger
have set. But the letter cannot have been written so early, because only
on November 16 the Elector writes to Duke George: \"that from those,
whom we ordered to take such report from Dr. Luther, [shortly
before]{.underline} report and Luther\'s answer has arrived, as your
dear ones will hear from the enclosed copy\". He enclosed an
[undated]{.underline} copy of our letter with the letter.

2\) Berckzaw, Berckaw == Berkwitz.

I have suffered some damage. Now, praise be to God forever and ever, I
have produced a little livestock, namely sheep, pigs, oxen and cows, and
also a small six-month-old cow, which I do not dare to take far without
danger. In particular, I am not able to take my fodder, hay, straw and
wood with me far for the sake of the cart, but I would have to give half
of it away and make it into water, and over that I would have to buy
other things at great expense, all of which would be to my undoubted
detriment as a poor man.

I may not assume another farm, so E. A. know, how I have looked around
for a dwelling in Grefenheinge 3) during the summer and have not found
anything. Kemberg, however, which abuts the Birckzaw (sic) village, is
in the Elector\'s possession, since I have been admitted by grace, but
with a gracious final clause, until \[it\] would be different 2c. But
there I could get several houses for rent or purchase, and bring in my
fodder, cattle and wood with favorable help in the most satisfactory
way, which I am not allowed to do or think without intercession and
permission. Because I have kept myself so quiet and practiced all kinds
of work, which I report for the sake of necessity and not for the sake
of fame, 4) that there is no more talk of Carlstadt\'s teachings, nor am
I willing to enter into any matter of the scholars, but to wait for my
food, which E. A. is nowhere more certain about. A. may nowhere
experience more certain daily, because from the proximity, so I ask E.
A. for God\'s sake, E. G. (sic) want me to the most illustrious and
highborn Prince and Lord, Mr. Johansen, Duke of Saxony, of the Holy
Roman Empire Archmarshalken and Churf, 2c., my gn. Lord, to ask H. C. F.
G. for princely clemency and Christian mercy, to pardon me with that
which does not break off a penny to their churf. G., as I understand it,
to further extend the gracious agreement shown to me, and to allow me to
come to Kemberg, to feed myself along with other citizens, and to
acquire food and clothing for my poor children, as I am obligated to do.
I will be prepared to do this at all times, without saving my body and
goods, in order to earn your honor. Date at Berckzaw, Saturday after
Martinmas \[Nov. 17\] Anno XXVI. year.

CA.

willing servant

Andreas Carolstat.

3\) Gräfenhainichen.

4\) \"thue\" put by us instead of: \"thun\".

**894** Letters from the year 1526. no. 1033. **895**

**No. 1033.**

(Wittenberg.) November 22, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther applies for a church visitation. He asks for Carlstadt to be
allowed to live in Kemberg.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p. 519; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XIX, p. 554; in Walch, vol. XXI, 156; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 135 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 386.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most noble, highborn prince, most gracious
lord! I have not brought E. C. F. G. supplication for a long time, they
have now gathered, E. C. F. G. wanted to have patience; it will not and
cannot be otherwise.

First of all, most gracious Lord, the parish priests are complaining
beyond measure almost in all places. The peasants no longer want to give
anything, and there is such ingratitude among the people for the holy
word of God that there is undoubtedly a great plague from God; and if I
knew how to do it with a good conscience, I would well \"help\" that
they have no pastor or preacher, and live like swine, when they do:
there is no longer any fear of God or discipline, because the pope\'s
ban has gone, and everyone does whatever he wants.

But because we are all commanded, especially the authorities, above all
to educate the poor youth who are born and grow up every day, and to
keep them in the fear of God and in discipline, we must have schools and
preachers and pastors. If parents do not want to do this, they can
always go to the devil. But where the youth neglects and remains
uneducated, it is the fault of the authorities, and the country becomes
full of wild, loose people, so that not only God\'s commandment, but
also the need of all of us, forces us to turn away from this.

But now in E. C. F. G. principality, papal and ecclesiastical compulsion
and order is over, and all monasteries and convents fall into the hands
of E. C. F. G., as the supreme head, there comes at the same time also
the duty and complaint to order such a thing; for no one else accepts
it, nor can, nor should. Therefore, as I have talked everything over
with E. C. F. G. Chancellor, also Mr. Niclas von Ende, it will be
necessary to ask E. C. F. G. in the most conducive way.

F. G., as God has required and authorized in such a case, to have four
persons visit the land; two who are responsible for interest and goods;
two who are responsible for doctrine and persons, so that these persons,
by order of E. C. F. G., may establish and care for the schools and
parishes where necessary.

Where there is a town or village that is of property, the C.C.F.G. has
the power to compel them to keep schools, preaching stations, and
parishes. If they do not want to do it for their own happiness, E. C. F.
G. is there as the supreme guardian of the youth and of all who need it,
and shall force them to do it; just as if they were forced by force to
give and serve for bridges, footpaths and roads, or for any other
accidental necessity of the country.

What the land needs and requires, those who use and enjoy the land shall
give and help. Now there is no need for people to come and rule after
us. But if they have no property and are otherwise too heavily burdened,
then the monastery estates, which are primarily endowed for this purpose
and are still to be used for this purpose, are to be spared the common
man all the more. For it is easy for the C.C.F.G. to mean that in the
end there would be an evil clamor, and it is also not justifiable where
the schools and parishes lie low, and the nobility should bring the
monastery estates to themselves; as is already said, and also done by
some. Since such estates do not improve anything in the C.C.F.G.
Chamber, and are finally endowed for church service, they should serve
this purpose first and foremost. What is left after that may be used by
the C.F.G. for the needs of the country or for poor people.

On the other hand: D. Carlstadt has asked me very much to write to E. C.
F. G. for mercy, so that he may live in Kemberg; otherwise he cannot
stay in the villages because of the malice of the peasants, as E. C. F.
G. can hear from this letter of his, and also from Hans von Grafendorf,
and yet he is afraid to write to E. C. F. G. himself. Because he has so
far been silent publicly, and our one part, also Hans Metsch, Captain,
consider it good that the Provost 1) at Kem

1\) Bartholomäus Bernhardt (Feldkirch).

**896**

Letters from the year 1526. No.

1033\. 1034. 1035. **897**

I also humbly ask that E. C. F. G. would graciously grant him this,
although E. C. F. G. has already done much and has been the subject of
much talk on his behalf. But God will reward it all the more abundantly.
Let him stand for his soul; let us do good to his body and to his own.
May the grace of God be with us, Amen. Thursday after Elizabeth \[Nov.
22\] 1526.

E. C. F. G. subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 034.**

(Wittenberg.) November 23, 1526.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther recommends the preacher at Schweinitz to be the pastor there.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 393; in the Altenburger,
vol. Ill, p. 657; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 551; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 158 f.; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 137, according to the original in
the Weimar archives, and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 389.

> To the Serene, high-born. Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony and Elector
> 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most gracious
> Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The people of Schweinitz ask me to intercede with E. C. F. G., so
that they will give the preacher they now have, who was previously
appointed by Doctor Lucae and left behind after his fatal departure, in
his place as pastor. Now it is true, he is a pious, learned man. But I
also have to report to E. C. F. G. that the people of Schweinitz, as
well as almost all commoners from time to time, want to appoint pastors
on other people\'s property, and give nothing themselves, and feed no
one. Whoever wants to have the power and right to appoint, should also
be obligated and obliged to feed, and not call, build or free on
another\'s property. Otherwise I lack nothing in the person; in this E.
C. F. G. will know well how to keep. For the parish goods and interest

are solely endowed by the Superior. Ordered by the grace of God. Friday
after Elizabeth \[23 Nov\] An. 1526.

E. C. F. G.

subservient Martinus Luther.

**No. 1035 .**

Weimar. November 26, 1526.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Response to Luther\'s letter of November 22; the note responds to the
letter of November 15.

The concept is in the Weimar Archives, N, p. 367, No. 183. 3. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 114 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. V, p. 407.

Our greeting before. Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! We have read
all the contents of your letter concerning the establishment of
parishes, schools and Doctor Carolstat, and as far as the establishment
of parishes and schools is concerned, we also find daily that there is a
great lack of ours in this area, and we do not like to hear it. Since we
have judged and considered among ourselves that we, as the sovereign,
are due to see to it, you know that we have ordered our advisors and
dear faithful, Gregory Brück, Chancellor, and Hansen von Grefendorf,
whom we left behind us in Wittenberg for this and other matters, to have
a conversation with you and the four deans 1) about it. When the same
two, coming to us again, reported to us that they considered it good
with you up to our favor, that one person or two from the university,
and from us someone from the council, should be ordered to visit our
cities, towns and villages, if the necessity requires it, and the
agreement should have been that persons from the university, suitable
for this, should be appointed to us in writing, We do not know how to
convince you that such a discussion, which ours had with you and the
four deans, will please us. We also want to appoint two of our
councilors, whom we will consider suitable and useful for such a
visitation, and we will not let the costs, which will result from it, be
lost for the good of the matter. However, we graciously request that you
be present at our university, so that we can make use of two per

1\) That is, with the decans of the four faculties.

**898**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1035. 1036.

899

If you compare the names of the persons and teachers 1) who are to be
paid attention to, and if you name and identify them to us, you and they
shall be left to our discretion as to the time and place at which we
first want to carry out and have carried out such a visitation.

Secondly, we have also heard what you have written to us concerning
Doctor Carolstat, to the effect that we have noted his complaints and
objections from his letter 2). Now we know not to leave it undisclosed
to you in your gracious opinion that all sorts of things were said on
his account when we were at the Diet of Speier, and in particular our
councilors, whom we used there as a committee in the affairs of the
realm, have indicated to us that some have publicly said that the said
Carlstat should not refrain from writing to some of those who are
dependent on his established sect, and to strengthen them in this way,
3) in which way, also with what measure and happened promise the said
Carlstat would be suffered by us at this time in our lands in the best,
so much might have happened that we could no longer have known him in
our princedoms. We therefore graciously request that Carlstat be
reminded to keep his promise and to dispense with letters and other
things that serve to strengthen the affected sect, and we want to have
it done, according to your intercession, that he may turn to Kemberg,
which you may also indicate to him on our behalf. We request, however,
that you inform and order the provost of Kemberg and others, whom you
respect in this regard, to have good respect for the man\'s character
and actions, as well as for the people who will come to him. For if it
should happen to us that he writes outside of the country or praises or
otherwise strengthens the affected sect in our countries and
principalities, he would have to consider what displeasure we would bear
and what we would be caused to do because of it. We have not wished to
restrain you from this, and are inclined to you with graciousness and
good. Date Weimar, Monday after Catharine \[Nov. 26\] Anno 26.

1\) The Elector later appointed Hans von der Planitz and Asmus von
Hanbitz as visitators; the university appointed Melanchthon and
Hieronymus Schurs. - The visitation began on February 13, 1527.

2\) No. 1032.

3\) The meaning of this passage will probably be: and if it had come to
that, that our councilors would have had to report on it 2c.

Notes.

Concerning Caspar Schalken, of whom you wrote to us in another letter,
we would be well inclined to procure at your request that he be secured
to his own. However, we cannot reproach you for the fact that we have
received such a report on account of his actions and things, and that he
has now been absconding for some time, so that we may not consider him
innocent. If he should now be admitted without punishment, you are to
consider to what imposition such a thing will be sufficient for us. If,
however, he is inclined to carry out his innocence, as is fair, or to
get along with the mistress and others, so that no one has cause, even
if it is done secretly, to complain about it, then, at his request, we
will gladly order our bailiff at Wartburg or someone else who is in a
position to do so, to act in one of the ways indicated.

**No. 1036 .**

Wittenberg. November 28, 1526.

**To Conrad Cordatus^4)^ in Liegnitz.**

Luther speaks about the religious conditions in Liegnitz that Cordatus
told him about, namely, on the one hand, swarm spirits, Schwenkfeld and
Krautwald, and on the other hand, carnal life.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 73; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 138 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 410.

Grace and peace be with you in the Lord! You write strange things about
your Liegnitz, my dear Cordatus, that in one and the same place the
spirit is so powerful and the flesh at the same time, since the former
boast nothing but spirit and the latter live nothing but flesh. But
although this is a common corruption in the whole world, namely, the
overindulgence in words, you must still try and stop it. 5) Who knows
whether God does not want to do the opposite and a new thing in this
place, that just as elsewhere the zeal for the gospel first glows and
then is cold, so there it should first be cold and then glow. May God
grant that this people may be the son who first refuses to go into the
vineyard, and after that

4\) About Cordatus and his life fate see St. Louis edition, vol. XXII,
Introduction, p. 4b f.

5\) This will refer to the new academy founded by Duke Frederick II of
Liegnitz, to which Cordatus was appointed as a teacher. It did not last
and Cordatus left Silesia already in April 1527.

**900** Letters from the year 1526. No. 1036 to 1039. 901

but repents and has gone, and is preferred to the one who first promised
to go but did not go \[Matt. 21:28 ff\]. Therefore continue bravely, and
the Lord will be with you. But do not fear the spirits, which are
spiritually the most spiritual. It is truly foolish with God what they
imagine. But Christ be with you. And if you can, write to us often. Your
letters are pleasant to us, both because they are witnesses of your
faith, which is very important to you and to others, and because they
are full of facts and refresh us who are eager for them. ^1)^ Fare well
in the Lord. Wittenberg, Nov. 28, 1526.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 103 7.**

Wittenberg. November 28, 1526.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

(Fragment.)

Luther strongly advised him against a double marriage.

This letter is taken from the original in the Hof- und Staats-Archiv in
Kassel, which is now in Marburg, and published in Niedners Zeitschrift
für die historische Theologie 1852, Heft II, p. 265, by Professor
Heinrich Heppe in Marburg; also in De Wette - Seidemann, Vol. VI, p. 79
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 411. The beginning of the original is
torn off.

\.... For the sake of this matter, my faithful warning and advice is
that Christians in particular should not have more than one wife, not
only because it is annoying, and no Christian should give trouble
without need, but should avoid it most diligently, but also because
there is no word of God here, on which one may rely, so that God is
pleased with Christians. Pagans and Turks may do as they please. The
ancient fathers had many wives, but they were forced to do so by
necessity, as Abraham and Jacob, and after them many kings, to whom the
wives of their friends died as an inheritance according to the laws of
Moses. Now it is not enough for a Christian to look at the work of the
fathers, he must also have a divine word for himself, which makes him
certain, just as they had.

1\) In the editions: *terreant*. De Wette suggests *satiant*. We have
adopted *recreant.*

For where there was no necessity or cause, the fathers of old had no
more than one wife than Isaac, Joseph, Moses and many others. For this
reason I do not know how to advise, but must advise against it,
especially the Christians, unless there is a great need, as if the wife
were leprous or otherwise stolen. But I do not know how to defend the
others. This is what I will humbly answer E. F. G. to such a question.
Hiemit GOttes Gnaden befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Wednesday after
Catherina \[Nov . 28\] 1526. F. G.

willing

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1038.**

(Last months 1526.)

**King Henry VIII of England to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 382, no. 82.

**No. 1039 .**

(Wittenberg.) December 9, 1526.

**To Joseph Levin Metzsch.**

Luther\'s opinion of polygamy; on infant baptism and the appointment of
a preacher.

In the Unsch. Nachr. 1712, p. 13; in the Leipz. Suppl., p. 46; in Walch,
vol. XXI, 160; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 139 and in the Erlanger
Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 390.

> To the honorable and firm Joseph Levin Metzsch 2c., my favorable
> master and good friend.

Grace and peace. Honorable and firm, dear lord and friend! To your first
question: whether anyone may have more than one wife in marriage? This
is my answer: The unbelievers may do as they please, but Christian
liberty should be directed by love, so that everything should be
directed to the service of the neighbor, where it can be done without
necessity and error of faith and conscience; but now everyone wants to
seek the liberty that serves and is useful to him, taking nothing into
account, neither the neighbor\'s benefit nor improvement, even though
St. Paul says: *Omnia licent, sed non omnia expediunt, 1. Cor. ep. VI.
tantum ne libertatem in*

**902**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1039 to 1045.

**903**

*occasionem carnis detis etc*. It is also free to prostitute oneself, or
to live without them; but who will do it without need, with a good
conscience? Even if the ancients had many wives, Christians are not to
follow such an example, because there is no necessity, nor correction,
nor especially God\'s word, that commands such a thing, and so great
trouble and unrest may come from it. For this reason, I do not consider
Christians to be any more free, since God would have to command such
freedom beforehand.

How one should baptize the children, I have written abundantly in the
Postille after Epiphany 1); the enthusiasts do what they want. That you
appoint a preacher 2) to your people, and let him become honorable (for
it is need, benefit and freedom, also God\'s word for it), is fair, so
far as you have complete power and authority over them, if not, then you
should let it be commanded by God, and likewise let him dare for himself
whether he wants to preach. Hereby commanded by God, Amen. Sunday after
Nicolai \[Dec. 9\] 1526. Martin Luther.

**No. 1040 .**

Dresden. December 21, 1526.

**Duke George of Saxony to Luther.**

Letter accompanying the letter from King Henry VIII of England to
Luther, which the Duke sends.

The original concept is in the Hauptstaatsarchiv zu Dresden, *Locat*.
10,300, koi. 203. Printed in the Theol. Studien und Kritiken 1880, Heft
2, p. 349 (Seidemann) and in the Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 413.

\[3) The noble prince, Lord Henry of England and France, protector of
the Christian faith 2c., our special dear lord and friend, has sent us a
writing \[today\], holding to you, kindly minded to send it to you by
our messenger, and that you may give us the more faith, so we send you
herewith a copy of his royal dignity letter, done to us. Dignity letter,
done to us, and at the same time royal dignity answer \[to you\]. Würd
reply \[to you\], as they come to us. If we knew kön. Dignity in more
service, we would be willing.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XI, 486.

2\) In 1526 Donat Krause came to Reichenbach, which belonged to Metzsch,
as pastor.

3\) The enclosed in square brackets is an addition by the hand of
Chancellor Pistori.

**No. 1041.**

(Wittenberg.) December 22, 1526.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About an earlier writing of Luther\'s, newly published by others, who is
buried the present year, as if he still holds so now.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 321; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 140 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. V, p. 414. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1016.

Grace and peace! Those articles I will either let go or, if I have time,
revoke. Because also another unworthiness has itself recently in this! I
have also recently shown myself to be worthless in this year, in that
the number of this year has been added to the issue, as if I were to
keep it that way in this year. Thus Satan mocks in his wrath. Farewell
and pray for me, and comfort the afflicted Marquard. 4) On the Saturday
after St. Thomas \[22 Dec.\] 1526.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1042.**

(Wittenberg.) (End 1526,)

**To Assa from Kram.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 488.

**No. 1043.**

(Wittenberg.) (End 1526.)

**To Philipp Gluenspies in Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1016, no. 131.

**No. 1044.**

(Wittenberg.) (Late 1526 or early 1527.)

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1786, annex, no. 11.

> **No. 1045.** 1526.

**To a parish priest.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 688.

4\) Schuldorp.

**904**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1046.

**905**

**No. 1046.** 1526.

**Concerns about how the peasants\' revolt could be alleviated at its
source by abolishing the mass and employing good parish priests.**

This writing is found in the collective editions: in the Wittenberg
(1569), vol. IX, p. 222 b, as from the year 1525, with the marginal
note: \"This writing is found in Herr Spalatin\'s Bibliotheca, and, as
its handwriting shows, is Germanized by him, but, as can be seen, not of
all things completely, especially at the end. Completely the same in the
Jenaer (1556), vol. Ill, p. 182 b, but with the marginal gloss in the
register: \"Gehört ins 26. Jahr,\" Further in the Altenburger, vol. Ill,
p. 337; in the Leipziger, vol. XIX, p. 551; in Walch, vol. XXI, Anh, p.
152\* and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 72. In all these editions,
it has been overlooked that single printings of this manuscript are
available, which Panzer has already listed under No. 3018 and No. 3019.
Only the second edition of the Erlanger Ausgabe, Vol. 26, p. I gives the
titles of these editions, and has given the text of the manuscript after
one of them. The title of this edition reads: \"Eyn ratschlag wie in der
Christlichen gemehne, ain rechter anfang vnd beharrliche endtschafft,
eyner bestmdigen ordnung solle furgenomen vund auffgericht werden. D.
Mar. Lu.\" Without place and year. 1 sheet in 4. It can be assumed that
Luther himself wrote the scripture in German. The first edition of the
Erlangen edition only brings in the register the title found in the old
editions: \"Luthers Bedenken, wie jetziger Aufruhr zu stillen\", with
the remark: \"*latein*. We give here the text according to the second
edition of the Erlangen edition, but here and there we have adopted
Spalatin\'s readings. - Walch, Seidemann and the Erlangen edition
recognize the year 1526 as correct.

**A Counsel by Doctor Martini Luther on How to Establish and Complete a
Permanent Order in the Christian Community. 1526.**

Because this next upheaval has so wrought havoc on us that it is easy to
see what evil will come of it if we do not see to it that the common
man\'s mind is quieted and united as much as possible, it is necessary
to do this not only by force, as is already the case, but also by
reason. For force without reason cannot endure, and keeps the subjects
in eternal hatred of the rulers, as all history shows us.

Now one cannot deny that in the mob, from many years ago, unwillingness
has grown up and evil delusion has taken hold of the dishonest life of
the spiritual state, and since one does not want to improve it, but
rather defends it with defiance against all fairness, the delusion has
become a

The result is such misery as unfortunately exists; therefore, the first
thing to do is to reform the state, or the pen will not come out of the
heart.

The first thing to be done here is to approach your main task, namely,
the mass, so that it is performed in a Christian, common, unanimous
manner, in which God and men may be pleased and satisfied. The manner,
however, must be taken from the divine word, without which no order is
unanimous and constant, since nothing so powerfully fills the mouths and
quiets the hearts of all men as the divine word. Words of men certainly
cause sects and unequal ways, as one can see before one\'s eyes all over
the world.

It is obvious and cannot be denied by the clergy themselves, how in the
whole world such a terrible abomination and horrible misuse of the
reverend Sacrament of our Lord Jesus Christ\'s body and blood is going
on, namely the great cruel misuse, which even reason without Scripture
recognizes and condemns, that a loud fair and manipulation has been made
of the holy sacrament, since Christ, the Holy Spirit, grace, life,
heaven, forgiveness of sins, and redemption from hell and purgatory have
been sold; yes, even if a sow is sick, or has lost a penny, or some
other small misfortune befalls you: all this is sought to be averted by
the Mass with money, so that the Mass has been free, open and ready to
obtain a merchant\'s office against all kinds of misfortune on earth
with a penny or half a penny for anyone, whether pious or wicked,
regardless of faith, love and all God\'s glory and salvation. -For even
if, among a hundred thousand, one or a few more might be found to keep
mass for God\'s sake, the others and the common state 1) are abused, so
that, if there were no money, no one respects the mass or is directed to
help anyone with it. For for this purpose monasteries and churches have
been founded, into which one does not go other than to feed one\'s belly
and have good days through the abominable and blasphemous creed of
divine service and the masses; this is no different and no one can deny
it.

1\) That is, the state of the clergy in general.

**S06**

Letters from the year 1526. No. 1046.

**907**

Moreover, it is seen and grasped that this creedalism and money-making
by 1) Christ\'s blood is not applied to pious poor people, but the
majority to the clergy, who lie in carnal uncleanness, as Paul calls it,
also in public fornication, adultery and all disgraces, Many of them are
drunkards and full of impiety, and live blamelessly in all these under
the appearance and protection of spiritual status.^2)^ So, impudent and
unclean, they go desperately to the altar, that is, to their merchant\'s
booth, trade and torture, sell and exchange the dear Christ. If there
were no abomination on earth, this alone would be enough for God\'s
wrath to carry us away, like Sodom and Gomorrah.

And indeed, God has let himself be noticed in this uproar, if we wanted
to open our eyes, that the misery has been inflicted on the clergy and
for the sake of the clergy, as they protect and suffer such
abominations, and finally, as a common punishment, has gone out on the
rabble, who have also followed and served such abominations, and there
is no end to it yet; In addition, it is to be feared that it was a
fox\'s tail, and where one will not yet do anything to put an end to
such a public, known abomination, but will handle and tolerate it
insolently and as if in defiance of God, the iron rod will follow
afterwards.

Therefore, it is advisable that all masses be dismissed with a final
common judgment, and that one does not intend to keep them and to
improve them with the patchwork of a glittering reformation. For where
the mass should remain as it is now, it is impossible to prevent it from
becoming a creed, unless others are ordained to attend masses, since
they are and must be vain idlers who have no office to serve the word
and neighbor, for which Christ actually instituted this sacrament. But
where there is idleness, all vices follow, so that it cannot be advised
here that the ministers of the Mass should be given the office of the
word; those who are not able to do this should not say Mass either.
Otherwise, the useless people will be and are too many, and because they
almost

If they are vain belly servants and idlers who serve no one, but let
them serve, the annoyance and vexation of both God and man will not
cease.

If we had ordered this main part correctly, then the other part, as it
depends on it, would be easy to advise. But if one does not want to do
this, then I would not like to advise the other orders, because this is
in vain and a vain wasted effort, which is broken by the handling of the
measurements. The source of the abomination must be stopped, otherwise
the rivers and streams will not dry up.

Above all this, the mass is even more abominable and abusive; For even
if it were without outward gross abuse and not a creed, but were kept
for God\'s sake, since it is kept as a sacrifice and good work, and not
in memory of our Lord Jesus Christ, as he instituted it, Christians\'
consciences are also built on it, as if they should be saved by offering
Christ in the mass, so that faith is destroyed and the one sacrifice
that Christ offered himself once for us is forgotten and despised, which
should be remembered with great diligence in the mass. But to destroy
faith and make a selfish work and sacrifice out of a divine common
treasure of souls is such a perversion 3) and abomination that no man\'s
heart can comprehend it. Therefore, it is necessary to look into this
matter with seriousness and haste, before God overpowers us with His
wrath.

> To say that it was decided by imperial mandate at the Diet of Worms,
> one should stick to the old Christian custom and practice:

It is obvious that in the same mandate nothing at all is commanded about
the abuse of the masses; although, as I said, they know it well, and
nevertheless pretend not to see it, and jump over it, as if it did not
concern us, so that God is nevertheless despised to the highest degree
and his honor is forgotten. Therefore, from the attitude of such an
imperial mandate, such a pity has come that, just as they have ignored
God\'s

1\) Thus Spalatin; in print: \"an\".

2\) Erlanger: \"Life.

3\) In print: \"Devastation\".

**908** Letters from the year 1526 and

1527\. no. 1046. 1047. 1048. **909**

have forgotten, despised his honor and enraged him, again both spiritual
and temporal authorities have come into such contempt and hatred, and
are still daily in it, and the longer the deeper they get into it, the
more that no good can ever come of it, as the rebellion has begun and
indicated, and thus the saying of God is fulfilled 1 Sam. 2:30:
\"Whoever honors me, him I will also honor, but whoever despises me
shall be despised again. Therefore, the Wormsian mandate is far too
little to maintain good order, because it despises and lets go of such
public vice and abomination, and does nothing to promote divine honor
and put away the blasphemy and dishonor of His name.

And if the mass were properly ordered, it would be necessary to have
good, pious preachers. In this case, it will depend on the people who
have to be educated in schools and universities. Therefore, reformation
of schools and universities is necessary, so that no expense or effort
is spared. This must be especially well thought of, for where the
schools are not well established, where people are to be trained and
educated, no church service will be advisable. But perhaps the empire
will not accept this, but will leave it to each dominion to provide in
its country. But it is necessary and the highest article of one.

But what to make of foundations, monasteries and bishoprics, I do not
know. If they remain like this, they do not serve God and do not wait
for the word. But if the bishops visit, as is their office, they may not
wait for the word. But this is to be considered, because they bear the
name and rank of bishops, abbots, deans, and yet they do not rule, but
are secular lords, that they are also in the rank to great dishonor and
dishonor of God, and it would be a thousand times better that they let
themselves be changed into secular rank, and that such estates be taken
in fief from the realm and given to those who are found worthy of it, as
otherwise happens when a lordship dies. For it is no different than that
through the gospel the bishoprics 1) all die off and fall to the
founders or the kingdom; for the names of the bishoprics 1) all die off.

1\) In print: \"Bishops.

Bishop, abbot, provost, dean, scholasticus, cantor, canonicus, vicarius,
and deacon indicate what kind of office such people should have; in
secular courts and estates such names and offices do not exist.

Psalm 33:11.

The counsel of the Lord endures forever.

**No. 1047.**

Wittenberg. January 1, 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

On economic matters, the cold-heartedness of the Wittenbergers, and
Luther\'s intention to write against the enthusiasts.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 75; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 145 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 1.

> To Johann Agricola, instructor of Christian youth at Eisleben, his
> brother.

Grace and peace in the Lord! My mistress and mistress Käthe has ordered
me to thank you for the cloth you gave her; however, such a proud gift
would not have been necessary for us poor people. She has faithfully
endeavored that this maid Elsa should come to your Elsa; God grant that
she may be quite obedient.

Here we are quite intent on and on fortifications so that Wittenberg
will be invincible, meanwhile we are cold and almost full in the Gospel
of God. I arm myself against the enthusiasts; pray to God for me that He
may crush Satan. There is no news among us other than what I believe is
known among you. Fare well with all yours in Christo and greet ours.
January 1, 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1048.**

(Wittenberg.)January 1. January 1527.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Luther apologizes for his long silence, justifies himself against a
grammatical reproach by Dolzig, and complains about the poor
administration of the monastery estates.

The original is in *Cod. Goth*. A 122, fol. 24 (partly damaged). Printed
in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 322; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 76 (only the
second paragraph); in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 146 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 2. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1019.

**910**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1048.

**911**

Grace and peace in the Lord! That it is not my fault that I write to you
less often, my dear Spalatin, these enclosed letters shall be my
witnesses, for they waited for a messenger, as they were always before
my eyes. You will recognize from the months, days, and the matter in
which they are written, that I myself had forgotten the things, and
finally, overcome by annoyance, unsealed them again to see what I would
have written. Yes, in the case of the last messenger, I had very much
intended that he should not leave without my letters to you, for the
sake of the Schösser at Eisenberg 1); but even so I did not get
anything. When I went down to look for him - perhaps his presence had
been reported to me too late - I was told that he had lost patience and
had gone away. At the same time, I was displeased with my people.
That\'s how it goes: What does not concern you, you do not care about.
But remember for yourself whether I used to behave like this when you
were at court, that is, when you told me about certain messengers or
certain *publicans who were* supposed to deliver my letters to you. But
now I have to use random messengers; how many of them, I pray you, ask
for letters, or deliver them, or desire them, or wait for them? 2) This
is my excuse, because I do not want to put my many affairs before you,
since there are none that could prevent me from writing to you, since I
am sure from your manner, which I know, that even a letter written
during the meal would be pleasant to you.

To the matter. You should tell our very dear Dolzig that if he tolerates
a friendly quarrel (as he does), we do not lack a reason for claiming
that it should sometimes be written \"darumb\", sometimes \"drumb\". For
why should we Germans not follow the Greeks, the Latins, and the Hebrews
in contractions and abbreviations 3) since there is scarcely any
language

1\) Cutting wine. See No. 1018.

2\) Melanchthon also repeatedly complains that there is so little
opportunity to send letters to Spalatin. See *Corp. Ref.*, Vol. I, 855,
No.430 and ibid. Col.865, No. 440.

3\) *syncopis* - omission of a letter in the middle of the word.

that shortens more than the German one? With an abbreviation we say:
\"thou shalt do it to me\", which according to Dolzig\'s strictness
should be said: \"thou shalt do it to me\". See what sweetness the
abbreviation has and what repulsiveness the rule. If one asks, \"Why do
you do this?\" we regularly answer, \"Because of this,\" because the
word stands alone; again, when words are added, it is said with graceful
abbreviation, \"I will not let it be because of this.\" How peevishly
would one say this: \"I will not let it be about this\"? To the
Thuringians with these un-Germanic *Germanisms*! You see how perceptive
we are, too. Therefore, Dolzig may beware of a grammatical fight,
especially if he undertakes to irritate us, since we seem to be double,
triple, yes, quadruple people like Aristarchus 4). This in jest.

Very serious, my dear Spalatin, is the matter concerning the robbery of
the monasteries, and, believe me, that it troubles me very much. What
you desire, I have long since pursued with writings. Not satisfied with
that, I (when the prince was here) even entered the prince\'s chamber
against everyone\'s will in order to talk to him alone about this
matter. Only \"Riedesel\" was present. Unawares, I approached the prince
and complained about what you write, after I had also complained about
the same thing to the younger prince in the antechamber, and he
indicated that he disliked such things. He answered that they would take
care that everything would be done properly. What should I say? Under
the best of princes, I am afraid that I and all of us will be given a
blue haze, empty appearances and fairy tales, so that we will not even
be required to know the originators. They think Frederick is dead; in
this opinion they are kings in this country, God grant that this does
not happen so happily. And that is the sourest vinegar to me, that those
who before as enemies of the Gospel (now as persistent enemies) did not
agree with Prince Frederick in godliness, now, on the occasion of the
loot, mock, laugh and, having become rich, rejoice that it is possible
for them under the

4\) A critic made proverbial by his sharpness,

**912** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1048 to 1051. 913

The people who are free in the name of the gospel are at the same time
the highest enemies of the gospel and enjoy all the freedoms of the
gospel. Have you ever seen anything like this ungodliness? Since I see
that the prince, who is overwhelmed with business, is reminded in vain,
I have no other advice than that it seems to me that the prince should
be reminded by a public booklet that he administers the monasteries in a
different way, whether perhaps those people want to be ashamed. For what
you remind him, that he should command and rule according to the example
of his brother, you know yourself, is not to be hoped for. The faithful
man is exposed to the deviousness of all, and such a one who believes
that all men are his equal, good and faithful. It must be a rogue who is
to be a prince, and it behooves a tyrant to be a king, that is what the
world wants. You see that I have become prolix, both out of necessity
and with my will. If, moreover, you have any advice through Christ,
share it with us; we will gladly follow it, so much do we hate the
raging, the deceitfulness, the wickedness of Satan everywhere, in all
things, on and on, that it will give us pleasure to meet or harm him in
any way. Fare well in the Lord with your rib. My little Hans greets you,
who in the month of teething begins to slur \"Father\" (*tattare*) and
to scold everyone with sweet insults. Käthe also wishes you all the
best, especially a Spalatinchen, who will teach you what she boasts she
learned from her little house, that is, the fruit and joy of marriage,
of which Pabst was not worthy with his world. On the day of circumcision
\[Jan. 1\] 1527. Martin Luther.

**No. 1049.**

Wittenberg. January 1, 1527.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tolleth.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1792, 1) annex, no. 16.

1\) This letter, which we have placed there in the year 1528 according
to Förstemann\'s, Seidemann\'s and Burkhardt\'s processes, will be more
correctly assigned to the year 1527 with Köstlin, M. Luther, vol. II, p.
644 ad 113^2)^ , as we have already pronounced in the 14th volume of our
edition, Col. 1768, note.

**No. 1050.**

(Wittenberg.) January 7, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 690.

**No. 1051.**

(Wittenberg.) January 7, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther sends Carlstadt\'s letter of apology, asks for intercession for
the expelled Danzig preacher Bonholt; in the postscript: Request for
alms for the licentiate Basilius Axt and for a Wittenberg family.

The letter is found from the original in the Weimar Archive in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 47; in Walch, Vol. XXI, 164; in De Wette, Vol.
Ill, p. 153 and in the Erlangen Edition, Vol. 53, p. 396. The
postscript: from the original in the Weimar Archive in De
Wette-Seidemann, Vol. VI, p. 86 and in the Erlangen Edition, Vol. 56, p.
LXVII, both undated, but Seidemann assumes the year 1527. That the
postscript belongs to this letter, says the Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 8.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony,
> Elector, and Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sincerely, Reverend Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Prince, most gracious Lord! I should have sent the next E. C. F.
G., as I wrote, D. Carlstadt\'s apology, 2) and was provided and
forgotten, send the same still herewith; about this he asks Niclas von
Amsdorf, and I also with him humbly, for an alms, that is, for a writing
to the council at Danzig for a pious priest, He Johann Bonholt, chased
away by the King of Poland there, who also gave up his fief before, so
that he might feed his estate and his wife\'s estate. Now they are
holding both his wife and his estate against him, so he very much hopes
that E. C. F. G. will write for him, that it will help, as it has helped
others, also prescribed by the prince, as E. C. F. G., if he so desires,
from this writing of his, and from his

2\) Carlstadt\'s letter of apology that he did not correspond with
Zwingli and Oecolampad in the matter of the Sacrament, dated Wittenberg,
Lucie (Dec. 13) 1526. The original is in the Weimar Archives
(Burkhardt).

**914** Letters from the year

. No. 1051. 1052. 915

Amsdorf may continue to hear. God\'s grace be with E. C. F. G. always,
Amen. Monday after Epiphany \[7 Jan.\] 1527.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

Mart. Luther.

\[Postscript.\]

About that, most gracious sir, although I am ashamed, and begging is
much, but I must do it. The licentiate Basilius, whom E. C. F. G. had
given the year XXX by C. Blancken, but now accepted as a physician at
Torgau, truly on sufficient pay and hired service, he would like to
become a doctor for more prestige, which such an office requires. If now
E. C. F. G. would once again let give the same XXX Gülden for the last
time, it would be necessary and good, but I want it in E. C. F. G.\'s
gracious will.

Otherwise, there is a poor citizen here who has been ill and spoiled for
a whole year with his wife, who now cannot get ready for food again, who
is deteriorating the longer the more, and who almost asked me to call
upon C.F.G.. God knows that I have mercy on them, so I ask once again
that E. C. F. G. also appear gracious and merciful to them. These are
two money matters that I do not like to deal with.

**No. 1052 .**

Wittenberg. January 7, 1527.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

Council not to be hasty with the publication of the church order.

The original is in the state archives at Kassel. From it printed by
Rommel in Röhr\'s Kritische PredigerBibliothek, vol. XIII, issue 2,
1832, p. 362; in Seidemann-De Wette, vol. VI, p. 80; in the Darmstädter
Allg. Kirchenzeitung 1849, no. 201; in Hassenkamp, Hessische
Kirchengeschichte, vol. II, p. 306; erroneously in *Prospectus,* den D.
Carl Zimmermann zu seiner beabsichtigten Ausgabe der sämmtlichen
deutschen Werke Luthers erließte, Darmstadt 1853, p. 7, and from it in
Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 56, p. 170.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! To
the order sent to me by E. F. G. and requesting my opinion on it, I
reply as follows

We do not like it, because many blame us in Wittenberg, as if we did not
want to let anyone count for anything without us, when we, God knows,
well wish that everyone would do the very best without us. But for the
service of E. F. G., and because such an order might go out with a
clamor, as if my speech had also come to this, it is my faithful,
submissive advice that E. F. G. does not permit this order to be omitted
by printing at this time, because I \[could not\] be so bold so far, and
also cannot be so bold yet, to introduce such a heap of laws with such
powerful words among us. That would be my opinion, as Moses has done
with his laws, which he has taken, written out and ordered almost the
whole part, as already in use among the people of old tradition. So also
E. F. G. first provided the parishes and schools with good persons and
tried beforehand by verbal order or drawn on slips of paper and all that
in the shortest and least what they should do. And which would be even
better, that the parish priests first of all of their three, six, name
among themselves began a unanimous way in one or three, five, six
pieces, until in practice and Schwang would come, and then further and
more, as thing would probably give itself and force, until so long all
pastors followed. Then it could be put into a small booklet, for I know
well and have experienced well that when laws are set too early before
custom and practice, they seldom turn out well; people are not skilled
in this, as those think who sit there by themselves, and do it with
words and thoughts, as it should go. Prescribing and doing are far
apart. And experience will show that many parts of this order will have
to change, and some will remain alone with the authorities. If, however,
some of the pieces were to come into force and custom, it would then be
easy to add to them and put them in order. Furthermore, making law is a
great, dangerous, extensive thing, and without God\'s Spirit nothing
good will come of it. Therefore, approach with fear and humility before
God, and keep this measure: Short and good, little and well, gently and
always on. After that, when they take root, more would follow from the
act of faith itself than is necessary, as must Christ, the Romans, the
Pope, and all the faithful.

**916** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1052. 1053. 1054. **917**

The first one is the one that has gone to the preachers. This is my
opinion to keep myself safe, because to E. F. G. and the preachers 1) in
E. F. G. country I do not want to set neither goal nor measure. F. G.\'s
country, I do not want to set a goal or a measure, but command them to
God\'s Spirit. I am willing and obliged to serve E. F. G.. At
Wittenberg, Monday after *Epiphany*. \[7 Jan.\] 1527.

E. F. G.

willing

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1053.**

(Wittenberg.) January 10, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

About the visitation, Luther\'s literary works, and the rampant
sacramental error.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
31. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 22 and at
Zwickau in the Rathsschulbibliothek, XXXI V. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 325 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 154 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VI, p. 10. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1024 f.

> To Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the extremely faithful bishop of the church
> at Zwickau, his superior in the Lord!

\"Grace and peace in Christ, my dearest Nicolaus! I also have nothing
new, except that the prince answers the university that he wants to
accelerate the visitation of the parishes. When this will be done, then
also the churches will be ordered, the use of the ban will be possible;
but what can be done, since the things are so torn? Zechariah is being
promoted for publication in print, and the book is growing daily under
my hands; at the same time I am attacking the Sacramentarians. You pray
that Christ may guide my pen against Satan happily and salutary. I am
also very happy about your testimony that you are still untouched by
this leaven, because I have always believed this about you. I am very
sorry that the exceedingly noble man Oecolampad has fallen into this
abyss with such ridiculous and trivial thoughts, at the instigation of
Satan; the Lord pull him out! Urban Rhegius either leans towards this
evil,

1\) \"the preachers\" put by us instead of: \"the preacher\".

or he has already fallen. May the Lord preserve his own!

I believe that you have heard that the Emperor\'s army in Italy has been
fortunate. The pope is haunted everywhere so that he may be destroyed,
for his end and his hour have come, although persecution is raging
everywhere and many are being burned. My Käthe greets you respectfully.
January 10, 1527, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1054.**

(Wittenberg.) January 13, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

About the affair of a certain bather. Complaint about the court. Apology
for his rare letter and report of a severe, almost fatal seizure he has
had.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 190 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 210. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 326; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 154 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 11. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1025 f.

> To the Lord Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ, his brother, rather
> his superior in the Lord, at Altenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I have recently written to you, my
dear Spalatin, and believe that the letter has reached you, I am
nevertheless compelled to write again, because you implore me so
urgently in the last letter. First of all, as you write about Simon the
physician, I will watch, but at court there is no hope left at all, so
much do the nobles presume all things and also put them into practice;
therefore, an unbelievable confidence arises among them and such great
pride in the rule that it seems that they bring a quick downfall upon
themselves. Enough of this. I confess that I seldom write, but I would
like you to believe that this is not through my fault or because I am
moved by any cause of insult or offense, for (as I wrote before) I would
freely admonish you if such a thing occurred, just as I would have you
admonish me. The messengers are rare, then some are so hopeful and
commanding that they completely demand that I sit still and idly await
their arrival. Everything stands here

**918**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1054 to 1057.

919

well, as before. Give my best regards to Eberhard and all of us, and be
well with your Käthe. It is true that the other day I was frightened by
a sudden stagnation of the blood around the chest, and was almost
lifeless, but a drink of the water of the *Cardui benedicti* 1) (as it
is called) was the remedy. This water has an extraordinarily effective
healing power, although it is neglected by physicians or rather unknown
to them. On the eighth day after Epiphany \[13 Jan\] 1527.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 1055.**

**Wittenberg. January 17, 1527.**

**To the Zerbst City Council.**

Luther recommends Magister Niclas Pintzelt from Gera to the council as a
preacher.

Alls the original in the Rathsarchiv zu Zerbst in Sintenis, Denkschrift,
1846, pag. 27; in the Erlangen edition, vol.56, p. 171 and in
Seidemann-De Wette, B.VI, p.82.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear Sirs! At E. W.\'s next
letter and request, I have asked this M. He Niclas to come to you and to
try whether he will please you. He is pious and honest, also skilled in
preaching, as E. W. will probably hear for himself; he has also been
well practiced in the office of schoolmaster for several years, so that
he can help to establish and maintain the schools with reading and
singing. What God will give, we will wait for. Christ\'s grace be with
you all, Amen. At Wittenberg, on the day of St. Antonii \[17 Jan.\]
1527. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1056.**

(Wittenberg.) January 23, 1527,

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

About a miraculous sign that happened in Magdebürg and about Luther\'s
writing against the Sacramentirians.

1\) *Carduus benedicti*, Bornwurzel, Heildistel, Spinnendistel, a
*Cnicus species* to which the most extensive healing powers were
attributed in those days.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 326 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 155
f. and int Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 13. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1027.

Grace and peace! There is nothing new that I could write to you, my dear
Wenceslaus; and what should we worms, who are hidden in the furthest
part of the world, write to you, who sit on the top of the world and see
and hear the face of the world before you? Rather, we wretched and poor
of you people, who are rich in facts and news that you hear,^2)^ must
receive the light and what is in the light in this world. But Amsdorf
writes to me that on the night \[of the feast\] of the Circumcision,
during the early Mass in the main church, all the chandeliers and lamps
suddenly went out, except for the one in front of the Sacrament. But
there are so many, especially those lit during High Mass, and so many
hidden corners of the chapels, that it is impossible for them to be
extinguished by the wind (which cannot reach them). Some interpret it in
such a way that the death of the canons is thereby foreshadowed; thus,
it is said, it also happened in the past that when Bishop Ernst 3) was
dying, the great chandelier fell down, went out and broke, and, as he
lay, lit another one. God will watch. Many signs are happening that will
not be in vain. I again go against the Sacramentirans; pray for me that
Christ will give me happiness in His cause. I expect the seeds for the
garden at the future equinox. Fare well with yours and with all in the
Lord. January 23, 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1057.**

Wittenberg. January 29, 1527.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Liegnitz.**

Luther advises him to leave Liegnitz and go elsewhere.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 77; in De Wette, Vol. III, p. 156 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 14.

2\) Walch: \"you who are rich in wealth and hearing\".

3\) Archbishop Ernst of Saxony, 1476-1513. The fallen chandelier was in
the Marien-Magdalenen Chapel at the Moritzburg in Halle, where Ernst
died.

**920**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1057 to 1060.

**921**

But I would rather, my dear Cordatus, that you leave those adversaries
of Christ 1) as soon as possible and go to the one of whom I have
written, especially since everything with you is as you write. But
nevertheless, so that I do not throw a rope over you, nor do I make a
necessity, I want that the time of the coming is free to you. These
people have an aversion to you, but there you are expected. Whatever you
decide now shall be right and safe with the Lord. I could not write more
now for lack of time and because of the hurry of the messenger. Continue
in Christ and be steadfast; in him you will be well. From Wittenberg,
1527, on Tuesday after Paul\'s conversion \[29 Jan\].

**No. 105 8.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of January 1527.) 2)

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt,**

Luther wishes him luck with the birth of a child. From the protective
letter of Menius Wider D. Conrad Kling zu Erfurt.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 360d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 226
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 14. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1074.

Grace and peace! I now wish you happiness anew as a father; if the
former congratulations did not come true, God does not deceive. Also to
me it is frightening example of God\'s wrath that such great men can
fall in such a way that they accept these inconsistencies of Satan for
certain currency; Christ keep us. Who would believe that the prince of
darkness would have such great power? But this raging will have its
course, as long as it pleases God. Your protective speech 4) is already

1\) Schwenkfeld and his followers.

2\) Aurifaber and, according to him, De Wette placed this letter in
November. But the date of this letter results from Luther\'s
congratulation on the birth of a child of Menius, under which only his
second son, Eusebius, can be meant, who was born on January 19, 1527.

3\) In Erl. Briefw. by a printing error: *gratulator* instead of:
*gratulor*.

4\) The title of the same is: \"Widder den Hochberümbten Barfüßer zu
Erffurt, D. Conrad Klingen, Schutzred vnd gründliche Erklernng etlicher
Haubtartickel Christlicher Lere

under the press, I do not know for what reason the printer has postponed
it. Fare well in the Lord. 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1059 .**

(Wittenberg.) (End of January 1527.)

**To the Christians of Erfurt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1524. 5)

**No. 1060 .**

(Wittenberg.) 1. February 1527.

**To Eberhard Brisger in Altenburg.**

Luther apologizes that ex cannot make the requested allslage.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Gud*. 214, fol. 63, and in Gotha,
*Cod*. 185. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 78 ; in De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 157 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.VI, p.16.

Grace and peace in Christ! You honor that I should lay out eight florins
for you, my dear Eberhard, but where should I get them? I, as you know,
am burdened with a heavy household, then I myself owe almost more than a
hundred florins here and there through my carelessness; all these debts
were made in this year. Three goblets stand in one place as a pledge for
50 guilders. But the Lord, who punishes my imprudence in this way, will
free me again. In addition, Lucas and Christian 6) no longer want to
admit me as a guarantor, namely because they know from experience that
they will either receive nothing more in this way, or I will be
exhausted. Yes, I have given them the fourth cup for 12 guilders, which
they lent to fat Hermann by giving him copies on my say-so. But what is
the point of this, that I

by Justum Menium.\" The writing had already been completed and sent to
Luther on November 12, 1526. Luther\'s preface to it is found in the St.
Louis edition, vol. X, 1524. Compare also ibid. vol. XIV, 272, note.

5\) There, according to De Wette and the Erlangen edition, incorrectly
dated: \"In November 1527. The correct dating results from the preceding
letter. - In the eighth line of the text read: \"Now I am
[not]{.underline} minded\" 2c.

6\) Lucas Cranach and his compagnon, Christian Döring (Aurifaber).

**922**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1060 to 1063.

923

Somebody is completely sucked out like this, yes, not sucked out, but
plunged into such great debts? That is already no longer giving alms
from my own, but from other people\'s goods. I believe that I cannot be
charged with frugality or stinginess, since I am also so lavish with
other people\'s goods. Therefore I want to do this: I want to talk to
those people whether I can pacify them in any way, then also make use of
Reiner\'s advice. If money came to my hand, I would not be burdened to
spend it for the time being. Yes, I would like you to come yourself and
talk to those people once and put your matter in order, and even rent
out your house 1). For why is it standing there so idle, since it could
have brought you a considerable sum this year? Fare well in the Lord. On
the day before the Purification \[of Mary\] \[Feb. 1\] 1527.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1061.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. February 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1774, annex, no. 3.

**No. 1062.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. February 1527.

**To Johann Draco.**

Luther exhorts him to persevere in Waltershausen despite the adversities
he has to endure.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 327 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 159
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 18. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1028.

> Your man, Doctor Johann Draco, faithful bishop of Waltershausen, who
> is highly esteemed by the Lord, his extremely dear brother.

Grace and peace in Christ! But I advise you in every way, my dear Draco,
that you do not let yourself be overcome by evil, that you change the
place, but overcome evil with good, according to the counsel of Paul
\[Rom. 12:21\]. Remember, I beg you, that you did not go there for the
sake of the wicked.

1\) About Brisger\'s house see No. 795.

Dear, if you left them for the sake of the wicked, how great a sting of
death would you put in your conscience! If you were not there, you would
have to run for the sake of the good, without taking the wicked into
account. Do you want to be alone without a persecutor, a rose without
thorns, a child of God without Satan? And would you rather have other
wicked ones instead of these? It is to be hoped that God will put an end
to this temptation and you will finally win those whom you would later
be sorry for having abandoned. The Lord will feed you, do not doubt; but
I write to the godly prince, and I ask that you forgive if someone has
2) sinned against you; we sin one against the other, we must confess and
forgive one against the other; such is life. Your customs and ceremonies
please me quite well, only be prepared that you do not hope to have all
your own as good and quiet people, but rather give thanks when three
love and like you, but the others hate and persecute you. I pray thee,
how many had Christ in his own so great a people to his followers?
Hardly the yeast, the rest and the refuse of all Israel, the chosen
people of God. Fare well and pray for me. February 2, 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1063.**

Wittenberg. February 3, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the pastor Draco at Waltershausen.

Handwritten in the parish register at Waltershausen. Printed in the
Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 237d; in the Jena edition (1556),
vol. Ill, p. 436d; in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p. 690; in the
Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p.552In Walch, Vol. XXI, 164 f; in De Wette,
Vol. Ill, p. 160 and in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 53, p. 397. In the
parish register of Waltershausen there is also a copy of the electoral
decree issued in response to this letter, in which the prince commands
conscientious payment of the interest. This also remained without
success, which is why Draco left Waltershausen in 1528 and went to
Eisenach, where he remained until 1530, but had to struggle with the
same difficulties.

2\) We have adopted De Wette\'s conjecture, *aliquis* instead of:
*aliquid.*

**924**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1063 to 1066.

**925**

Grace and peace. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious Lord!
Doctor Johannes Draconites, pastor of Waltershausen, complains about how
he has to deal with the people who are supposed to pay him interest, and
asks me to write to E. C. F. G. that E. C. F. G. wants to ensure that he
does not have to do so. For it is annoying, as if it were avarice, when
it is necessity. But I console them all with the future visitation. But
it will take me a long time, and some great merchants say that it will
remain.

If this is the case, it is the end of parishes, schools and the gospel
in this country; they must run away. For they have nothing, they walk
and look like dry ghosts. But more about that some other time. E. C. F.
G. will know how to hold on. At Wittenberg, Sunday after Purificationis
\[Feb. 3\] Anno 1527.

E. C. F.G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 106 4.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. February 1527.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

Luther inquires how the matter of Caspar Schalbe stands; of his literary
works, and request for Erfurt Rettige and seeds thereof.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 328; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 160 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 20.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1772, annex, no. 2.

**No. 1 065.**

(Wittenberg.) February 5, 1527.

**To Hans Ottensaß, Mayor of Hersfeld, currently imprisoned in
Spangenberg.**

Luther informs him that he will plead with the landgrave and M. Adam
Crato for his release.

The original is privately owned in Hamburg. Printed by Schütze, Vol. II,
p. 372; by De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 161 and in the Erlangen edition, Vol.
53, p. 397.

1\) \"dürren\" is missing in the manuscript.

> To the honorable Hans Ottensassen, mayor of Hersfeld, now imprisoned
> at Spangenberg, my good friend.

G. and F. My Hans, how sorry I am that you have been imprisoned for so
long, and I didn\'t know it, it was only yesterday that I received your
letter. I have been working diligently on M. Gn. H., the Landgrave, and
hurriedly, because there happened to be a message. God grant that it
helps, as I hope. And I also called M. Adam 2), because I am willing to
serve you. God commanded, because I have much to do. On the day of St.
Agatha \[Feb. 5\] 1527. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1066.**

Wittenberg. March 1, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Further intercession for Caspar Schalbe in Eisenach.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, No. 108, 4l. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 47; in Walch, vol. XXI, 165 f.; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 162 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 398.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, and Landgrave in Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen,
> my most gracious Lord.

G. u. F. in Christo. D., H. F., G. H.! E. C. F. G. have previously
graciously put off M. Caspar Schalben, a citizen of Eisenach, when he
had made up with the maid who had accused him, they would graciously
help him back to his own; since this has now happened and yet some of
the council of Eisenach are still trying to strengthen his disgrace, my
humble request is therefore that E. C. F. G. continue and graciously
protect him against such people\'s mouths and insolence. C. F. G. will
thus continue, and graciously protect and handle him against such
people\'s mouths and nobility, as he relies on E. C. F. G. and puts him
off. E. C. F. G. will without doubt graciously know how to keep to this.
At Wittenberg, Friday after the celebration of St. Peter\'s See \[March
1\] 1527.

E. C. F. G. undersigned Mart. Luther.

2\) M. Adam is Crato or Kraft of Fulda, court preacher in Cassel.

**926** Letters from the year 1527. No. 1067 to 1070. 927

**No. 1067.**

(Wittenberg.) (Before March 11, 1527.) 1)

**To Spalatin.**

A short letter delivered by M. Eberhard Brisger.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv (with Spalatin\'s
inscription: *P. M. Eberhardus Brisgerus* 1527). Handwritten in 6oä. u,
lob 256. Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 58; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 163 and
in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 27. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1079.

> To M. Georg Spalatin, his \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace! More with the pastor at Zwickau; now I am busy with
thoughts and writings against the Sacramentarians, so that I do not
want, and also you would not want, that such a draft would suffer damage
in my mind. But M. Eberhard will report everything. Farewell and pray
for me. Mart. Luther.

**No. 1068.**

(Wittenberg.) March 11, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VII, 2224, annex, no. 1.

**No. 1 069.**

(Wittenberg.) March 17, 1527.

**To Hans von Dolzig.**

Luther recommends a former monk as gardener.

Handwritten in *Cod. Seidel*, Dresden. From the papers of Sagittarius
printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 47; in Walch, vol. XXI, 166. From
the original in the Quartal-Schrift für ältere Litteratur und neuere
Lectüre, edited by Canzler and Meißner, III, 2, p. 39; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 164 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 399. Here with the
variants given in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. XII.

> To the strict and firm Hans von Dolzig 2c. at Torgau, my favorable
> lord and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. My strict, firm, dear lord and friend! I ask
you very kindly to let this pious man, Heinrich, be in your command,
whether he might

1\) The year is derived from the inscription Spalatin/ the approximate
date from the following letter.

You know that he is a good gardener and has nothing to gain from the
monastery, if each of the others gets a hundred guilders from it. I hope
you will be the best friend. Hiemit GOtt commanded, Amen. Domin.
Reminiscere \[March 17\] 1527.

Martinus Luther.

My Käthe sends you two bitter orange peppers. If she had known, she
would have sent them to you long ago with her own messenger, because she
would like to hear you get well; she has none left either.

**No. 10 70.**

Wittenberg. March 21, 1527.

**To Clemens Ursinus, pastor in Bruck.**

Luther admonishes him not to leave his post, answers several questions
posed by the same and instructs him to administer his office properly.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 330 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 165
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 29. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1030.

To Clemens Ursinus, pastor in Bruck.

Grace and peace in the Lord! With regard to what you have asked, my
dearest Clement, I absolutely advise you not to leave your position
unless you are forced, just as Christ also tolerated the sloth of the
Jews for a long time. That is, in truth, shaking off the dust when we
are forced out. Who knows if there are not some who will still believe?
I dare not approach your nobleman (*heroem*) with letters yet, for I
fear I would make things worse, which has often happened to me. You talk
and continue, and command God the matter, so you will be safe.

On the restoration of the right use of the Mass, many German books have
already been published by me 2) and others, but one of mine in Latin,
\"von dem Mißbrauch der Messe\",^3)^ which is sold and out of print, so
that I have none to send you. Zwingli\'s and Oecolampad\'s opinion takes
hold

2\) \"Deutsche Messe und Ordnung des Gottesdienstes,\" St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 226.

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1068.

**928**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1070. 1071.

929

and has already many different sects among itself, but various people
have written against it in Latin and German. I, too, am now writing a
book against it in German. ^1)^ If you take my admonition, you will flee
this delusion as a plague, because it is a blasphemy against Christ\'s
word and faith. We believe and know this. I think the same of infant
baptism against Balthasar Hubmeier. 2) If you have to teach badly, then
at least leave opinion alone in these articles, and in the meantime
practice faith, love, freedom of the spirit, the cross and obedience to
the authorities, and make them well instructed in these; the rest will
follow in its time. No one has yet written about the Revelation of John.
I myself do not have a *catalog of* my books, but neither do I have the
books themselves, since I wish that the true Bible be read instead of
mine. I am improving the Bible according to the Hebrew truth,^3)^ pray
for us. Polygamy, which was formerly permitted to the Jews and the
Gentiles, cannot be honestly approved by Christians and cannot be
undertaken with a clear conscience, unless there is an extreme
necessity, as if one of the two spouses had been separated by leprosy or
something similar. Therefore, you may say to carnal people: If they want
to be Christians, they must be faithful and force the flesh, not let the
reins shoot; if they want to be pagans, they may do as they please, at
their peril. In short, teach the gospel in such a way that you say all
that a Christian must know, be he strong or weak. But refrain from
violent interference, and change

1\) \"That these words of Christ, this is my body 2c., still stand
firm.\" St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, 762, No. 20.

2\) Hubmeier, from Friedberg near Augsburg, burned at Vienna on March
10, 1528, had written several writings against infant baptism.

3\) Köstlin, M. Luther, vol. II, p. 162 f. and the Erl. Briefw. refer
this to the Latin Bible translation allegedly made by Luther, which is
appended to the 14th volume in the old edition of Walch. However, there
are various counter-witnesses, and we too must admit that it is very
doubtful to us that Luther is the author of this translation. Compare
also our preface to the 14th volume of our edition.

Nothing, they have become strong before and force you, so that it is not
ordered by your will, but only by force, if something should be ordered.
In the meantime, let the word go forth and do what the Lord wills. Greet
Ambrosius Buxius with love, and Philip Melanchthon sends you his best
regards. And be at ease in the Lord, and pray for me in love, Amen.
Wittenberg, Thursday after Reminiscere \[March 21\] 1527.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1071.**

(Wittenberg.) March 29, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther admonishes Hausmann to stop his preacher Paul Lindenau
(Lindenauer, Lindauer, Lindemann), who had attacked council members in
the pulpit. Punishments of persons do not belong in the pulpit, but in
the congregational meeting.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. VIII, p. 970; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XXII, p. 553; in Walch, vol. XXI, 167; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 166 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 399.

Grace and peace in Christ. Worthy, dear Lord Pastor! It has been said to
me, also reported by N.^4)^ , how one of your preachers is behaving
clumsily in the pulpit, and is attacking the person of the council in a
disorderly manner, which is then filled with the rabble; and thus the
spirit is still sparkling along, seeking its own honor and following.
For this reason, my friendly request is that you and the council have
understanding here, so that we are not again troubled by sleep and
insolence. You know well by God\'s grace that such punishments of the
person belong nowhere but among the gathering of Christians. Now you
have not yet ordered a collection, as we hope it will be done by the
visitation. Even if the gathering were ordered, such a rebuke would
still not be right, because St. Paul says: *Seniorem ne increpes, sed
obsecra ut patrem*; and Christ, Matth. 18, has previously admonished in
particular. Whichever spirit does not keep this order has nothing good
in mind. But

4\) \"N.\" is the mayor Mühlpfort, who had sent his complaints to
Wittenberg on March 15.

**930**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1071 to 1074.

931

In the public *theater of* London, where Christians and unbelievers
stand together and listen, as happens in the church, one should also
punish in general, and all kinds of unbelief and bad behavior, and no
one should be singled out. For it is a common sermon and should remain
common, and no one should be ashamed and reddened in front of others
until they are separated and come into the assembly, where they are
properly admonished, prayed for and punished. But if he has a desire to
punish publicly, let him do it to those who first attack him publicly,
as I do to the papists and zealots. Otherwise he shall stop, and make no
attachment, nor contempt of persons. For such punishments mend no one\'s
ways, but they doom the rabble, and atone for the punisher\'s pleasure.
I ask you to report this to the honorable council for my sake and for
your sake and for yourselves, and to watch over it diligently. For Satan
does not sleep and always seeks to cause misfortune. Hereby commanded by
God, Amen. Friday after Oculi \[March 29\] 1527.

**No. 10 72.**

(Strasbourg.) (April 2, 1527.) 1)

**Nicolaus Gerbe! to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Gerbe! reports on the suffering and abuse he has to endure from the
Sacramentarians and urges Luther to write against them. About the
evangelical inclinations of Duchess Margaretha of Alenyon and other
news.

Handwritten at Strasbourg in *Thes.* Printed by Röhrich, Gesch. der Ref.
im Elsaß, vol. I, p. 456 (without year and date); by Kolde, p. 85 and

in Erl. Briefw., Vol. Vl, p. 37.

**No. 10 73.**

(Wittenberg.) April 9, 1527.

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt.**

From the printing of a treatise by Menius against D. Conrad Kling.
Complaint about Erfurt\'s obduracy and ingratitude against the Gospel.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 331 d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 167
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 40. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1032.

1\) The date of this letter, which Kolde has set \"6. end of March\",
results from a. Remark in Kerbel\'s diary.

> To the Lord Justus Menius, the faithful servant of Christ at Erfurt,
> his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace! Care has been taken that your protective writing 2) is
printed, my dear Justus; the way in which the printer and your messenger
have come to an agreement, he will tell you. Your Erfurt is and remains
Erfurt; wrath from heaven follows so quickly that as soon as grace has
begun to shine, the wrath of God immediately follows, which blinds and
hardens the heart of Pharaoh. 3) You pray to the Lord for me and greet
the Lord Lang and all of us in Christ. Tuesday after Judica \[April 9\]
1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1074.**

(Wittenberg.) April 22, 1527.

**To Friedrich Pistorius, Abbot at Nuremberg.**

Luther gives thanks for a watch given to him.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 332 d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 168
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 41. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1035.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Friedrich, Abbot of the
> Aegidien Monastery in Nuremberg, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I write as a stranger to a stranger, my dear Lord, that
makes my and now even more your Wenceslaus Link, who sent me in your
name a bronze clock 4) given by you, an exceedingly pleasant gift, so
that I am compelled to become a student of our mathematicians, until I
understand all these forms and rules of the One Clock, because before I
have not seen nor observed anything like that, because I am ignorant of
these things of mathematics. Would that

2\) This does not refer to the \"Schutzrede\" (St. Louis edition, vol.
X, 1524), because it had already been printed, but to Menius\' sermon on
Reminiscere Sunday, to which Luther also wrote a preface. See St. Louis
edition, vol. XIV, 272, where the title is also given.

3\) In some churches of Erfurt the old cultus was restored by the
archbishop of Mainz.

4\) The inventor of pocket watches, Peter Hele, still lived in
Nuremberg. He died in 1542.

**932**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1074 to 1077.

933

God, that I could be according to your heart, which I realize is most
intimately indicated by this gift: there would be nothing I would rather
accomplish. This, I would like you to receive in the best way (as I
hope), according to the kindness of your friendship, and to be well
disposed and pray for me. Easter Monday \[22 April\] 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1075.**

(Wittenberg.) April 28, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the citizen Michael expelled from Mühlhausen. Cook.

The original is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. N, fol.* 108. 41.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p.47; in Walch, vol. XXI, 168; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 168 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 400.

> To the most illustrious, high-born. Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony
> and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I come once again on behalf of the poor man Michael Koch, 1)
citizen of Mohlhusen, and humbly request that E. C. F. G. would
graciously help him and let him come back to his own, for he has now
been in misery long enough, and, as he reports, he has come to it
innocently through the mayor; but now many have been let in and come in
again, who have also been guilty in the riot: he asks for God\'s sake to
come in too, and he begs for the highest and best he ever can. E. C. F.
G. wanted to look at his misery, and, where it is suitable, let him
enjoy my intercession; for I almost took pity on the poor man. Hiemit
GOtt befohlen, Amen. Sunday Quasimodogeniti (April 28) 1527.

> E. C. F. G. subservient

Mart, Luther.

1\) He was a wool weaver, and compromittirt in the Bauernanfruhr.

**No 1076.**

(Wittenberg.) April 29, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

From a satirical book published in Nuremberg, Wider das Pabstthum.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Printed by *Buddeus*,
p. 53; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 169 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
48. German in Walch, vol. XXl, 1038.

> His brother, Georg Spalatin, who is extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace! Magister Eberhard returns, who was taken in by me
according to my small fortune, he will report what he has seen and
heard. From Nuremberg we have received a booklet 2) that was published
there, with prophetic pictures, which I believe is called
*Hieroglyphia,* which quite actually foreshadows the course and fate of
the papacy. We will reprint it here, otherwise I would have sent it,
although we have only one copy, and a foreign one at that. Pray for
Christ on my behalf; in him you too will be at ease. Monday after
Quasimodogeniti \[April 29\] 1527. Mart. Luther.

**No. 1077.**

(Wittenberg.) (April or later) 1527.

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt.**

Luther sends him his scripture printed in Wittenberg.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 360b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 227
(dated: \"in November?\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 44. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1074.

2\) \"A strange prophecy, of the Pabstum, how it should go to him until
the end of the world, ynn figures or reports, found at Nurmberg, ym
Carthauserkloster vnd is ser alt. A lecture by Andreas Osiander. With a
good, understandable interpretation, interpreted by a literate audience.
Which Hans Sachs has set down in German reckoning and added to it. In M.
D. xx. vij Jare. Gedrücket Nürnberg, Hans Guldenmundt.\" Under this
title, Osiander found 30 pictures in the Carthauserkloster, which he
considered to be very old, but which were taken from an alleged writing
of Abbot Joachim von Floris (d. 1202), which was only printed in Bologna
in 1513. At his request, Hans Sachs wrote rhymes for it that were
sharpened to the pabstical. On March 27, Osiander and Sachs therefore
received a warning from the council, which feared harm from this
writing.

**934** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1077. 1078. 1079. **935**

Grace and peace! This accountant comes and brings your explanation 1)
against Kling, admittedly a little late, but so it had to happen. Christ
will (as I hope) restore his honor with you through this his disgrace,
because nothing that is of God is glorified that is not first crucified
in the world, unless Erfurt deserves to be deprived of the recently
emerged but despised word. But I promise myself good things and hope for
better things, because Christ has many in this Corinth whom he has
chosen. Therefore Satan rages and fears so that these may be snatched
out of his jaws. This letter (I ask) you want to have delivered to Jakob
Koch at the fish market \"to wolves\". The grace of God be with you.
1527.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 10 78.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. May 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

Literary news, especially from a breeze and writings of Zwingli.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, 193. Printed by *Bud*

*deus*, p. 54; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 171 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VI, p. 44 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1038.

> To his brother in Christ, Georg Spalatin, Bishop of Altenburg.

Grace and peace! I received this letter from Prussia to send it to you,
moreover, there is nothing new here. Zwingli wrote me a letter 2) which
is full of hopefulness, slander, obstinacy, hatred and almost all
malice, but under the best words. This is how this spirit rages. He has
enclosed three little books.

Besides, there are the interpretations of Oecolampad on the last three
minor prophets, those of Bucer on John 3) and Matthew, of Brenz on John
against that, and all the

1\) The paper mentioned in No. 1073.

2\) Zwingli\'s letter is dated April 1. It is printed in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 33 ff.

3\) \"Luther is mistaken here; Bucer\'s interpretation of John did not
appear until April 1528 in Strasbourg with Joh. Herwagen.\" (Erl.
Briefw.)

Prophets translated into German;^4)^ namely in everything they come
before, we are nothing. What do you think they will do after they have
seen my booklet 5)? So finally that spirit will come to the day. You
pray Christ for me and be well in the Lord. 1527, the Saturday after
Quasimodogeniti \[May 4\]. Martin Luther.

**No. 10 79.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around May 4) 1527.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

About Zwingli\'s letter and the translation of the minor prophets
published in Worms. Luther also sets about translating the prophets.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 332; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 171 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 46. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1034.

Grace and peace! I have only this news to write, my dear Wenceslaus,
that Zwingel has also sent a letter to me, together with his quite
insignificant little book, written with his hand, which is certainly
quite worthy of that exceedingly hopeful spirit. With all modesty 6) he
rages, rages, threatens and rages in such a way that he seems to me
irredeemable, even if he is convicted by the obvious truth. My eloquent
little book has indeed been of use to many. I do not despise the
prophets translated into German at Worms, 7) only that the German idiom
is too dark, perhaps due to the nature of that country. 8) They have
applied diligence, 9) who

4\) \"Alle Propheten nach Hebräischer sprach verteutscht\" 2c. \"Printed
at Worms by Peter Schöffern and published on the thirteenth day of
April, August XXVII. The translators were Joh. Denck and Ludwig Hetzer.

5\) \"That these words of Christ: This is my body, still stand firm.\"
This book came to Switzerland from the Easter Fair in Frankfurt,

6\) We would be inclined to accept the reading: *immodestissime* instead
of: *ita modestissime*; but because in the preceding letter it is said
that Zwingli does all this *optimis verbis,* we have not dared to make a
change, although this passage may not be well understood by Wenc. Link
may not have been well understood.

7\) Later, Luther comments more unfavorably on this work. See St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, 978.

8\) That is, by the dialect spoken there.

9\) Walch summarizes here the words: *forte natura illius regionis
fecerunt diligentiam*, and translates: \"they hüben vielleicht nach Art
des Landes gekünstelt; wer will aber alles berühren?\" .

**936**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1079. 1080. 1081. 937

but can achieve everything? But I now set out to bring them into German
as well, reading about Isaiah at the same time, so that I will not be
idle. You ask the Lord for me and for his church. Christ let me hear
that a child is born to you and that it is safe, amen. My Käthe has
sickness and vomiting again due to the hope of a second fruit. ^1)^
Greet the Spengler and thank him, for all the seeds you sent are
sprouting, only the melons and cucumbers are fading, although they are
also sprouting in other gardens. Farewell. 1527. Martin Luther.

**No. 1080.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around May 4) 1527.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tolleth.**

About Luther\'s writing against the Sacramentirians; about Zwiugli\'s
letter and its *amica* exegesis.

Manuscript in Copenhagen, old royal library, 1393, p. 119 and
(theillveise) at Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Aug*.

11.10, fol. 235. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 345; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 172 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 47. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1049.

Grace and peace! I have, my dear Michael, sent a letter to you the day
before yesterday, together with my booklet against the enthusiasts
(*Antischwermerio*), of which I hope you have received it and that it
has pleased you. For many are, by God\'s grace, fortified in the right
faith through this booklet; again, I await the angry response of those
people, whom, if Christ gives it and wills it, I will oppose with
strength and wisdom. For Zwingli has written a certain \"declaration\"
2) to me, with the addition of a letter in his own hand, which is full
of hopefulness and sacrilege. For there is nothing of shameful deeds or
cruelty of which he does not accuse me, so much so that even the
papists, my enemies, do not tear me to pieces like these our friends,
who were nothing without us and before us and did not even dare to
protest, but now, puffed up by our victory, turn their attack against
us. This is what it means to give thanks, this is what it means to

1\) The birth took place on December 10.

2\) The *Amica exegesis*.

In short, only now do I understand what it means that the world is in
trouble and that Satan is the prince of the world. Until now I thought
that these were only words, but now I see that it is a fact and that the
devil really rules in the world. 3) To your mistress 4) say thanks in my
name, in the name of her little house and Catharina 5). Hans is
extremely proud of the delicious undergarment you sent him. If I could
serve her in turn with that, I would certainly be pleased. \"For I
realize that God is with her. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen.\" My Käthe
sends her best wishes for your well-being. Wittenberg, 1527. Martin
Luther.

**No. 1081.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around May 4) 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

Luther recommends a certain Stephanus to him and invites Agricola\'s
wife to come to them for the sake of her health.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratenb*. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 333b; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 173 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Vl, p. 48. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1037.

> His brother in the Lord, Johann, the farmer (*Agricolae*) and
> instructor of the Christian youth at Eisleben 2c.

Grace and peace! If you are able to do something, my dear Agricola, in
the matter which this Stephanus will present to you (but you are able to
do very much), then help him. For although we have been deceived in many
ways up to now, I do not believe that we or our efforts, which we may
spend on him, will be deceived by this person. He is miserable and in
need of the labors of love to which you find your counts ready.

It seems advisable to us for your Elsa to come here for a few days to
change the air she is used to. You will advise us in this matter at the
same time, because we will gladly explain everything to your lovely wife
and the simple and righteous woman.

3\) The following is missing in Aurifaber and De Wette. From the same
the question of the latter is settled: \"Where was Stiefel at that time?

4\) Mrs. Dorothea Jörger.

5\) Luther\'s son and wife.

**938** Letters from the year 1527.

No. 1081 to 1084. 939

point out what can be useful to her in any way. Farewell. My Käthe has
vomiting and nausea and is again ill, but (as I hope) with a good
illness, namely of the head and (I don\'t know what kind of) vertigo;
she sends her love to you and your Elsa. My little house is cheerful and
strong, and a person who likes to eat and drink (*vorax et bibax*),
thank God.

1527\. Martin Luther.

**No. 10 82.**

(Wittenberg.) May 5, 1527.

**To Andreas Kaugisdorf in Eilenburg.**

Because of a dispute with an officemate.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B, 24. n. Printed in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
175 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 49.

> To the highly venerable brother in Christ, Andreas Kaugisdorf, the
> faithful and loud preacher and pastor at Eilenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! The one who hands you this letter, 1) my dear
Andrew, complains that he is driven out of the ministry of teaching by
you. Therefore he asks that I intervene on his behalf. But I, who do not
respect the word of one party, especially from afar, and at the same
time know your love very well, do not know what discord there is among
you. Therefore, if there is anything that my intercession for him must
do for you, you will do what Christ taught you and which I promise to do
for you. Grace be with you, Amen. Sunday after the Exaltation of the
Cross \[May 5\] 1527.

Your M. L.

**No. 10 83.**

(Wittenberg.) May 6, 1527.

**To Johann Busmann in Königsberg.**

On the printing of an interpretation of the Revelation of John sent by
Brismann. About Luther\'s literary works.

The original is at Königsberg in the Wallenrodt Library. Printed by
Voller, No. 5; in *Acta Borussia,* I, 801; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 118;
by De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 175 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 50.

1\) The bearer of the letter was, as we see from Luther\'s letter to
Kaugisdorf of Nov. 9, Juno, preacher at the church in front of the
castle.

> To the highly venerable man, Johann Brismann, the servant of Christ in
> Prussia, his brother.

Grace and peace! I can hardly believe you, as tested as your credibility
is with me, my dear Brismann, I am surprised that you write that you
have not received a letter from me in half a year. Far otherwise, if it
does not deceive me, my memory tells me, but perhaps the letters are
caught. The revelation \[St. John\'s\] that you sent,^2)^ is now being
printed, because the one who brought it has only now asked for it.

The sacramentarian spirit rages without moderation, which Christ, as he
is wont to do, meets with his weak strength. I have irritated them by my
last booklet 3), for almost all of them attack me by name and challenge
me. You pray for me that Christ\', while we become disgraced, be
glorified alone. That the great ones are outraged by my booklet of the
men of war 4) I assume rightly, because also here with us it annoys
outstanding people among us. But we have flesh, and it grieves us when
our sense is touched. Farewell in Christ and greet all of our people.
Pommer is seriously ill 5) and sends you his greetings, and wishes that
you pray for him. On the sixth of May 1527.

Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1084.**

(Wittenberg.) May 17, 1527.

**To Amsdorf.**

From a German translation of Luther\'s Commentary on the 5th Book of
Moses. Warning against the Anabaptist Melchior Hofmann.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 78; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 177 (with
the wrong date: May 18) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 51.

2\) Luther wrote a preface to it, St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 178.
There, see the details about it in the note.

3\) \"That these words: This is my body, still stand firm.\" St. Louis
Old Edition, Vol. XX, 762, No. 20.

4\) \"Whether men of war can also be in a blessed state.\" St. Louis
edition, Vol. X, 488.

5\) He suffered from an ulcer in the ear. (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. I, 866.)

**940**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1084. 1085. 1086. 941

Grace and peace! I have published my Deuteronomy in Latin, but I have
not even seen it translated, so much is missing that I should have
translated it myself. Again, I wish to know on what grounds you desire
to know this from me. ^1)^ If Melchior 2) the prophet from Liechtenstein
should come, do not receive him in a friendly or confidential manner. I
have had to suffer very serious letters because of my testimony, which I
gave him as a foolish and deceived man. For, trusting in it, he has
begun to despise even the preachers there and to be hopeful. The man and
his spirit displeases me completely, since he wanders about without
command and without profession and is nonsensical in whimsical things
that are too high for him. If he should come, bid him wait for his
profession, that is, furriery, and abstain from prophethood, and cease
therefrom, until he be received into the church, interrogated and
judged. Farewell and visit us at last, and show us your exceedingly dear
face and let us communicate with each other. On Friday after Servatius
\[May 17\] 1527, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1085.**

(Wittenberg.) May 19, 1527.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther says thank you for the woodturning tools and other instruments
sent to him. About the book with the pictures of the Pabstthum.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 333 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 178
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 52. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1039.

Grace and peace to your Lord! We have also received the woodturning set
and the quadrant with the roller and the wooden clock, and we give
thanks. But you omitted one thing, that you did not indicate how much
money remained to be sent, for we consider that the two skilled

1\) For the translation of Deuteronomy published in Strasbourg, see St.
Louis Edition, Vol. Ill, 1370, note.

2\) This is the furrier Melchior Hofmann. Amsdorf showed him the door
and warned against him in your fierce print.

\[guilders\] are not sufficient. Otherwise, there are enough instruments
for this time, unless you have some of a new kind that can turn alone
when Wolfgang 3) snores or does not pay attention. For with regard to
the clock, I am almost a perfect master, especially since the hours are
to be indicated to my drunken Saxons, who prefer to look at the jugs
rather than at the hours, and are not much troubled by an error either
in the sun or in the clock or in its master. With us there is nothing
new than your picture book about the Pabstthum,^4)^ in which I like my
picture less sickle very well, since I am sa preannounced so many years
ago as a biting and harsh man, but I bear Bedeuken to interpret the rose
as my sign; 5) I would like to think that it also refers more to the
office. The other pleases me now, if what you have published is true.
Fare well in the Lord. May 19, 1527, Martin Luther.

Philip will recommend Veit Dietrich to you, just as I will do if there
is any use for him.

**No. 1086.**

**Of Mr. Leonhard Kaiser in Bavaria, burned for the sake of the Gospel,
a blessed story.**

The report about the martyrdom of Leonhard Kaiser (more correctly:
Käser) first appeared before October 1527 under the title: \"Histori
oder dz warhasftig geschieht, des leydens vnd sterbens Lienhart Keysers
seligen, etwa Pfarrers zu Weytzenkirchen, von des heyligen Euangelij vnd
Gütlichen warheyt wegen zu Passaw verdteylt, vnd zu Scherding verbrandt,
am Freytag nach Laurentij, im jar M.D. xxvij. Item eyn trostbrieff
Doctor Martini Luther, gemelten

3\) Sieberger. It seems that Luther had the woodturning tools come
mainly for this one.

4\) See No. 1176.

5\) In the 20th picture of that scripture, Osiander had put a monk in
the place of the pope, who holds a rose in his right hand and a sickle
in his left hand, and under it the words: \"But so that one sees who the
monk is, he stands there in his clothing and has his sign, the rose, in
his hand, I think it is Luther. But because Isaiah saith, All flesh is
as grass, he standeth there with a sickle, and cutteth it off, not
grass, but flesh, and all that is carnal 2c. For against this he
preaches, and when it is extinguished, he will strike again with the
iron of fire the fire of Christian love, which is extinguished, and
kindle it.\"

**942**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

943

Lienhardt-Keyser blessed, sent in his gefencknus.\" 1-1/2\^ sheets in
quarto (in 4 different editions). Of this writing Luther says in the
allsang of our report that some inaccuracies are contained in it.
Therefore, on the basis of the notes made by Kaiser, which Michael
Stiefel sent him, Luther organized another printing under the title:
\"Von Er Lenhard keiser ynn Beyern vmb des Euangelij willen verbrandt
Eine selige geschicht. Mart. Luther. Wittemberg. M. D. XXVIII.\" At the
end: \"Printed at Wittemberg. by Hans Lufft.\"

Sheet in quarto. Another edition was published in 1528 at Nuremberg by
Friederich Peypus. In the editions: in the Wittenberg (1553), vol. VI,
p. 4056; in the Jena (1556), vol. Ill, p. 441b; in the Altenburg, vol.
Ill, p. 780; in the Leipzig, vol. XlX, p. 577 and in Walch, vol. XXI,
173. Our writing is not found in the Erlangen edition, and in order to
make up for this deficiency, the Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 53,
contains Luther\'s letter to Kaiser, which belongs to this writing, and
ibid. p. 156 ff. Luther\'s preface and epilogue to this writing, which
are in epistolary form. The Erlangen correspondence, however, has
recognized just as little as Köstlin that the section immediately
following the preface originates from Luther.

To all the dear people of Christ Martinus Luther. ^1)^

Grace and peace in Christ! The story of Lenhard Keiser, who was burned
in Bavaria for the sake of the Gospel, has been printed. And although
the master of this booklet is inclined to the Gospel and meant it to be
true, he has described some parts differently, as it happened, perhaps
to the disgust of those who were against him, or he did not have a
better report, so that the papists\' mouths would be all the more open,
so that they could boast about how ours deal with lies. Therefore, after
I had diligently inquired into the matter until I had arrived at the
certain truth, I let this story go out anew. For I believe that we, who
want to be Christians, may not without sin keep silent about such a
glorious confession of the truth, which this Lenhard Keiser has made by
the great grace of God, and we owe it to God to thank Him for His
abundant grace that He has strengthened our faith and doctrine with such
a great and beautiful example, and that He has made it possible for us
to live in peace.

1\) The exact time of the publication of this writing cannot be
determined; however, because the first edition is already marked with
the year 1528, and Luther sent a finished copy to Spalatin on December
28, Christmas 1527 can be assumed. On the 2nd day of Christmas 1527 that
Luther is mentioned in the sermon of Leonhard Kaiser. (Buchwald, Andr.
Poach\'s Unprinted Sermons of Luther, p. XXIX.).

comfort at this evil time, when so many abominations and troubles rage
and rage against the salvific Word of God. O Lord God, the most
beautiful articles are those for which the pious emperor shed his blood
and gave his life, condemned on earth as a heretic, but glorified in
heaven as a true martyr. O dear Lord Jesus Christ, help us by your
Spirit (according to such an example) to confess you and your word with
constant faith before this blind and naughty world, and forgive the
wretched tyrants together with their multitude such their sin, and
enlighten all erroneous and deceived hearts with the light of your
graces, and be with us poor, that you protect us and keep us pure and
blameless for your future. To you be praise and glory with the Father
and Holy Spirit forever and ever, Amen.

Mr. Leonhard Keiser was born of honest, famous friendship at Rab (Nabb),
four miles from Passau, in the district of Schärding in Bavaria, and has
led an honorable, chaste life for his person as a special pious priest,
held dear and valuable by everyone.

But when he was vicar of Watzenkirchen for seven years (there Doctor
Perger, canon of Passau, was pastor), and he, by the grace of God,
showed the people the truth of the Gospel, his pastor, the
above-mentioned Doctor Perger, became unfavorable to him, \'as if his
parish would decrease in money through him. Finally, he was brought
before the bishop of Passau, summoned, and imprisoned by the official of
Passau, kept there until the third day, and told that he should never
adhere to such teachings as Lutheran or Protestant, according to a long
original that the priests of Regensburg had provided.

After this, he returned to Watzenkirchen and did not stay longer than
half a year in the parish 2c.

But when his conscience weighed heavily on him, he set out and went to
Wittenberg 2) and elsewhere, where he found remembrance of his life.

2\) He is immatriculated at Wittenberg on June 7, 1525.

**944**

Letters from the year 1527. No\] 1086.

945

2c., and failed to do so for two years.

After that, when a letter came to him from his brothers and friends,
saying that his father was in mortal danger and that he wanted to see
his father alive, he came out and, out of the love of his father and
brothers, resigned himself and went to Rab, where he found his father
alive within two hours. After that, he stayed at Rab with his mother and
brothers, and he also became weak, so he stayed there for five weeks. In
such a state he was reported by the parish priest there at Rab, and the
parish priest reported his future to the abbot of Süben and the bishop
of Passau by letters and persons.

After this, the prince of Passau sent a letter to the judge at Rab,
asking him to have Lenhard imprisoned. The judge had Lenharden read this
document himself, and the judge imprisoned him. Then he was kept in
their court on the third day, then delivered for the court to the
district court of Schärding on the 10th day of March Anno 27, and led to
Schärding. On the other morning, as on the 11th day of March, he was led
to Passau on the water, then imprisoned in the Oberhaus or castle, and
examined several times in the presence of Doctor Ramelsbach, preacher at
Passau, and Officials, parish priest at St. Paul and canon, Doctor
Rosin, canon, and Doctor Fröschel, canon 2c.

The prince has also spoken to him personally, but his answer has always
been: according to divine Scripture he wants to be reprimanded,
otherwise with nothing, even with revenge, he should be sent to some
cities of the empire, such as Nuremberg, Augsburg, Ulm and the like, at
his and his friends\' expense, and there present the alleged crime. If
he is found to be in the wrong, he shall pay for it without any mercy,
but if he is not due, 1) nor overcome with holy scripture, he shall not
be charged further. But as they questioned and examined him

1\) \"due\" guilty. (Dietz.)

nirt, and what his answer has been, we will best hear from his own
handwriting, which has come to me,^2)^ and reads thus:

Grace through Christ.

Friendly, dear brothers in Christ! I let you know that on the day of
Pentecost 3) I was required to be interrogated, and there I was asked to
answer briefly and to give my opinion on all the articles that were
rejected by Doctor Martinum, and which are strictly contrary to God\'s
Word, and are not yet founded in the Holy Scriptures.

But now you can well notice that this wolf\'s presumption is nothing
else but a thurst to muffle divine word and to condemn innocent blood,
also no love to instruct the erring one, as me or one of my equals,
according to their eighth, only inclined to condemn outright and
cunning, also not to let any saying of the Scripture remain with his
right mind, but must be violated and desecrated as devilish, heretical,
Lutheran doctrine.

Who would consider it Christian, brotherly love that a weak, sick person
should be put into a heavy prison for a while, and then hurriedly,
unawares, begin to respond to such excellent articles concerning the
salvation of the soul? Since even high authorities in such respectable
matters and necessary articles would not be allowed eight days, but half
a year or a whole year, to which I would not be able to untie the laces
with my intellect, you may understand what tyranny is used to search the
consciences of men and to reform them according to their head, which is
God\'s doing and work alone.

Now I would like to show you the articles to which I have had to answer,
but I must say that a good part of them has fallen away from me, but
nevertheless, according to my simple mind, and in accordance with the
word of God, I have answered them, because you have good knowledge,
since God\'s word is accused of heretical, diabolical, seductive,
Lutheran doctrine among them, I also, who am accused by them of being a
heretic, diabolical, seductive, Lutheran doctrine.

2\) This passage seems to us to be full proof that everything preceding
(not only the letter \"to all Christians\", as Köstlin, M. Luther, p.
643 ad p. 113 states) was written by Luther.

3\) Here the Jena edition has the marginal gloss: \"This is Dornstag. -
According to the document that immediately follows Leonhard Kaiser\'s
handwriting, \"a legal day has been set for July 11,\" which was a
Thursday. This letter is therefore written soon after July 11.

**946** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1086. 947

I have been taken for an erring, deceived man, blinded with false
doctrine; also where already writings have been denounced, unseemly and
utterly rejected by them, also not allowed to listen, to speak out my
distress.

One article or six other examinations have been held up to me by them,
which in part have fallen away from me, as first of all: what I think of
the Conciliis; what of the primacy or supremacy of the pope; what of his
statutes and the like? 2c.

\(1\) But the first article, now held up to me this time, was whether
faith alone, without works, makes one justified? Answer: Yes. \[I have
shown Scripture from the Old and New Testaments, but \[it is\] denied by
them, and it has not been given me leave to argue.

\(2\) Secondly, concerning works, what are they, if faith alone
justifies? I answered: that faith alone acts before God, but works are
signs of my faith; these must be left down with the neighbor, to serve
him with them, and not to lead him over himself before God. One must
separate faith and works as far as heaven and earth, angels and devils.
Only do nothing before God with works, but leave the glory to Christ
alone, that he has bought us with his blood and has done more than too
much for all men\'s sins, and believe this, rely on it completely and
die on it: faith is enough before God and makes us children of God,
heirs to his kingdom, co-heirs with Christ, and partakers of all his
goods. But now you know well what the goods of Christ are, of which it
is unnecessary to write.

3\. thirdly, the sacrament of the altar or mass? Answered, as if it were
a testament or memorial of the united sacrifice of our dear Lord Jesus
Christ, made on the cross for us poor sinners. Is it not a sacrifice?
Answer: No, because he was sacrificed once. Whether it is not service
for the departed? Answered: No. Whether it should be offered to the
laity under one or under both forms? To which I answered: Where the
gospel is not preached, it is necessary to wait a while, for the sake of
the weak, to give it in one form. But if the gospel is preached, and the
words of the institution of the body and blood of Christ are taught, one
should proceed to present both forms to the male. One must first build,
then destroy, but whoever stinks afterwards, let him stink and go to the
devil.

4\. what the great and small canon and what I think of it? Answer:
because they both say only about sacrifice, and the will is a gift and
not a sacrifice, so I do not think anything of it 2c.

5th Item, fifth, about the confession? Answer: There are three kinds of
confession. The first of faith, which is necessary daily, Ps. 32:5: \"I
said, I will confess,\" 2c. The other of love, and is, if I have
offended my neighbor, \[that\] I reconcile myself with him, of which
Matth. 5, 23. f. and 18, 18. The third of counsel, and not to be
despised. For where I know to fetch God\'s promise, I should not despise
it, but lament my distress, there receive God\'s word, and rejoice in my
request, and believe that I will be helped 2c.

\(6\) Item, repentance and atonement? Answer: I know of no other
atonement than that of Christ, that is, His blood, suffering and death
given for us.

\(7\) What then are repentance, confession, fasting, prayer, and the
like? Answer: In all these there is neither satisfaction nor payment,
but are signs of thanksgiving to those who are redeemed by Christ\'s
shedding of innocent blood, suffering and death.

8\. item, about the sacrament of the last rites? Said: that for this
reason no scripture is sufficient for me, that it should be a sacrament,
but that it was the custom of the Jews to visit the sick and there to
pour delicious ointment or water on them to help their weak, sick bodies
and to give them refreshment, which is what Christ, the Lord, Magdalene
did; so Marcus should also be understood.

9 Item, about the confirmation? I said, as before, that no scripture
pleased me.

10 Item, of the ordination of the priests? I said it was not a
sacrament, but drawn from the Old Testament, just as Mosi was commanded
to ordain and clothe his brother Aaron, as we have in the Book of the
Exodus of the Israelites. So also the bishops have taken the same
scriptures for themselves to consecrate our priests, but therefore no
word nor command.

\(11\) Item, [baptism]{.underline}? I have said that it is a sacrament
instituted by Christ, and not to be missed; and if any man be not
baptized, let him desire to be baptized still, and a sign of faith 2c.
For this also not man\'s work, but God\'s work, by which the old man is
drowned and a new man is born, and the old man dies and lives anew. Also
a sign that faith is not only in the heart,

**948** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1086. 949

but must be made known to everyone by the sign, and to me. Then follows
the cross and temptation of the Christians who confess him.

12\. item, [of the marriage state,]{.underline} whether it is a
sacrament? No, but instituted and created by God. For this reason man
and wife were created, and his word was given to multiply them, and no
one was to walk outside the estate, unless he was blessed by God. There
was much talk about this, but I had to be their liar with open
scripture, as Matth. 19 reports. \[I said that it is not proper in any
case to leave one\'s wife and marry another, unless one has betrayed the
other\'s faith, which then separates itself. But a Christian man knows
how to keep himself in this case. If once 1) divorced and again sought
mercy, further to avoid should be left, and then a new marriage.

13\. item, whether it is also proper for a priest to be free about his
vows? Answer: Yes. The vow made cannot or may not dampen God\'s word. It
is not our doing to vow chastity, but God\'s grace must give it first,
for the word is strong against it: \"Grow and multiply.

Item 14: What is Christian freedom? Answer: Christian freedom is that we
are free from all laws, that no law has anything to do with any
Christian, as Paul says \[1 Tim. 1, 9Z: \"No law is given to the
righteous\". He wants and strives to live according to the law without
being forced to do so. He is sorry that he stumbles at times, he is also
sorry for sins and would gladly be without them; the struggle remains
until our pit. Now in such a case, the Christian man is like-minded
toward God: God hates sin, and so does a Christian man, even if he feels
sin, even if he falls into it.

On the other hand, God wants us not to sin. A Christian man also wants
to be free of sins. He writhes here, he turns there; as he does, he
finds two laws in him, as Paul did to Romans 2c. Also he is a lord over
all goods of God, all creatures free to use, but that through freedom he
does not give place to the flesh, as Paul says Gal. 5, 13.

15 Item, what about free will? Did I say that to obtain external things,
man may well have free will to a certain extent?

1\) \"once\" put by us instead of \"oneest\" in the Wittenberg and
\"one\" in the Jena. - Immediately following we have put instead of:
\"further\": \"Weiteres\".

will, but in the things to do God\'s will, or to leave that which is
contrary to God\'s will, we still have no free will. God gives me much,
but I am such a fellow, and leave His commandment. Nor do I find in all
my powers, even me, that I can do and leave what he gives or bequeaths.
There is a great difference between owing something and having
something. I owe a lot and I don\'t have it. Lord, give what you give,
and do what you will.

16 Item: What do I think about purgatory? Answer: I have not yet heard
or read a saying in the holy Scriptures that has completely satisfied my
conscience, from which one could or would want to try that there should
be a purgatory, although we have all in one heap bent and rhymed the
saying and the like, namely as Matth. 5, 25. f.: \"Be at peace with your
adversary\" 2c. \"Thou shalt not come forth from thence till thou hast
paid the last farthing.\" \"So long\" 2c. is spoken as much as
eternally; so I understand it this time, and will not err.

Item, 1 Cor. 3, 11, the same saying also bent there. \"No one can lay a
foundation other than the one that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. But
if any man build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stone,
wood,\" 2c. has another mind. But I cannot or may not allow that there
be a purgatory, because all the works of God are perfect, and none of
His works are wholly imperfect. \[He\] forgives man his faults, or
nothing at all. It is not necessary to divide God into pieces, so that
here he forgives a part of the sins, and in that world also a part that
is called venial, especially because it is an article of faith, since we
believe that here is forgiveness of sins.

Now it is known in the day that one cannot believe in that world, when
sea and body separate, because faith and hope end with the death of man.
If then faith alone receives forgiveness of sins, misery must half
follow, because the deceased do not have faith nor hope for forgiveness
of sins, do not receive forgiveness of sins, venial or whatever one may
call them, because we confess that here and not there is forgiveness of
sins.

\(17\) Item, the difference of days? Answer: That to Christians there is
no difference of days, but one is like another. On this Marci 2, 27. f.
is indicated: \"that the Sabbath was created because of man, not man
because of the Sabbath. That also the child of man is

**950**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

**951**

a Lord of the Sabbath\", but it is good, right and proper (but not a
commandment) to keep \[one day\] in the week, as it is now Sunday, so
that the common man, who is burdened with his work all week, may come
together to hear God\'s word, prayer and supplication for all the needs
at hand.

18\. item, from the choice or [difference to]{.underline} keep the
[food]{.underline} half? Answer: in the food there is no difference to
be kept; \[I have\] drawn scriptures; Matth. 15, 11. Christ says: \"What
enters the mouth\" 2c.

19\. Item, about the [invocation of the saints,]{.underline} whether
they are also to be invoked or honored, whether they may also be our
intercessors? Answer: That only God is to be called, worshipped and
honored, in the Book of the Exodus of the Children of Israel, Cap. 20,
3. that we have no other mediator than Jesus Christ, who is given to us
by God as a unique mediator, Hebr. 4, 15: \"For we do not have a high
priest who cannot have compassion on our weakness.\" And 1 John 2:1 f.:
\"Beloved, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. But if any
man sin, we have an Advocate before God, Christ Jesus, who is our
propitiation for our sin, and not for our sin only, but for the sin of
the whole world.\"

To this end, I have said that in the saints we see the greatness of God,
and His unspeakable goodness, so that the Almighty God graced the dear
saints, and especially gave them great faith and strength, so that they
overcame princedom, kings, and all that was mighty before the world,
through the power and might of faith. Therefore God in His saints, and
not the saints, are to be praised and glorified. \[For this reason they
are presented to us, so that we may see and perceive in them their great
faith and steadfastness in all adversity. This is the greatest honor, so
we may prove to them that we are caused by them to magnify God and
praise His good deeds, proven to them.

20\. Item, what [about the Mother of God]{.underline}? Answer: she is a
high, great, worthy person, highly graced by God, and indeed, before the
foundation of the world, provided to become a mother of His most beloved
Son, and yet by grace without merit. Luc. 1, 30. the angel says: \"You
have found grace with God\" 2c. Doctor Rosin: Does the Christian church
sing: For you have deserved to bear 2c. To this I answered that she had
not deserved it, not even in her

In her praise song Magnificat, she indicated something else, because she
wanted to praise and extol the mightiness, goodness and mercy of God,
thereby promising comforting help and support to her and all those who
are thus reduced and think nothing of them, 2c. because she says: \"For
he has considered the nothingness of his servant. For he hath shewed me
great things, who is mighty, and hath exalted them that think not of
them. He hath filled the hungry with good things, and the rich,\" the
arrogant and the work-saintly, as a glorifier, \"he hath left empty.\"

21\. item, [whether the pope may condemn]{.underline} someone? I do not
know how the official raised the question. I think he said, as he said:
whether the pope has the power to condemn? Does the pope have the power
to condemn? I said: No, because it belongs to God alone to condemn. Let
it be known how the ban is to be used: not to condemn, but to force and
shame the unruly and recalcitrant, so that they confess their sin and
suffer for it, so that they are separated from the community and thereby
caused to desire to be received back into the community, as Matt. 18:15:
\"If your brother sins against you,\" 2c.Just as Paul commanded the one
who had taken his stepmother as a wife, 1 Cor. 5:1, in the absence of
his person, but still with the spirit in the church, that he should not
be tolerated any longer, but should be set apart for the corruption of
the flesh, that is, that he would be disgraced and thus despised, so
that he later desired and asked to be taken back into the church.

22\. Item, what would I think of [the fourth line]{.underline} or clan
number of the friendship of the blood? Whether it was proper to marry in
the same clan numbers? I do not know what my answer would have been
about this, or whether another question would have intervened; I am even
in doubt about what I have said.

Item, another question comes to my mind, and that is: what do I think or
believe to be under the two forms of wine and bread? Answer: that under
the two forms is understood the true body of the Lord, and that under
the form of bread, but under the form of wine the precious blood of our
Lord 2c.

\(23\) Whether the [whole body and blood of the Lord are]{.underline}
comprehended in the [figure of bread]{.underline}? Then I answered, that
I believe with simplicity, as the words of the author, that is, of
Christ, who says, \"Take and eat, this is my body, which is given for
you,\" and again, \"Drink ye all of it.

**952**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

**953**

Whether among the two figures permanent, or transformations? 2c. Then I
said, \"It is not for me to argue about these things; I leave it to the
wise. It is enough for me that I remain firm in the words of our Savior;
whether it remains bread or is transformed, it is none of my business.
Item, another question of my time of day 1) half: whether I pray them?
Answer: I have not prayed much in a year. Says the official: yes,
perhaps much longer; Lutherans do not usually like to pray much. I just
kept quiet and thought to myself: you might have guessed it (from the
times of day).

To these and other questions more, if a good part has undoubtedly fallen
away from me, to which my simple answer (as you will find such
responsibility in this), I am condemned by them and through them a far
astray man and almost far from the path of blessedness and divine truth,
in addition to which these articles are all condemned in the next
Concilio, and condemned as heretical long before. And should the
Christian church have erred so long ago, as twelve hundred years, and
this accursed heretic be right \[against\] so many holy fathers and so
much Concilio?

And I do not know how this speech escaped me, that I spoke: I believed
that Germany has never had the gospel nor heard it rightly. The point is
also written out for me along with others, although the prophet speaks
\[Ps. 19:5\]: \"Into all the earth\" 2c. This is also how one usually
speaks when one sends a messenger: I sent a messenger to Vienna, whether
he was still on his way and had not reached the end. So I left for my
hole, where I have enough mice and stink; God grant patience 2c.

Hereupon, dear friends, all with one another, I want you to send my
confession to the Christian man Philippo Gundelio, to see my
responsibility, whether any of them have erred, and whether they have
not been answered by me according to God\'s word, \[hoping that he\]
will report this to me in silence, \[and that he,\] out of Christian
love, will not refuse my faithful request. But if he does not, he will
send it to my Christian brother Micheln Süffel gen Tollet, Wolfgang
Georgerin Caplan, 2) to discuss it, to give me further help, advice of
the writings on all my articles in a small summa, so that I am
strengthened,

1\) Daytime == *horae canonicae*.

2\) Michael Stiefel, Chaplain to Mrs. Dorothea Jörger, the widow of the
knight Wolfgang Jörger, at Tolleth, which is only about four miles from
Schärding.

and whether I will be touched further, that I will then take care to
protect myself. I hereby command God. Have given me my simple 2c.

**The letter of Mr. Leonhard Kaiser, the prisoner of Jesus Christ,
written to Michel Stifel from prison.. March 9, 1527.**

This letter is found in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 245,
in the other editions at the locations indicated at the beginning of
this paper.

Grace and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ! Rejoice
with me, my most beloved brother in Christ, that the eternal, almighty
God, the Father of mercy and God of all comfort, considers me, His
unworthy servant and great sinner, worthy of a blessed profession, that
I should confess His holy, sweet and blessed name before the wicked
world. Praised be He for ever and ever, Amen.

The same God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begun his work
in me, may he also accomplish it, strengthen and direct my heart, all my
senses, and what I intend to do, in the way of salvation; may he also
rule my lips, mouth and tongue, according to the good pleasure of his
fatherly will, that they may utter his praise and glory as long as I can
stir them up, so that through me, his weak, ineffectual vessel, his
holy, pure and loud gospel, which I have heard so often and long, may
not be reviled nor blasphemed, ah! God wanted, with fruit, to the glory
and honor of His holy name.

That I may now be granted this request of mine, and that I may obtain
it, then sit down earnestly with me with your fervent, heartfelt prayer,
and let your Leonhard Keiser be commanded to you in this. Also,
diligently admonish your people to pray to our dear God in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ in right faith and confidence for me, a poor
sinner, according to the glorious, comforting promise of Christ: \"Where
two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst
of them; and why they ask, it shall not be denied them, but shall be
done for them of my Father which is in heaven.\"

Let my Ulrich be commanded to you. Greet the honorable and godly woman,
Wolfgang Görgerin, and Fuchshuber, the faithful servant of God, and all
our brothers. The grace of God be with me and with all of you, amen.
From my prison, on the Saturday before Invocavit \[March 9\] Anno 1527.

On August 16 of the same year he was burned to death in constant
confession of Christ and his holy word, as can be seen in the following
history.

**954**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

**955**

**Another writing by Ern Leonhard Kaiser \[to an unnamed person\]
written in prison before Aug. 16, 1527,**

thus saying:

Grace and peace through Christ! I am in no doubt that you have heard my
confession in response to the questions posed by Official and Rosin in
the presence of 1) Notarii Hugl, in a similar \[letter\]. \[I\] consider
it, as much as I know, \[that it\] should be so uniformly written \[by
me\] in the pen, without which the question article would have fallen
off me, there would be some doubts. Because you now see my simple
responsibility, 2) I am undoubted, you will find out for yourselves by
God\'s word (given to you by His word and His Spirit) whether divine
truth should have been admitted in my responsibility, too little, or
more than known.

Therefore, to you, as lovers of divine truth, who let me examine the
ends and quietly receive an answer, to pacify my conscience, and also,
with the help and comfort of divine scriptures, not to refrain from
making an effort on my responsibility, if necessary, as I have to be
careful to protect myself from the wolves and enemies, to lay God\'s
word, and to have reason and scripture to answer for their unrhymed
sayings and sayings with \[the\] hair pulled to it. For this reason, I
now also need much to expose and to read over, especially the booklet of
the Babylonian prison,^3)^ in which D. Martinus instituted \[teaches\]
two sacraments of Christ, pushing the others to the ground.

Now, dear God, I feel as if I had dreamed of it in my sleep, as I had
read it at one time, but the reason and cause have mostly slipped my
mind. Therefore, for my benefit, I would like to have the treatise put
together, or else, because I want to be uncertain and careful when
dealing with these books, I would like to have some sayings of such
reproach 4) put into a summa; \[it\] will concern little or not much
writing or writings, because on the others it would truly be my duty to
overlook much.

Almighty GOD, give grace, do not let your holy divine Word perish. The
Word is

1\) That is: present.

2\) According to this, it seems that the above-mentioned Philip
Gundelius is the unnamed recipient of this letter. Compare Col. 952.

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 5.

4\) \"Fürwerffung\" == Template, draft; namely \"Von der babylonischen
Gefangenschaft\".

thine, handle thy word; thou must do it! I am far too simple and too
weak for him, nor do I find it in all my power to accomplish anything,
to receive your word, honor and praise, unless you first give and grant
it to me; I am nothing but a poor instrument.

Therefore, dear friends and all my dearest kind benefactors, be mindful
that I am helped in these matters, that my confession is inspected by
those who may give me helpful and quiet comfort in turn. I am now
lacking several little books, which I need to discuss several points.
Item, of the booklets one of which I have now brought out, one can be
found with the N., as he himself indicates. Item, a Latin Psalter,
covered with white leather, has the N., \[of which\] I would need to
comfort myself with a Psalm at times. Item, a written Christianism 5)
has also seen the N. well, also read in the upper room in my presence; I
would also like to overlook one.

Item, if Ulrich is not yet native, but still at Tollet, my suggestion
and good opinion would be that he stick to the boys and teach them as
before; \[I\] do not think that one should follow him. Item, I have not
been approached because of him. I have not been asked whether I have
Lutheran books or not. \[Nor did I like it that he gave flight. What do
they want to do to him? He is a free and unmarried man, therefore no one
is disgusted or annoyed by him. That he be given all necessities is my
wish. I also ask him to write only once in a friendly manner, and also
to remind Mr. Michael in Tollet to write to me, especially if the
articles and my responsibility should be delivered to him. Greetings to
the wife 6) together with all her loved ones, \[they\] have commanded me
in their prayers, the same, God willing, I will do again. Dear friend,
let all things be commanded, God help me, that I have good hope, I will
keep it unforgotten all my life 2c.

Among others, two questions come to my mind. The first: whether all
Christians are priests? Answer: Yes, from the saying 1 Petr. 2, 9: \"You
are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood\" 2c., because one can or
may pray for the other and carry his matter before God.

5\) In addition, the Jena edition brings as a marginal gloss:
\"Catechism\".

6\) In the editions: \"Frawen\", which is probably not to be fast as
plural, but it will be the Mrs. Dorothea Jörger to understand under it.

**956**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

**957**

To prove counsel and help through God\'s word. Also, all men who are
Christians are kings, that is, lords over all the goods of Christ; for
all the goods that are Christ\'s, the same goods are also at the same
time all Christian men, and are all partakers of the same with Him
through faith, that through Him they are lords over sin, death, the
devil, and hell; these \[have\] no more to rule nor to command against a
Christian 2c.

Item, secondly: what do I think of the laying on of hands? Answer: It
would be a common custom of the Jews, if they wanted to signify a person
worthy of honor and dignity, that they then used to signify such
persons, who were worthy of an office or suitable for it, with the
laying on of hands. I did not respond formally, as I later thought. Now,
however, because it is not formally asked and not quite clearly, as I
also encounter much in other matters, it must immediately pass away, and
at the same time go with other heretical articles, as they then condemn
me. Where one remains, the others also remain 2c.

End of his handwriting.

1\) Item, between and in the time his friends have made a great and high
effort for the prisoner\'s release, with a great offer, request and
desire, and supplication, also many lords have raised to ask and
prescribe for the prisoner, namely the von Traun, 2) the counts of
Schaunburg, the von Schwarzenburg, margrave Casimirus, the von
Starheilberg and other many of the nobility, and a diligent
interpellation from the prince and duke Johansen of Saxony, to which,
however, he gave no answer 2c. Also, with much offer of friendship, he
sometimes asked the prince to send the prisoner\'s friendship crimes and
misdeeds in writing, or to let the friendship remain with him, so that
they might the more nobly expel him from what he had done wrong. But all
this and more, everything was refused, and nothing helped at all. 2c.

After this and all the other actions, a legal day was set for him on the
11th day of the month of July. But he, the bishop, only let the
friendship know this on the 10th day of the hay month before, after
noon. The

1\) What follows now is the history of Leonhard Kaiser\'s martyrdom sent
to Luther by Michael Stiefel, which Luther mentions in his letters to
Stiefel on October 8 and 22, 1527.

2\) In the Jena edition: \"Trawn\"; in the Wittenberg edition:
\"Trawm\".

The prince pretended that he had allowed friendship to go up to the
prisoner in one part by special grace, and to cleanse him of his
wrongdoing. But the friendship of one part went up to the castle, namely
those: Friedrich Baumeister, Hans Reichenberger, Hans Schmid Krämer, the
brothers-in-law; Erasmus Keiser his cousin, Thomas Keiser his brother,
and Hans Greiner, Baumeister\'s servant, and Master Vincenz as
procurator.

So the friendship with him was left in the presence of Doctor Eck of
Ingolstadt and the Abbot of Allersbach, so that nothing secret would be
said or done 2c. After this \[Eck\] has a long sermon and a long speech,
ordered him by the prince, how his F. G. out of special grace has
granted the friendship to Mr. Leonhard, also allowed him a procurator,
not by right, but out of grace and inclination 2c.

And on the friendship\'s manifold requests Eck wanted to read the
articles to Mr. Leonhard, Mr. Leonhard raised and said: it would be
necessary for him to do a preface, because he was weak, pressed,
therefore he was clumsy 2c. But that would still be the opinion: it
would be knowing how they dealt with him, let him lie for ten weeks
before they asked him what he had done wrong 2c., then hurriedly touched
him, and he as a weak man would have to answer many and large articles;
after which he would be put in prison again, then pulled out again
unawares, in again, out again, he himself would not know how. And in
such a case he would have answered, but he would not know how all his
responsibilities were put together. According to what he overhastily or
according to divine word did not decide, he wanted to have reserved for
him to change such, therefore he had long desired to send him his
responsibility.

After such Doctor Eck began to read out his \[Emperor\'s\] articles and
proceedings, namely the \[following\], but what his responsibility was
on it, would now be too long, but almost on the opinion, as reported
above in his handwriting, understood 2c. In the shortest possible way
the articles were read out once, that he then confessed everything as it
was prescribed 2c.

1\. Faith alone justifies before God, without works.

2\. he holds two sacraments, baptism, body and blood of Christ.

The mass is not a sacrifice, useless to the living and the dead.

4\. he did not say mass in two years.

**958**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

**959**

5\. he took the sacrament at Wittenberg in two forms.

6\. the gospel \[is\] not preached properly in German lands.

7\. penance \[is\] not a sacrament.

The Scriptures do not satisfy him about the five sacraments.

9\. ear confession \[is\] not commanded, only a counsel.

10\. Christ alone is the satisfaction for sin.

Marriage is not a sacrament.

12\. praising chastity does not bind.

13\. clanship is to be kept according to the Scriptures.

14\. no cause to divorce, because of adultery.

15 Confirmation and Holy Communion are not sacraments.

16\. he did not have scripture from purgatory.

The good works here do not help the dead there.

18\. All days \[are\] equal before God.

19\. the dead saints \[are\] not intercessors.

20\. through Christ \[are\] the Christians free.

21 Man has no free will in divine matters.

In the reading and disputation of such articles, Doctor Eck spoke many
unseemly words. Mr. Leonhard brought writing, but Eck tinkered with a
mallet 2c. He brought little goods, as he is a heavy merchant. After
this, the friendship had its procurator say that the action was
difficult for the layman to understand 2c. Therefore, Mr. Leonhard
requested the day that is now set for the right, even for her, the
friendship, to hurry. Therefore their request to extend the day to a
month, also that the friendship may assist him, and also to allow Mr.
Leonhard a procurator to the right, who has a free safe conduct from and
back to his custody, to communicate clauses and articles according to
his need 2c.

Also, Mr. Leonhard should be sent a copy of half of his articles, the
same of friendship, so that one may deliberate or let others of the
realm judge about it 2c. Also that Mr. Leonhard be allowed one or two
who please him to speak of the articles in the dungeon. Also, if the
prince is in trouble, if he receives a postponement of the day of
justice, the friendship will extend such trouble and reimburse it with
its money.

Said Eck and the Abbot of Allersbach, they have no power. Therefore, the
friendship of the two deputies, now reported, diligently requested that
they be

So let them be good-willed and make an effort to request the prince, and
indicate such their request, desire and approval of friendship 2c.

When this happened, friendship was required before the princes and
prelates, as they sat afterwards in the morning at the shrine, where Mr.
Leonhard had been desecrated, and there the officials began a long
speech, and our request, as mentioned above, was denied from piece to
piece, and all of them were rejected, without only that the writings and
articles should be delivered to Mr. Leonhard in the dungeon today
(today). But this was not done, as it would have to be proven with his
prelates that they did not have the writings delivered to him, as we
learned from Mr. Leonhard himself this morning. The prince let speak
through the official: he put it home to the friends, whether it is
honest \[that one should do\] some assistance to such a one as Mr.
Leonhard 2c.

In the morning he was bound and captured with great splendor. The prince
demanded much from the country, with armed hand in the armor almost
cleaned, which then the prince lent. So they brought him and another
priest with him, who was an evil-doer, who spoke strange words. He
confessed the innocence of Leonhard; he, the priest, said: \"I am not
worthy to walk beside you; you are a righteous man, I am well to blame
for death, I shall have my due. \[He scolded the prince, calling him a
bloodhound; he talked a lot and shouted loudly; Leonhard punished him,
telling him to keep quiet. So the two were led bound together. First in
front of his mother\'s house, the master builder. \[He took a heartfelt
leave from her and comforted her, and she had to kiss him or kill him.
This was done in order to frighten his friends. In the middle of the
market, his friends came to him and comforted him, for there was no one
among them who would have wanted him to step away from the truth.

So the two were led into the chapter house on the Pfaffenhof, where the
wardrobe was possessed under heaven. The citizens of Passau also ordered
some of their citizens and sons of citizens to wear armor by order of
the prince. There the bishop of Passau sat in his own person as a judge;
the suffragan bishop of Regensburg, the suffragan bishop of Passau, the
abbot of Allersbach, provost of Suben, provost of Osterhofen, provost of
St. Nicolai near Passau, provost of St. Salvator, Doctor Eck of
Ingolstadt, Magister Antonius, dean of Ingolstadt, Doctor Ludwig
Frösche, cathedral prince, Doctor Tho

**960** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1086. 961

mas Ramelsbach, preacher and canon, Johannes Schönburger von Schönburg,
canon, Hieronymus Metting, doctor and official, three notarii: Erasmus
Kolb, Nicolaus Hugenreuter, Wolfgangus Krieger. Item, Master Hans
Teberesch as a notary of the prison, who has announced and signed the
summons, Master Christoffel Kirchbuler, Fiscalis 2c. First of all, it
should be noted that this act, which they have spoken, is spoken in
Latin, but Mr. Leonhard almost stopped: one should speak German; but it
would not be.

Beginning of the act.

If the official started and spoke to the one from Passau, how a captured
Lutheran priest was present, that one led him into the barns; the lord
of Passau gave an accessory to bring forward 2c. Then Mr. Leonhard was
brought forward, the official released him from the bonds. After that,
the official spoke publicly to all the world how the lord of Passau must
do so out of obligation of his oath to the See of Rome, and other things
2c. so that the heretical sect would be eradicated. \[The named official
has also promised Mr. Leonhard that if he wants to revoke, then Passau
will show him mercy. Mr. Leonhard answered through his procurator, who
was admitted to him by grace alone and not by justice, that he could not
and might not revoke anything that was founded in Scripture; but what
was not founded should now be contradicted.

After that, the fiscal came forth, and pulled out a large citation,
credenced it, and gave it to a notary to read out publicly; the notary
wept over it. Another came forward, read it out with great pleasure.
\[Mr. Leonhard has shown himself humbly on the claim 2c. After that the
Fiscalis was there, and pulled out a large libell, several leaves
written in Latin, read out in Latin. Mr. Leonhard requested that it be
read in German for the sake of the bystanders; but he was not granted
this.

So now the libell has been read out in the community with all points,
namely of the bull of Leonis of the pope, of the edict of Worms, also
the Regensburg statute, and that Mr. Leonhard was prescribed a time, so
\[he\] was first imprisoned, under oath, to express himself of such
doctrine, and \[he had\] not kept this. Mr. Leonhard\'s procurator has
made a number of preliminary statements, and has also made and
reproached a protective plea, namely, to set time for a copy of the
complaint,

1\) and to consult with impartial persons in the whole realm, to ask his
friends for instruction; \[it\] is not to be hurried in this trade,
because it touches the consciences 2c.

But that none is admitted, but only away the Fiscal has stopped that Mr.
Leonhard shall personally answer from article to article and the
complaint: Yes or no. \[More \[of\] Mr. Leonhard\'s procurator has
requested that one speak German; \[it\] has not been granted, however,
but the articles have been read in Latin. But Mr. Leonhard gave the
summa of the articles and his answer in German, with great spirit and
understanding; much writing fell to him, because of which he was
courageous, would not have been senseless the whole day.

But the official talks to him a lot, of the opinion: Mr. Leonhard, how
do you do, do you want to preach? 2c. So he confessed the truth before
God and men, with much compassion of the circumstance. The article, now
read out, is just the opinion, as I mentioned before, since the
friendship has been on the castle; this time it is not necessary to
indicate more. His responsibility is placed on the opinion, as evidenced
by his handwriting 2c.

After Mr. Leonhard had answered the articles, his procurator repeated
the due exceptions, but could not obtain anything, but to the final
judgment a common resolution of the matter has been passed, with
deduction of further submissions.

Then the one from Passau read a verdict in his own person from a note
and gave to degrade Mr. Leonhard and to answer secular supremacy about.
\[Mr. Leonhard made a speech to mitigate the prince, but had no
standing; also his procurator repeated and protested his necessity, and
besides appealed to a free concilio, because such action had been heard
in the whole realm and had not yet been carried out, 2) but no admission
had been made 2c., 3) consecrated garments were put on Mr. Leonhard and
taken off again by the suffragan bishop of Passau with special gestures
and collections, from the highest to the lowest. He was clothed in a
gown, put on a black cut beret, and handed over to the city judge as a
layman. And before that \[the\] bishop of Passau and the bishop of
Regensburg have requested for the said emperor that

1\) Here we have erased \"to give\".

2\) \"entragen\" otherwise means: to carry away, to steal (Dietz); here
probably as much as: done.

3\) Here we have deleted \"in\".

**962**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

963**.**

they do not deal with him for the blood, so that they do not lack 1)
their priesthood 2c.

After that, the city judge took him and led him bound back to the castle
into prison, where he lay from the 11th day of July until the 13th day
of August. After that, he was led through the city of Passau on a horse,
bound with chains, together with several guards, also on foot. His
spirit was fearless and greeted all people. Under the gate, his friends
took leave of him and publicly asked him not to depart from the truth
through life or death. Therefore, he drank with an eager heart, with his
face lifted up: \"This is for me in my Christ\'s name.

So he came to Schärding. He said, \"Christ, my God, how wonderful are
you in your works that I should come back to my old home. There he lay
until the fourth day. \[The friends came to him in the miners\' room,
comforted him, and also said to him: \"Mr. Lenhard, you must burn. He
\[spoke\]: It would be better to have another message, but God\'s will
be done; but I hope that they will not kill me without any judgment.

The friendship also came to Munich with a prayer from the young and old
Count of Schaunburg, but they did not achieve anything, but Duke Wilhelm
wrote seriously to the district judge in Schärding that he should have
Mr. Lenharden judged without all judgment and justice with the fire.

The country judge used a strange handle. \[He thought he could turn the
friends away, so that no one would be at his \[the emperor\'s\] end. He
would also have liked to do it secretly, because the plan was to let the
executioners out at night so that the grate would be prepared, and he,
Mr. Leonhard, would be judged early in the morning. The people of
Schärding did not open their gates, nor did they take any pleasure in
it. It was brought to the friends, they should ask, he, Mr. Leonhard,
would surrender to them to the sword. Answer: They do not want to ask,
God would do it well 2c.

In such a state the henchmen rode before the office, and the two
executioners and their servant went into the office. The executioner
asked: What is your name? Answer: My name is Leonhard. The executioner
said: \"I can\'t tell you much nor teach you much; you know how to
behave yourself, I have to behave myself according to the order of my
lord.

1\) \"lack\" == cause a flaw.

hold. Mr. Leonhard \[said\]: Dear friends, I do not need your teaching,
do what you are commanded. \[He offered his hands, bound hard. The
executioners \[have\] cursed, for the ropes had 2) become tangled. Mr.
Leonhard said: Dear brothers, do not curse. Let yourselves go, I will
not escape you. You do me no covenant or move, it will have Christ, my
Lord, you are only an instrument, ordained by God 2c. After that he was
led out. But what shall I write, I have not seen such earnestness and
fervor from any man. He lifted his face above him, his chest up. His
mouth spoke Latin psalms so quickly that one word could hardly escape
from the other. This is what he drove out through the city.

A priest came next to Mr. Leonhard; he wanted to talk to him and leave.
\[One of them took him by the armpit and said, \"Priest, you have
nothing to do there. Mr. Leonhard\'s servant came, took leave full of
weeping, and kissed Mr. Leonhard\'s hands. Mr. Leonhard grimaced and
said, \"What is the flesh doing? One of them began to comfort him in the
Lord. He began to speak in German with a fierce spirit, his head swaying
from side to side, saying, \"Christ, you must suffer with me, Christ,
you must go under me, you must carry me; with me it is in vain and lost.
Then they came to the watery place called the Inn; on the watery place
by the gallows the grate was prepared, and the people stood. He started
and said: there would be harvest, there should be harvest in the
harvest. Ask the father of the house of the reaper to send reapers into
his harvest; and much other speech 2c.

So an arm of the great water runs around the gravel. \[Then they put Mr.
Leonhard on a chariot, and the executioners with him drove over the arm
of the water. So Mr. Leonhard was brought forth, and he made his speech
in the ring thus: to all those who had brought him hence he forgave them
from the heart, therefore God would also forgive him. \[He\] exhorted
the people to help him diligently for all his adversaries. He also
asked, if he offended a man with his life or example, as he did not
preach rightly before 3), to forgive him, and to pray for him, that he
die in a firm Christian faith; and prayed for those who were not yet
enlightened.

2\) \"themselves\" put by us instead of \"they\" in the issues.

3\) Marginal gloss of the Jena edition: \"im Pabstthum\".

**964** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1086. 965

The judge would not let him speak, and said to the executioner,
\"Finish, you know what you are ordered to do. So Mr. Leonhard was quick
with his undressing, and soon he went up to the pyre in his
vestments, 1) in his shirt, and lay down in a groove of the pyre; then
he was bound long on the pyre. Then he asked (because he was bound) the
people to sing: Come, Holy Spirit. A papal priest, whom we had put away
before, was with him again and told him that if he had erred in any
article, he should ask God for mercy. Mr. Leonhard gave no answer, but
the priest asked Mr. Leonhard if he wanted to die as a devout Christian.
Answer: Yes; and the priest admonished him of baptism and gave the
heretic the suffering of Christ; it was strange to me 2c. But the same
priest said afterwards, I do not know what else he said, if one had
spoken rightly to him, that he had converted; and such words 2c.

In it the fire was lit; in it he made several loud cries: Jesus, I am
yours, make me blessed! After this, his hands and feet and head were
burned off. When the fire was extinguished, the executioner took a
stick, rolled out the body, and then put more wood on the fire. After
that, the executioner hewed a hole in the body, pierced it with a sword,
then stuck a rod into it, and again he burned with the rod on the grate;
thus burned 2c.

After that the executioner said to the judge: whether he has been judged
rightly, as his Lord\'s command? and did not ask how right and judgment
is given. So Leonhardus ended his life according to the word of the
Lord, his spirit and sacrificed himself on the 16th day of August, on
the day of Rochus, between 8 and 9, to strengthen him and all Christian
people in the Lord Jesus Christ. May God grant this to all people, Amen.

**Another of Mr. Leonhard Kaiser\'s writings, written from prison to one
of his friends.**

Grace through Christ.

Friendly dear N.! Since I have heard of your presence, I have been
greatly pleased in my heart, and if you were all well in spiritual and
temporal gifts from God, I would not hear anything better.

Dear N., you know my accident on account of the old Adam, who is
tormented in the cave 2) and is very disgusted with him, and often rises
up in impatience to grumble against God, as if great injustice were
being done to him; yet the spirit is present (although weak), and
comforts him again. Oh how poor and feeble he is, I complain to God and
to you, my dear N. Ask God for me that he may be strengthened.

I heard the other day from the faithful brother in Christ, N., that you
have a sweet and kind heart towards me, and that I rejoiced greatly in
my heart that God had given me such a friend, who might also put himself
in danger of death for my sake. Now, dearest N., you are well aware that
my life is in danger of death, yet in the hand of God. For, as I have
been told by the pious N. and others who have visited me in silence, the
prince will, if I do not renounce heresy and convert, \[put me\] on
trial, and let happen to me what the law gives. O God from the heaven of
justice, look into it, save and defend your word, save me, your poor
instrument, from these bloodthirsty dogs and enemies of those who
confess God\'s word.

I have decided with myself, as Paul says Rom. 8, 38. f., that neither
death nor life, neither angel nor power shall turn me away from the love
of God and His holy word: but there are twelve hours in the day, and it
is not up to anyone to will or to run, but up to God\'s mercy, as he
says Cap. 9,16. Therefore it is pure grace if I remain steadfast, and
not at all up to my own doing; whether a man stands or falls, he stands
or falls by God 2c.

Therefore, dear N., I am truly too foolish and childish for your
suggestion and friendly Christian offer, and do not know what to leave
or do in this case. You should therefore ask the Christian N. brother
what should or should not be done in this matter. I will also let it
happen that you make an effort and work diligently on my behalf, but I
will nevertheless, above all things, place my cause in the hands of God.
He has thrown me into the hole, even though the old Adam often strives
against it and says: You would have been idle in this misfortune, you
have been warned often enough, you should beware 2c. But because Christ
Matth. 10, 29. \[says\]: \"Does one not buy two sparrows for a penny?\"
and \[v. 30.\]: \"The hairs of your heads are all

1\) By \"kölblin\" is probably to be understood the above-mentioned
\"cut beret\".

2\) \"hole\" == hole, prison. With Walch: \"hell\".

**966**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086. **967**

and none shall fall from the head without the will of your Father,\"
Adam must ever stand still here and say that it is God\'s will, Isa.
2.^1)^ Why does man murmur against me, saying that neither good nor evil
comes from God?

If the bishop now pursues the matter against me with his dogs, the
enemies of the divine word, I believe that he will deal with me
abruptly, as he did with Oberhaimer, although I believe that he will
soon end it with me. Let it now be as the merciful God wills, but he
must have his will and his eyes open, otherwise he will not be able to
do anything with me. Since everything is in his power, we want to put
the matter in his hands and command him, request and ask of him that his
holy name not be reviled by me, but that his will, and not mine, be done
for me. Nevertheless, we do not want to omit good means and counsel,
considered with God\'s will, but rather cultivate them, and yet we want
to give God the prosperity and the honor.

Dear N., I can well consider that I have completely outraged and angered
the devil, the spiritual holy people; in that I have placed the question
articles and my responsibility in the kingdom to examine, and do not
wait with them. Which the prince also heard, since I spoke such words
and others with the priest, and he himself had me examined by the priest
for this reason. Because I have now offered, at my cost, through the
travels of my friends, brothers-in-law and brothers, that I would gladly
turn away from impartial people, where I have answered unformally, and
be guided by well-founded writing, should not D. Ramelsbach jump before
Grimmen, where he heard such contempt? The like also the others, Doctor
Rosin, Official, Fröschel, Perger and the same bunch? Well, the boy must
die, their hearts will be against the poor sheep. But God is above them
and mocks them in their accusations and says: \"You do not have to do
anything to him, I want you to. Oh, if my heart were firm and could
believe that this is so, how blessed I would close my days in this way.

I also believe, dear N., that the bishop already had my responsibility
at Ingolstadt, and had the enemies of God examine it. If this is true,
then I have already lost, and may God have mercy on me and save me from
their judgment. Oh, dear God, how might or could the race

but act more cruelly than it does! If one does not answer, they stretch
and stretch him, 2) as they did to the one in the Free City who recanted
on Palm Day. Item, now they let a priest throw his corpse out of the
church in Weidhofen, because he took his cook in marriage in secret, and
made a will on his death for her benefit, and dressed her as his wife
before God. But a whore would be well off if she inherited all the goods
of her whore husband, and the friends would not receive a penny 2c.

Thus, dear N., the holy generation acts. May God have mercy on those who
do so out of ignorance, but God has blinded them like Pharaoh.

Oh, my dear N., be well, all of you; comfort my dear mother, my
brothers-in-law, my friends and my brothers, that they command God to do
this and other things that are unpleasant for them. God wants to try us,
who will grant us patience and constancy in all troubles and distresses.

I also take great care of the boys and Ulrich, who are now also orphaned
and abandoned. I do not know 3) whether Ulrich has food or not; that he
be given food. I would like them to be brotherly with each other and not
forget Ulrich, as I have often ordered them.

Item, if something is sent to me from Wittenberg, decree that it be
delivered to me in \[silence\].

Greet your pious housewife, if you come to her with joy, that I have
good hope.

Be at peace with your brothers-in-law and sister-in-law and with
everyone.

Oh, think how this is a rich, great treasure, for which one can never
thank God enough when a person is free and not imprisoned. But we do not
remember these and other gifts of God before we feel and sense the
contradiction.

Let my cause be commanded to you in the best and according to God\'s
will; do not deal with it carelessly or unadvisedly.

May God Almighty grant all of you, my dear brothers and sisters, His
knowledge to proceed in this and other things according to His divine
will. God be with us all, amen.

> Lenhard Keiser.

It is dark, and must write sheer after the handle.

1\) So the editions, but not fitting. About Jes.

45.7. Amos 3, 6.

2\) on torture.

3\) \"not\" is missing from the outputs.

**\
968**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

969

D\[octor\] M\[artin\] Luther.

I have therefore had this letter printed so that it may be seen how
Christ fought in the dungeon over the old man Leonhard, and how he
conquered death in him before he was conquered in court and in the fire.

**Leonhard Keiser\'s will.**

*In Homilie Domini, Amen*.

After God, out of pure goodness and mercy, has required me from the
misery of this world to His mercy and has summoned me through His
instrument to give up my spirit of ungodly truth tomorrow after the
date, I want to ask you, my dearest brothers, by God\'s will to handle
this last will of mine and to do it according to the best execution.

First of all, keep brotherly and friendly relations among yourselves. To
be obedient to the authorities in all respects. Act kindly with the
mother, decreeing that she be instructed in the right Christian faith
above all things, for which God is to be diligently asked.

Item, secondly, that you know my abandoned property, given by God, as
won, act kindly and brotherly and share it among yourselves, do not
quarrel nor surrender to each other in displeasure. Let the poor people
be your command and show your service to them by deed. Finally, believe
that God will feed you forever and ever, so do not be anxious or stingy
about what is condemned. If we have food and cover, be content with it.

Item, the servitude of the villein shall be cancelled in the payment or
solution of the farmer, and the farmer\'s future servitude shall be
released by God\'s will.

Item, consider Ulrich as an equal co-heir to my estate, provided that he
is granted to stay in the ends and the boys are kept in education. But
where the tyranny is so great, and \[he\] will not tolerate it, let your
one be astonished, and dwell in the ends, since the word of God is
clearly preached to him louder, receive Ulrich together with the boys,
and act completely brotherly with him, as God is dear to you.

Item, live with your wives in all unity, loving them as your own bodies,
helping one another bear burdens, meaning that our lives are like the
shade and like the flowers of the field.

The other concerns temporal good, which we leave pending here.

**\[Letter of the Elector John of Saxony to the Bishop of Passau. May
24, 1527\].**

Duke John of Saxony, Elector 2c.

Our kind service and what we are able to love and do good at all times
before. Venerable, highborn prince, friendly dear cousin! Although until
now little has happened that we have had cause to write to your love as
our dear cousin, it now happens that we have received a request from Mr.
Leonhard Keiser, whom E. L., when we are reported, as having acted
against the imperial majesty, our most gracious lord, by mandate of his
doctrine, we have not known how to refrain from writing to E. L., and we
also hope that E. L. will not take unkind note of it from us.

And if the poor imprisoned man would have the form that he would not
negotiate anything, but only be subject to divine doctrine and the holy
Gospel, and should therefore be further burdened with imprisonment or in
other ways without being overcome, it would be a special accident and
pity for us. And for this reason, our most friendly request to His
Holiness is that His Holiness graciously relieve the aforementioned
emperor of the burden of imprisonment with which he is afflicted and let
him enjoy this kindly of our intercession.

If he does not want to tolerate or suffer E.L. in her territories, we
want to make sure that, if he is released from prison, he will gladly
leave E.L.\'s territories and pen, and turn to other places, and also
keep and show himself unrepentant in what is due to him before God
Almighty. This we do not have to tell to E. L., and E. L. as our dear
N., we are kindly inclined to show him again our willing and friendly
services. Date Torgau, Friday after the Sunday Cantate \[May 24\] Anno
Domini 1527.

To the Bishop of Passau.

**Letter of comfort from D. Martin Luther, sent to him by Leonhard
Keiser in his prison.**

**Dated May 20, 1527.**

In addition to the locations given at the beginning of this paper, this
letter is also found in Spalatin\'s Annalen, p. 99 and in the
Trostschriften, Jena, Bl. Qiij^b^ . The original is at the Frankfurt
City Library. - Although the letter was originally written in Latin, we
have not re-translated it because the old translation is accurate and
irreproachable, perhaps even coming from Luther himself.

**970**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

S71

> To the worthy and dear brother in Christ, the faithful and dear
> servant and prisoner of Christ, Leonhard Keisek.

Grace, strength and peace in Christ! That your old man, dear Leonhard,
was caught, is the will and calling of Christ your Savior, who also gave
his new man for you and your sin into the hands of the ungodly, so that
he redeemed you with his blood as a brother and co-heir of eternal life.

We are sorry for you, and we also pray diligently that you may be set
free, not for your own sake, but that you may be useful to many for the
glory of God, if it is His will. But if it be the will in heaven that
thou shouldest not be made free, yet thou art free in spirit. Only see
that you are strong and constantly overcome the weakness of the flesh,
or even patiently bear it through the power of Christ. He who is with
you in prison will also be with you in all distress, as he so faithfully
and kindly promises in Ps 91:15: \"I am with him in distress\" 2c.

Therefore it is necessary that you cry out to him in prayer with all
your confidence, and with psalms of comfort refresh and sustain yourself
in this fierce anger of Satan, so that you may be strengthened in the
Lord and not speak too little or too softly to the teeth of Behemoth, as
if you had overcome and feared his arrogance. Faithfully call upon
Christ, who is everywhere present and powerful, then defy Satan and mock
his rage and arrogance, for you are sure that he cannot harm you, and so
much the less, so much the more he rages. St. Paul says Rom. 8, 31: \"If
God is for us, who can be against us?\" Ps. 8, 7: \"All things are put
under His feet.\" He can and will help all who are challenged, \"who
also has been tempted in every way\" \[Heb. 4:15\].

So, my dearest brothers, strengthen yourself in the Lord and be
confident in his mighty power, so that you may recognize, support, love
and praise the fatherly will of God out of a good heart, whether you
become free or not. But that you may be able to do this in honor of his
holy gospel, may the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ work in you
according to the riches of his glorious grace, which is a

Father is of mercy and a God of all comfort, amen. In this you will have
mercy, and also pray for us. Given at Wittenberg, on Monday after
Cantate \[May 20\] in the year 1527. Martin Luther. ^1)^

Martinus Luther.

So far I have let this legend and story go without my word, as I have
obtained it from many honest writings and especially from Mr. Lenhard\'s
own manuscripts, so that no one can say that we have been telling lies.
For my own handwriting, 2) which I sent to him in prison, has come back
to me together with his handwriting, broken and read, that this is my
testimony certainly and truly enough. Therefore I kindly ask all pious
Christians to thank and praise God through Jesus Christ, who gives us
such comfort through his dear servant and martyr Lenhard. Oh Lord God,
that I had been or would still be worthy of such confession and death!
What am I? What do I do? How ashamed I am, when I read this story, that
I have not long since been worthy of suffering the same (although ten
times more deserving before the world). Well, my God, should it be so,
so be it, your will be done!

But I want to warn you tyrants and angry papists faithfully and ask you
to be careful, for your own good, and if you do not want to believe with
us, that you do not so wretchedly condemn yourselves in innocent
blood\'. You see and hear that God nevertheless attacks your one part
even now (which I will not name). The pope, your idol, is almost leading
with half a cart, and has lost his common prayer; see, God warns you
manifoldly and calls you to repentance. And even if you rage, our
doctrine is the gospel, as you yourselves know, that we preach Christ
the Savior, thus praising worldly authority and restoring it to its
right and honor, as it was not before. For you yourselves know that
until now worldly rulers have been

1\) The signature is missing in the German editions.

2\) The previous letter.

**972**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086.

**S73**

Papists is almost trampled underfoot. What are you raging about? Why do
you shed innocent blood without any cause or need, when we serve you
with our doctrine for soul, body and good in the highest and most
diligent way?

If you want to be angry and fight unbelief, dear, do it! You have the
Turk. You should try it cheaper, if you would be willing to control
unbelief, although I don\'t rush anyone to get it. But if you want to
fight, and the knife is so loose, or the skin itches, then I would be
satisfied that you go for those who can win honor and prize, and prove
their manhood and armor, and not for the wretched innocents who live
among us in peace and quiet, and serve us to the highest degree,
especially with teachings. They are ugly, hostile animals, which
strangle themselves among themselves, as wolves do when they have a
wedding and a bridal run. But it is much more hostile when one member
eats and corrupts the other, as we are unfortunately doing now.

And even if you want to be stubborn, you will gain nothing but greater
condemnation. It is God\'s word that will remain, as Isaiah \[Cap.
40:8\] and Peter \[1 Ep. 1:25\] say. And we also will remain, all those
who cling to it and believe, even though we must fail and go into the
sleep of death. You yourselves could not deny that it is written in the
Scriptures as we teach, but that it is not written in your decrees and
in the doctrines of men. But what can we do about it? Our scripture is
confirmed by heaven, your decree has not yet done any miracles, nor is
it confirmed by heaven. Oh Lord God, it is an unequal fight when the old
pots want to fight with the rocks, for it goes over the pots as it will:
if they fall on the rocks, they bump into each other and break; but if
the rocks fall on them, they smash and crush the pots, so that it would
be advisable for the pots to remain pots as they are, in the kitchen,
and not to go out into the field and fight against the rocks and
mountains.

Christ himself also says \[Matth. 21, 44\]: \"Whoever falls on this
stone will be broken, but on whom it falls it will be crushed.

You are an earthly and fragile vessel, like a pot or a jar. But,
beloved, do not rub against me; let me be the rock, and be not sworn
with me. If not, verily I say unto you, I am a stone, and will not fear
that the pots have great bellies, and are puffed up, as though they
would terrify me with their wrath and their dread. The bigger bellies
they have and the wider they are inflated, the easier they break and the
better they are to hit. Similarly, I do not care that they have wide
mouths and holes at the top, that they can shout and blaspheme against
me as if no one could fill them. For this is the least of all things,
and they are easily broken, so that neither belly nor hole remains, but,
as Isaiah says \[Cap. 30:14\], there is scarcely a shard left to carry a
coal in.

For so the other psalm also declared \[v. 9.\], \"Thou shalt break them
as the vessel of a potter.\" Beware then, dear lords, dear friends, dear
enemies! For it is serious in the sight of God, and we do not begrudge
you anything bad, but would gladly have you recognize yourselves and
come to your senses; for we have no pleasure nor joy in your damnation,
God knows that! would rather have you be blessed with us, and gladly
forgive from the bottom of our hearts all the bloodshed that you
practice on us, for you do not hinder our cause with it, but only
further it the more, to yourselves to great horrible destruction. Do not
fail yourselves, and do not let us offer you peace and forgiveness in
vain and ask for you; it will truly be smelled all too badly in the
torment, which (oh Lord God!) has no end.

When I was at Worms before the emperor, I gave this advice to the bishop
of Trier: one should leave these things to God, because they concern the
soul, and \[it\] would not be too close to anyone\'s body and goods. If
it were of men, it would soon perish; if it were of God, no one could
dampen it; which counsel Gamaliel also gave to the Jews. And such advice
is not mine, but of the Holy Spirit, who has confirmed it through St.
Lucas, Apost. 5,38. f. But it would not sound. Well, as it also worked
afterwards and still works, ask the whole of German

**974**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1086 to 1089.

975

Land around. Be careful, dear sirs! It is for you from now on, it was
for us until now. May God make you know what you are doing and what He
would rather have you do. Amen.

**No 1087.**

(Wittenberg.) May 20, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther excuses a husband who has been deceived with his wife to his
relatives. From Zwingli\'s letter.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv (with the inscription
Spalatin: *Pro G. Fabrfo pistore Laurentii pastoris frater* \[*sic*\].
Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 257. Printed in Buddeus, p. 55; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 180 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 55. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1041.

> To his dearest Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ at Altenburg, the
> man to be highly honored in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I commend this Georg, 1) a worker in the local mill, to
you, my dear Spalatin, so that you may give him a good report to his
relatives through this manuscript of mine. For it is annoying to them
that he married here, and in a lawful manner, that nun (if she was
otherwise a nun) Dorothea, who afterwards left him as a whore and
secretly fled from here, taking all his goods and money with her. The
mother of this whore knew about this infamy and the escape and
participated in it. She stayed here for a while and, under a splendid
pretense of godliness, played a deception on all of us and presented the
daughter as recommendable, even worthy of this marriage. Therefore, let
his relatives refrain from taking offense; through no fault of his, he
suffers this dishonor and damage as well as we this exceedingly great
and frightening annoyance. God will repay the harlot mother and the
harlot what they deserve, since they abuse the favor shown to them
because of the Gospel to their deceit and wickedness, to the shame of
all of us. This is true; therefore I pray that you will give him

1\) According to Spalatin\'s inscription, he is a brother of Laurentius
Fabri, pastor in Crouswitz, mentioned in No. 991.

and believe his story, and serve him with his own.

Zwingli\'s letter 2) was not at hand; it is floating around somewhere
with friends, I don\'t know with which ones, but you will receive it.
Fare well in the Lord. May 20, 1527. Martin Luther.

**No. 1088.**

(Wittenberg.) May 20, 1527.

**To Friedrich Pistorius, Abbot in Nuremberg.**

Luther, at his request, pledges his friendship to him.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 334; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 181 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 56. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1040.

> Yours sincerely, Frederick, Father of the Aegidien Monastery in
> Nuremberg.

Grace and peace! I will indeed be exceedingly glad to be united by
common and mutual friendship, man to be revered in Christ; indeed, I
should have sought this, which you desire to happen, from you with the
most fervent supplications, since I, who am very much plagued both by
sins and by Satan himself, have need of many friends before God, who
assist me, who am burdened with such a great trade, with their prayers.
But I am very glad that it is given to you that the truth of the Gospel
pleases you in this corrupt and evil world, where people who sincerely
hold fast are rare. Christ, who began the good work in you, may he also
complete it \[Phil. 1, 6\]. In him you are well. May 20, 1527, Martin
Luther.

**No. 1089.**

(Wittenberg.) May 31, 1827.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends Zwingli\'s letter. Among other things, he reports the
murder of the preacher Georg Winkler of Halle.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. V, No. 194 and in Cod. 36\". a, fol. 212. Printed by Buddeus p.
55; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 182 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 57.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1042.

2\) Compare No. 1078.

**976** Letters from your year

1527\. no. 1089. 1090. 977

> To his exceedingly dear brother in Christ, Georg Spalatin, the servant
> of Christ at

Altenburg.

Grace and peace! I have taken in Johann Pachmann, my dear Spalatin, as I
was able. He will return and bring you Zwingli\'s letter addressed to
me, so that you may see that impetuous Swiss who thinks that the cause
of Christ is being pursued with Swiss impetuosity. I know nothing new,
except that they say that M. Thomas Spieß should be dissolved and
dismissed. One accuses the pope at Mainz of having killed the preacher
at Halle, whom he had appointed to himself 1); God knows it. Certainly
the preacher, a very good man, was killed. Cain wants to corrupt Abel
anew by deceit, and does not realize that he will be corrupted in this
way. Pray for us and be well in the Lord. 1527 on the last of May 1527.
2) Martin Luther.

**No. 1090 .**

(Strasbourg.) (End of May 1527.)

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

About the impression that Luther\'s writing against the swarm spirits
had made in Strasbourg, and the hostility of the Strasbourg people
against Luther.

Handwritten in *Thes. Baum*, III, 39, at Strasbourg. Printed in Kolde,
p. 87 and in Erl. Briefw.,

Vol.VI, p. 58.

Your letter, which I wished for with such great hope and expectation,
dearest Luther, has been given to me by Secerius, a letter full of
comfort and faith and all the more pleasant to me because I see that you
persevere in your duty and in your commitment with such great constancy.
For those who are with us have almost all left me, or if there are still
some who remain steadfast, they are of course the very few who are
neither cold nor warm. They want people to believe many things about
them, but they themselves believe nothing but what is mean and
contemptible. I hate such friends and consider that they are the

1\) Georg Winkler was called to Aschaffenburg by the archbishop, but was
graciously dismissed. On the return journey he was murdered two miles
from Aschaffenburg in Spessart on April 23. See Luther\'s Consolation to
the Christians at Halle, St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1960.

2\) In the original, the year is twice.

They are unworthy of friendship. After your writing against the swarm
spirits 3) came here, various judgments arose. Hedio exclaimed before an
assembly: you are not very divided, one should read the second Quatern,
there one can find the seeds of unity; Luther, Zwingli and Oecolampad
are men of God; the writings of those have often been helpful to him;
one must read your writings, one must also read the writings of those,
but with good judgment. Another, on the other hand, said: in your book
there is nothing that has the spirit of Paul; everything is interspersed
with invectives and sharp speeches. Oecolampad said: it is not a book,
but invective. Bucer, as he has a mind without falsity, showed with
great indignation to some great men a passage of your confession, where
you confess that even an ungodly man eats the body of the Lord, as a
blasphemous thing in the highest degree. See, there you have what you
prophesy in the letter written to me. In short, they are blinded by
hopefulness, hatred and obstinacy. Let them go. I am exceedingly sorry
for the poor people, for I see that many more bitter things are coming.
I wish you to remember one thing carefully. Since ours endeavored to
make the people suspicious of your teaching and to turn them away from
your opinion, Bucer, if I am not mistaken, asserted before an assembly
that you taught repugnant things about the holy supper: this 4) passage:
\"The flesh is of no use,\" is to be understood of the flesh of Christ,
but the opposite in the books published against Zwingli. After my
special love for you, I began to be concerned and to think that they
might have falsified the passage, as is their way. I run through all the
bookstores to see if I could find the Wittenberg book somewhere. After I
finally obtained it, the words stand as we wrote out on the enclosed
slip of paper. He took up this passage 5) and attracted a good part of
the most honest citizens to his opinion on this occasion. You will
undoubtedly recognize what cunning, what deceit, what futile pretense
this exceedingly wicked and completely unbelieving Satan uses.

3\) *Antischwermerus tuus*. This results in the

Date of this letter.

4\) Here is a gap in the manuscript which we have filled by *hunc* -
Immediately following the Erl. Briefw. *Quo* instead of *Caro*.

5\) \"This passage\" will have to be looked for in Luther\'s writing:
\"Daß diese Worte 2c. noch feststehen\" 2c., St. Louis edition, vol. XX,
830, § 168 ff.

**978**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1090. 1091. 1092.

**979**

Who now, after your princes have prepared war troops against the
bishops, is a marvelous silence; no mention is made of the Lord\'s
Supper. Perhaps they will be mindful of their prophecy, for earlier they
said that it would happen that they would suffer the same thing that
once the enemies of Arius suffered. For they think to be people like
Chrysostom, like Hilarius and I don\'t know what kind of people, but you
are Arius, and who else. Praise be to God, who has taught you to
generously despise this pestilence, this stupidity, this arrogance.

This Christopher, 1) a righteous man, who has a fine, good head and an
unusual eloquence, I ask you to let him be dear to you also for my sake.
Even the enemies of the gospel have helped him with their money for no
other reason than because he has made the best progress in both the
sacred and humanistic sciences with incredible integrity.

Farewell and pray to God for me that He will keep me unharmed under so
many adversities. To Johann Pommer, the most godly man, greet him a
thousand times in my name.

**No. 1091.**

(Wittenberg.) June 10, 1527.

**To Elisabeth Agricola in Eisleben.**

Consolation letter because of Kleinmuth in illness.

This letter is found handwritten in *Cod. Jen. B*, fol. 162 and in *Cod.
Ratzenb*. Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 415; in the
Altenburger, vol. Ill, p. 756; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 498; in
Walch, vol. X, 2121; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 182 and in the Erlanger,
vol. 53, p. 403. As \"to an unnamed person\" with the wrong date: \"den
21. May 1537\" in the Wittenberg (1559), vol. XII, p. 168 b; in the Jena
(1568), vol. VI, p. 495b; in the Altenburg, vol. VI, p. 1099; in the
Leipzig, vol. XXII, p. 332; in Walch, vol. X, 2100; in De Wette, vol. V,
p. 64; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 55, p. 179; and in the St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 1790.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1808.

1\) Christoph Lasius, actually Rauch, born July 6, 1504 in Strasbourg,
matriculated in Wittenberg on October 19, 1522, Baccalaureus on May 22,
1525, returned to Strasbourg, joined Gerbel in particular, and went to
Wittenberg again in 1527. After an eventful life, in which he suffered
many hardships and persecutions, he died at Senftenberg near Großenhain
on Aug. 25, 1572.

**No. 1092.**

Wittenberg. June 12, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther\'s writing against the sacramentarians \"and the intended
abolition of the monastery in Altenburg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 192 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 211. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 331 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 174 (datirt:
\"im Mai\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 62. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1052 f.

> To his brother Georg Spalatin, the faithful servant of Christ at
> Altenburg, who is extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace! It is dear and pleasant to me that you liked my little
book against the Sacramentarians, my dear Spalatin, but I wonder how it
comes that the copies are brought to you so late, since I think that
Paul Knodt 2) is your procurator, otherwise I would have sent it myself.
I do not doubt that I have upset the Sacramentarians very much, for it
also seems to me, although the book makes many words and is of little
scholarship, that I have met them. Bucer, however, has already written a
very poisonous letter against me to unfern Jonas. 3) Luther is
completely a Satan with those people, what do you think they will do
after they have been provoked by this booklet? But Christ lives and
reigns, amen.

Your Bethaven, I think, must be left to its own devices until the
visitation, because it would also be prevented by the wedding of the
prince^4)^ if I wrote and asked for something in the meantime; but after
the unrest of the wedding is over, I will be forced of my own accord to
insist in every way on the visitation of the parishes. For the bather
Simons I have sent

2\) Paul Knodt from Ezer, formerly an Augustinian monk in Altenburg,
inscribed in Wittenberg on July 4, 1518, later lived in Wittenberg and
was, together with Christoph Blanck, administrator of the Wittenberg
monastery, which had been confiscated for the benefit of the university.
In Tentzel\'s Hist. report, vol. II, p. 376 erroneously: \"Paulus
Kurth\".

3\) This letter is missing.

4\) The marriage of the Churprinzen Johann Friedrich with Sibylle von
Eleve had taken place on June 2.

5\) Compare No. 1054.

**980** Letters from the year 1527. No. 1092 to 1095. **981**

occasionally written as you asked. You are well and greet the rest of us
and pray for me. Wittenberg, Quatember Wednesday 1) 1527. Martin Luther.

**No. 1093 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 14, 1527.

**To the Mayor and City Council of Coburg.**

Recommendation of M. Philipp Eberbach as a school teacher.

The original is at the Coburg fortress. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 118 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 63.

> To the honorable and wise gentlemen, mayor and council of Coburg, my
> favorable lords and friends.

Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! Here comes M. Philippus Eberbach, 2)
whom M. Philippus Melanchthon has appointed and assigned to you as
schoolmaster, as E. W. requested, the other day through your mayor and
council friends. Please, accept him, because I am sure he should be
righteous, as I have the testimony of Magister Philippo Melanchthon, who
understands himself highly and well. For I and Philipp are inclined to
serve you and yours. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Friday after Pentecost
\[June 14, 1527.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1094**

(Wittenberg.) June 16, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for his relative Heinz Luther concerning a farm.

The original is in Weimar, N, fol. 108. 41 (facsimilirt for the Möhra
Luther Festival 1883). Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 48; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 169; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 183 and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 53, p. 404.

1\) *feria 4. majore*. This can be only the 12th of June, because to the
ksria\" majorss belong among other things the Quatembertage, which alone
here can come into question. Of these only Wednesday after Pentecost can
be meant, since the feast of the Beilager was not yet over. (Burkhardt,
p. 117.)

2\) Previously Rector in Joachimsthal, where he also preached the Gospel
since 1521. He died as Rector at Coburg on Oct. 18, 1529.

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Johann, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen,
> my most gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Here my dear father\'s brother and my cousin, Heinz Luther von
More, 3) has come to me out of special confidence to intercede for E. C.
F. G. on behalf of a farm, located near Eisenach, how E. C. F. G. may
hear his request and desire from this supplication. Although I do not
like to trouble E. C. F. G. with such things, I also fear that I ask too
much and often; but nevertheless, considering that I owe it to my
friends to serve me, and that the good man has come such a long way to
me, I cannot let his confidence be lacking: I therefore humbly ask where
his request is fair, and E. C. F. G. for his intercession. C. F. G. to
do, let him have a gracious good answer. I cannot blame the man, he
seeks to divinely nourish himself and his children with his work, and
desires nothing in vain, but wants to do what is due from the same
court, and even more, if it pleases C.F.G.. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen.
Sunday after Pentecost \[June 16\] 1527.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1095 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 16, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for his relative Werner Berg regarding withheld interest.

The original is in Weimar, *Reg. N, fol.* 108. 41. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 48; in Walch, vol. XXI, 169; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 184 and in the Erlangen Ausg. vol. 53, p. 405.

> To the noble, high-born. Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of Saxony,
> Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my! most
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord!

3\) This is Möhra.

**982**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1095. 1096. 1097.

**983**

I bring another intercession here on behalf of my brother-in-law, Werner
Bergk zu Satzungen, whose interest in the land of Henneberg is hindered
for the sake of some purchased bell food, and I do not want to help him
in any way with his request for justice and goodness. I therefore humbly
ask E. C. F. G. not to suffer the example that foreign rule in E. C. F.
G.\'s sovereignty, and E. C. F. G.\'s subjects to punish without E. C.
F. G.\'s knowledge and will; for there patience is to be kept, because
it concerns E. C. F. G.\'s office and duty to protect the subjects. His
complaint and petition, however, will be well heard by C.F.G. from his
supplication, and he will graciously show himself against him. Hiemit
GOtt befohlen, Amen. 1527, the Sunday after Pentecost \[June 16\].

E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1096 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 18, 1527.

**To Friedrich Myconius in Gotha.**

Luther asks him to be patient with a preacher for a while.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. X, 1048, fol. 5. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 334 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 185 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VI, p. 65. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1043.

> The man to be revered in the Lord, Friedrich Mecum, the faithful
> evangelist at Gotha.

Grace and peace! This Paul Salfeld, the bearer of the letter, complained
to me, my dear Frederick, that they were planning to remove him from the
parish of Goltbach, as if he were too unskilled and I don\'t know what
else. But I, who believe that I have tested your loyalty and integrity,
could hardly believe that you would do anything improper against anyone,
even an enemy; nevertheless, I advised him, so that it would not seem as
if he had complained in vain, that he should postpone the matter until
the time of the visitation, which likewise you (if you had done
something), as I easily believe, will do, and I promised him without any
doubt. You therefore do this, I beg of you, that you may judge this
man\'s righteousness or unrighteousness by i

Your goodness and gentleness will overcome, as I am most certainly
convinced of you. Fare well in the Lord, my dearest \[friend\]. Tuesday
after Trinity \[June 18\] 1527. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 109 7.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early) July 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

Luther tells him that he has taken in his wife Elisabeth and that she is
not sick in body or soul.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in the Zeitschrift für
historische Theologie 1872, 348 and in the Erlanger Briefw.

> To Johann Agricola, the servant of Christ at Eisleben, his \[friend\]
> in the Lord.

Grace and peace! I have gladly taken in your Elsa, my dear Agricola,
who, as you can see, is more ill in spirit than in body. I comfort her
as much as I can and know how to do. You can do the same, except that in
this case a woman believes someone else more than her husband, since she
thinks that everything that is said to her is said to her by her husband
more out of love than according to true knowledge. Summa, her illness is
not a disease for the apothecaries (as one is wont to say), nor even to
be ordered to the ointments of Hippocrates, but to the strong plasters
of the Scriptures and the Word of God. How do conscience and Hippocrates
agree? Therefore, I advise against a medicine for the body, and exhort
to the power of the Word of God. But our wives are like that, they think
that the word does not belong to them, but to us, their husbands, as
their defenders and protectors. Therefore, whether you are absent or
present, do not refrain from inculcating in her that she learn that it
is her business when the word of God is taught. For in this struggle I
stand continually also with my daughter, lest, when at last the custom
of the word has come, they realize to their detriment that they then
lacked it. Everything else stands well. Fare well in the Lord. On Monday
after July 3, 1) 1527. Martin Luther.

1\) The date *feria* 2. *post* III. *Julii* is in any case incorrect,
probably through the fault of the copyist.

**984** Letters from the year 1527.

No. 1098. 1099. 1100. 985

**No. 109 8.**

(Wittenberg.) July 5, 1527.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Congratulations on the birth of a baby daughter. Luther promises to send
books to a poor friend.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 342; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 186 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 67. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1044.

Grace and peace! I wish you happiness with your daughter Margaretha, who
has been given to you by God as a gift, which I have awaited with great
desire, so that you too may experience xxxxxxx xxx xxxxxx xx xxxxx \[the
natural love for children\]. See how suddenly I have become a foreign
Greek (*Barbarogracus*). By the way, we received the woodturning tools
with the quadrant and the clock, and I will make an effort that you get
an idea of my cup; it could not have happened so quickly. Give my best
regards to Nicolaus Endrissus 1) and tell him that he should be so bold
as to demand copies of any books from us. For we are also very poor in
money, but I would like to have a certain, albeit small right against
the book printers, that I, since I receive nothing from them for my
various work, occasionally take a copy if it pleases me. I believe that
this is owed to me, since other writers, even the translators, receive a
gold ninety for a quatern. Therefore, I have given my Wolfgang the order
that he should provide poor Endrissns with all the copies he ever
desires as soon as possible; may he firmly believe this. Fare well with
all yours. The melons or arrows grow and are anxious to occupy immense
spaces, likewise the pumpkins and citrulles,^2)^ so that you do not
think that the seeds were sent in vain. Be well again. 1527 July 5.
Marti\" Luther.

1\) According to the Album, p. 58, *Fr. Nicolaus Enderisch, Carmelita ex
conventu Nurnbergen. was* immatriculirt on Sept. 1, 1515.

2\) Walch gives as explanation: \"little pickles\".

**No. 1099.**

(Wittenberg.) July 10, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

Of a severe attack of illness Luther had on July 6. See the report about
it in the following number.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen. a*, fol. 213. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 56; by De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 186 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 67. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1045.

> To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Christ\'s servant at
> Altenburg, his brother who is exceedingly dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It is written and said here that you are
suffering from illness, my dear Spalatin. If this is so, I beseech the
Lord Jesus that he may restore thee and keep thee by his divine power in
honor of his word. In the meantime, patiently bear his gracious hand, as
you have been taught, not only to know it, but also to teach it to
others. For the Lord will make an end of temptation \[1 Cor. 10:13\].
Three days ago I also had a sudden attack of fainting and was seized by
it so much that I despaired completely and thought I would die under the
hands of my wife and friends, so much was I suddenly deprived of all
strength. But the Lord had mercy on me and restored me quickly.
Therefore pray for me, I beseech thee; beseech the Lord that he will not
forsake his sinner. Be well in the Lord. There is a rumor that the
plague is with us, but it is unfounded and false; by Christ\'s grace all
is well and quiet. July 10, 1527. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1100.**

**Report of D. Bugenhagen and D. Justus Jonas on Luther\'s high
spiritual and bodily challenges on July 6, 1527.**

This report is found in the old editions under the inscription: \"Kurze
Historia, durch beide Herren D. Johan. Bugenhagen and D. Justum Jonam,
how the blessed man of God D. M. L. surrendered to God\'s will to live
and die in great trials, both spiritual and physical. To all pious
hearts, which certainly have their fears

**986**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1100.

**987**

and suffering also have, useful and comforting to read.\" In the
Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 239; in the Jena edition (1556),
vol. Ill, p. 458; in the Altenburg edition, vol.lll, p. 772; in the
Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 498 and in Walch, vol. XXI, Appendix, No.
IX, Col. 158\*. Latin in Aurifaber\'s collection of letters, vol. II, p.
335. - We let this report follow here in connection with the previous
letter.

> To the venerable Johann Bugenhagen Pommer, our pastor, dearest friend
> and brother in the Lord.

It seems to me that this quick weakness of our dear father D. Martini
and other cases that have occurred are warnings by which God reminds us
that we should not heap wrath upon ourselves, Rom. 2, 5. For this reason
I have taken the serious speeches that the doctor spoke out of a fervent
heart yesterday in his severe confrontation and great fear, so that they
would not be forgotten.

I think I have summarized them all in fresh memory in a fine and orderly
way, as he said it, and with possible diligence I have recorded them
here on paper, as I heard it from him. I have written these down for
you, as my dearest friend and brother. And please, where you intend to
rewrite them, that you send me my handwriting again, because I have
otherwise kept no copy of this writing.

If I am unwise (as some might think) in recording such speech, I am
happy to do so. It seems to me that one should not ignore or despise
such great events that occur. Be well in Christ. Do not share this new
tale with anyone at this time, but keep it a secret. It is enough that
we know it, otherwise they would get out too far. Anno 1527.

E. E. willing

Justus Jonas. ^1)^

I.

Johannes Bugenhagen Pomeranus.

On the Saturday after 2) *Visitutionis Mariae* \[July 6\], when the
following Sunday the beautiful, comforting parables, Luc. 15, of the
Lost Sheep and the Son are held up and explained to the Christian people
in the sermon, D. Martinus Luther, our dear father, had a very severe
spiritual challenge, like those which are often remembered in Psalms. He
may have suffered more such challenges before, but never so severely.

1\) This signature is missing in the Wittenberg and Jena editions; we
have added it according to Walch and Aurifaber.

2\) In the editions \"after\" is missing. However, the Visitation of the
Virgin Mary in 1527 was on a Tuesday.

than this time, as he confessed the following day to D. Jonä, D.
Christiano and me. Jonah, Christiano and me, said that it was much
harder and more dangerous than the painful weakness that had struck him
on the same Saturday evening at five o\'clock (which was so quick that
we were afraid he would stay over it), although he let himself be heard
the Sunday after that the same physical weakness was not natural, but
perhaps such suffering as St. Paul suffered from Satan, who beat him
with his fists 2c, 2 Cor. 12, 7. For he said that his weakness and
suffering had first begun in his left ear and had not affected him in
any other way, but as if it roared with great impetuosity in front of
his left ear and the whole of his left cheek like rushing waves of the
sea, but not yet inwardly of the head, but outwardly.

Such (he said to D. Jonah, who was alone with him when such faintness
came upon him) could not happen naturally, but would be such an
unmistakable suffering and torture that, if it were not a short
transition and lasted only a short time, man could not endure it, but
would soon have to die, because the same whirring and roaring (like a
strong wind), which he felt before (as said) only in front of his ear,
would now have taken over his left ear inside and half of the main part.

Since I, D. Pomeranus, have begun to talk about this, I will first tell
the story of the physical illness that struck him after noon. Suddenly
he sank into such a deep unconsciousness that he knew nothing about
himself, and his body became absolutely so cold that no color, no blood,
no feeling, no voice, no sign of life, but only death could be seen and
noticed in him. But when he was watered with fresh water, as he cried
out to Jonah when he felt the faintness, he began to come to himself
again, began to pray with great earnestness from a fervent heart, as
Jonah, our dearest brother, has diligently recorded.

But I, who did not know at the time what the doctor\'s situation was,
was called to him at six o\'clock in the evening and found him lying in
bed. There I heard him with clear words, now in Latin, then in German,
now calling God the Father, then Christ the Lord. Above all, however,
with great earnestness he commanded God the ministry of the holy Gospel,
which He had entrusted to him until then.

I have not been worthy, he continued, to shed my blood for the sake of
Christ, as many of my brethren have done for the confession of the holy
gospel. But \'

**988**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1100.

**989**

This honor did not happen to St. John the Evangelist either, who wrote a
much worse book (he needed such words) against the Pabstacy (which is
the realm of the true Antichrist, who soon began to practice his craft
in Paradise, as the Scripture says: \"You will stab him in the heels\"),
the like of which I will never write nor can.

But when I was standing before him, very frightened by the fear of my
heart, I spoke to him kindly like this: Dear Doctor, pray with us that
you may stay longer with us, to comfort us wretched and many others. He
answered: \"For my own sake, dying would be my gain, but living longer
in the flesh would be necessary for the sake of many. Dear God, your
will be done!

After that he turned to me and D. Jonah and said: \"Because the world
delights and delights in lying, many will say that I have revoked my
teaching before my end, therefore I earnestly desire that you be
witnesses of my confession of faith. I say with a clear conscience that
I have taught rightly from God\'s Word, according to God\'s command, to
which He has drawn and urged me even without my will. Yes, I say, I have
taught rightly and wholesomely about faith, love, the cross, the
sacraments and other articles of Christian doctrine.

Many blame me for being too harsh and vehement when I write against the
papists and red spirits 2c. and punish their false doctrine, ungodly
nature and hypocrisy. Yes, I have been fierce at times and have attacked
my adversaries harshly, but in such a way that I have never repented.
Whether I have been fierce or moderate, I have sought no one\'s harm,
much less his soul\'s loss, but rather everyone\'s best and happiness,
even that of my enemies. I had intended to act and write about the holy
baptism of Christ, also against Zwingel and other sacrament enthusiasts,
but as it can be seen, the dear God has decided something else about me.

Then he spoke to us with great earnestness (God always included: Ah God
2c.) against the devotees of the sacraments, and lamented with tears
that now many sects and cults had arisen that falsified and perverted
God\'s word, and would not spare His army, which He had acquired through
His blood. He said, \"To me, the unworthy, God has given many beautiful
gifts, which he has not given to many thousands of other people, who I
would like to use longer in his honor, and also for the benefit and
comfort of the godly, if it were his will. But you will be unequal and
too weak to so many enthusiasts who are now tearing down everywhere. But
I console myself

that Christ is stronger than the wretched Satan (together with all his
scales), yes, he is his Lord.

The will, however, which he made to his wife, who was pregnant, and to
his little son, was as follows: My dearest God, I thank you from the
bottom of my heart that you have willed that I should be poor and a
beggar on earth, and therefore I cannot leave my house, my fields, my
land, my money or my property to my wife and my sons after me; as you
have given them to me, so I give them to you again, you rich, faithful
God; feed them, teach them, keep them, as you have fed me until now 2c.
O Father of the fatherless and Judge of widows. D. Jonas has diligently
distinguished what are more of the speeches.

However, while he was talking like this, Augustine 1) made every effort
to warm up his body, which (as I said) was freezing cold, with many
cloths, pillows and clothes, which were always made warm over a charcoal
fire and laid out for him, and to bring it back into shape, especially
his chest and feet. After that, we, D. Jonas, D. Augustin Schurs, the
physician, and I, go down from him into the hall to take supper, as much
as we can in such suffering and sorrow, so that he may rest the better.
Meanwhile, however, D. Augustin goes up again to see how the sick man is
doing, comes back and says that the doctor has been sweating a lot, and
that there is therefore good hope that he will have no more trouble this
time. Since we were thus suspended between hope and fear, we also
visited our patient, greeted him and wished him a blessed night, and
went home.

When we visited him again the following morning, it turned out that the
doctor had judged correctly, only that the sick man was still in bed on
Sunday and said that he was not yet completely free of the terrible
roaring and rushing in his head. On the evening of the same day,
however, he got up, had supper with us, and all things, praise and
thanks be to Christ, were restored. Thus the Lord led into hell and out
again, not only him, but also us together with him, so that we would not
put our trust in ourselves.

Now that I come back to the point I started with: if this weakness that
struck him after noon was so great and dangerous, as we have said so
far, the spiritual challenge he endured and endured in the morning will
have been much more severe and horrible, which he said had affected him
much more severely than the bodily weakness after noon, which he himself

1\) Prospecting.

**990**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1100.

**991**

indicated that \[it\] would not have been a natural weakness, but a
stroke of Satan\'s neck.

Now that the same spiritual challenge of Saturday morning was over, the
pious Job worried that where the hand of God would come again so
strongly, he would not be able to bear it, perhaps he also had a concern
that it would now be time for our Lord Jesus Christ to call him from
hence, therefore he sent his servant Wolf to me at 8 o\'clock before
noon, and had him tell me that I wanted to come to him in a hurry. Since
he said \"hurriedly\", I was a little shocked about it, but found the
doctor in his usual form standing with his housewife, as he could then
with a quiet, collected mind give everything home to God and command it.
For he was not in the habit of complaining to people who could not help
him or to whom he could not be useful with his complaints, but he was in
the habit of standing against people as they desired to have him, who
sought comfort from him. If he sometimes does too much over the table
with cheerfulness, he has no pleasure in it himself, and this cannot
displease any godly man, much less annoy him, because he is an affable
man and is hostile to all mendacity and hypocrisy.

But so that I would continue, I asked the doctor why he had summoned me?
He answered: \"For the sake of no evil. When we had gone out and stood
aside in a special place, he ordered himself and all that he had with
great earnestness, began to confess and confess his sin, and the master
desired from the disciple comfort from the divine word, item, an
absolution and release from all his sins; also admonished me that I
should pray diligently for him, which I likewise desired from him.

Furthermore, he asked me to allow him to receive the Holy Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ on the following Sunday, because he hoped
to preach on the same Sunday, was not concerned (as far as I could tell)
about the accident that happened to him after noon, as I said, and yet
said: \"If the Lord will call me now, let his will be done! I was
appalled by this and other speeches. But when I saw that evening that he
was so fatally ill, I had no other thought that he would die, for I knew
how earnestly he had sent himself to the end of this life in the
morning.

But this piece, which is well worth knowing, I must not forget. Since he
had confessed and then talked about the spiritual challenge, which he
experienced the same morning with such terror and

When he felt that he could not talk it out, he continued: \"Many think,
because I am sometimes cheerful in my outward conduct, that I am walking
on vain roses; but God knows how I am for the rest of my life. I have
often intended to be of service to the world in a more serious and holy
way (I don\'t know what to call it), but God has not given me this to
do.

The world, in praise of God, finds no vice in me, which it could impute
to me with truth, nevertheless it is annoyed by me. Perhaps God wants to
make the blind, ungrateful world a fool over me, so that it will be
corrupted by its contempt and not be worthy of seeing the beautiful
gifts that He otherwise denies to many thousands of people, so that He
has graced me to serve those whom He knows well, so that, because the
world does not think highly of the word of salvation that God offers it
through me, its weak, small vessel, it will find in me that it is
offended and falls. What God means by such His judgment, I return to
Him. I pray and call upon Him daily with earnestness that He may grant
me mercy, that through my sin I may not give anyone cause to take
offense at me. - I have heard this from him with great pleasure.

Since I was acting alone with him, it was almost time to have lunch. And
because we had been summoned by some of the nobility to eat with them, I
reminded him that he wanted to please the guests and not stay outside.
But he refused. Then I admonished his wife that she wanted him to come
and not stay at home alone. She hoped it would be good for him to be
with people and talk to them about all sorts of things. 2c.

Then he came to the meal, ate and drank, but very little, which I
noticed among all at the table alone. Nevertheless, as is his way, he
was in good spirits with the guests, made them happy, as much as he
wanted to suffer, because he had not yet forgotten what a great journey
he had been on shortly before. At the twelfth hour, however, he got up
from the table, went into D. Jonas\'s garden behind his house, and left.
Jonah\'s garden behind his house. But I, because I had to preach at
vespers, went home.

After this time, everything happened with the weakness of D. M., as I
have told it above, of which everything, neatly written in a document,
our dear brother D. Jonas has made a good report and sent it to me
(especially the speeches which he heard from D. Martins, partly alone,
partly I together with him at the same time). For he knew well that he
had sent me

**992**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1100.

**993**

It would do me a great favor if he would send it to me in writing, so
that I could have such speeches before my eyes, remember them often, and
also have an example to follow when I am challenged.

II\.

Follows D. Justi Jona directory.

The following section is found (with the exception of the last three
paragraphs) in a Latin translation different from Aurifaber\'s in
Bindseil\'s *colloquia*, tom. In Cordatus, numbers 1186 to 1192 contain
the main facts that are reported in our entire writing. See St. Louis
edition, vol. XXIl, 1936, no. 1186.

On the Saturday after the Visitation of the Virgin Mary, in the evening
half an hour before six, Luther\'s, our dear father\'s, weakness
happened as follows: Since he had had a severe spiritual challenge that
same morning, as he himself confessed, and yet had fairly come back to
himself, and had been asked to be a guest by some of the nobility,
namely Marx von Wallefels, Hans Löser 2c, he went to Paul Schulte\'s
inn. After the meal, he went into my garden to beat his melancholy and
sadness and to refresh himself a bit, sat there, talked with me about
various things, for two hours. When he left my house, he told me and my
wife that we should dine with him in the evening. When it was five
o\'clock, we went up to the monastery. Then the doctor said that he had
gone to bed, that he would like to rest and recover, because he had come
home weak, and asked \[me\], however, that I should not let the time be
long, and if it would be a little delayed, I should put it down to his
weakness.

When I had rested for a while, the doctor got up from bed, thinking that
he wanted to have supper with us, but complained of a large, annoying,
unusual roaring and ringing in his left ear (which, as doctors say,
tends to precede fainting). But because this ringing and buzzing grew
larger and larger, he said that he could not stay at the table with us
because of his weakness, so he went back to his bedroom and lay down in
bed again. I alone soon followed him on foot, I do not know what the
doctor ordered the maids at the bottom of the stairs before she came
(although she did not delay long). When he stepped over the threshold of
the bedchamber, he fainted, and hastily said to me: \"O Doctor Jonah, I
feel sick, bring me water or what you have, or I will perish. So I
caught

almost frightened and nimbly a pot with cold water; I poured it partly
under his face, partly in his back, as I could.

Then he began to pray: My dearest God, if you want this to be the hour
that you have provided for me, may your gracious will be done. Further
he prayed (lifted up his eyes) with great fervor of his heart the
Lord\'s Prayer and the sixth Psalm. In this the doctor also came up.
When she saw that he was so frail and almost dead, she was very
frightened and called loudly to the maids. The doctor then asked that
his pants be taken off soon. I did so quickly and threw him there. As he
was lying on his back, he would have liked to rest, but he complained
that he was very weak and felt no more strength. We rubbed and cooled
him, gave him refreshments and did what we could until the doctor came.

Shortly thereafter he began to pray again and said: \"Lord, my most
beloved God, how gladly I would have shed my blood for the sake of your
word, you know that, but perhaps I am not worth it. Thy will be done! If
you want it so, I will gladly die, only that your holy name may be
praised and glorified, be it through my life or death. But if it were
possible, dear God, I would gladly live longer for the sake of your
blessed or chosen ones. But when the hour has come, do it as you please;
you are the Lord over life and death.

My dearest God, you have led me into this matter, you know that it is
your word and the truth; do not exalt nor please your enemies, lest they
boast: Where is now their God? but declare your holy name contrary and
to the chagrin of the enemies of your blessed, salvific word.

My dearest Lord Jesus Christ, you have graciously given me the knowledge
of your holy name, you know that I believe in you, together with Father
and Holy Spirit, one and true God, and comfort me that you are our
mediator and savior, who shed your precious blood for us sinners: stand
by me in this hour and comfort me with your Holy Spirit. Again he said:
\"You know, Lord, that many of them to whom you have given it have shed
their blood for the sake of confessing your gospel. I hoped that it
would also come to me that I should also have shed my blood for the sake
of your holy name, but I am not worthy; your will be done!

You know, Lord, that Satan has stalked me in many ways, that he has made
me bodily

**994**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1100.

995

by tyrants, kings, princes, 2c., and spiritually by his fiery darts and
terrible, devilish temptations. But thou hast hitherto preserved me
marvelously against all their raging and raging; preserve me further,
thou faithful Lord, it is thy will.

He also remembered the physical doctor and asked if D. Augustin would
come soon? Yes, we said, and he came not long after. He put warm
pillows, cloths and other things on him, comforted him and gave him hope
that, God willing, there would be no need for this time. In the
meantime, D. Pomeranus, pastor of the church in Wittenberg, to whom the
doctor had confessed early that day, arrived. There he spoke to us, as
he spoke to me, Jonah, and to the women who stood before him, when the
faintness subsided a little: Dear ones, pray diligently for me. We again
exhorted him that he would earnestly beseech the Lord Christ not to take
him, the faithful minister of his holy word, from us. He answered: \"My
dear priest, I confessed to you today and you gave me absolution, which
is dear to me.

But as the faintness increased somewhat, he repeated in his prayer
comforting words and sayings from the Holy Scriptures, which he spoke
out of a fervent heart and firm faith and certain confidence in God\'s
grace and mercy, shown to us in Jesus Christ: My most beloved GOD (he
said), you are indeed a GOD of sinners and wretched people, who feel
their anguish, distress and misery and heartily desire your grace,
comfort and help, as you say: \"Come to me, all you who labor and are
burdened, and I will give you rest.\" O Lord, I come in response to your
promise; I am in great anguish and distress; help me for the sake of
your grace and faithfulness, amen.

Not long after that he said to his housewife: \"My dearest Käthe, I beg
you, will our dear God take me to Himself this time, so that you may
surrender to His gracious will. You are my wife, you shall certainly
keep it and have no doubt about it. Let the blind godless world say what
it wants against it. If you follow God\'s word and hold fast to it, you
will have a certain, constant comfort against the devil and all his
blasphemers. Then he said to Doctor Pommer and to me: \"I meant that I
still wanted to have written about holy baptism. Item, against Zwingel
and others who falsify and pervert the doctrine of the Sacrament, but
God may not want it; his will be done!

Soon he began to pray again: O my dear Lord Jesus Christ, who said,
\"Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and you shall find; knock, and
it shall be opened to you,\" according to this promise of yours, give
me, O Lord, who ask, not gold nor silver, but a strong, firm faith. Let
me find, I who seek, not the pleasure or joy of the world, but comfort
and refreshment through your blessed, healing word. Open to me who
knock; I do not desire anything that the world esteems great and high,
for I am not a hair\'s breadth better in your sight, but give me your
Holy Spirit to enlighten my heart, to strengthen and comfort me in my
anguish and distress, to keep me in right faith and trust in your grace
until my end, amen.

He continued: \"O my most beloved God and Father, you have given me many
noble and precious gifts before many other thousands; if it were your
will, I would gladly use them for the praise and glory of your holy
name, for the benefit and comfort of your small army. But your divine,
fatherly will be done. Only that your name be honored through me,
whether I live or die, amen.

Then he further said: \"Oh, how will the devotees, the sacrament
abusers, the Anabaptists and other mobs wreak havoc after my death! But
I take comfort in the fact that Christ is stronger than Satan and all
his scales; indeed, he is their Lord. When he said this, he wept so
loudly that tears flowed down his cheeks.

When warm cloths and pillows were laid on him to warm his cold body
again, he asked his son: \"Where is my dearest little girl? When the
child was brought, it laughed at the father. Then he said, \"Oh, you
good, poor little child! Now, I entrust my dearest Kate and you, poor
orphan, to my dear, pious, faithful God. You have nothing, but God, who
is the father of orphans and the judge of widows, will feed and provide
for you. Then he continued talking to his housewife about the silver
cups. Except for these, he said, you know that we have nothing else.

At this and other speeches of her master, the doctor was greatly shocked
and saddened, but she did not let herself realize that she had suffered
so much that she should see her dear master lying there so miserably
before her eyes, but stood confidently and said: \"My dearest doctor, if
it is God\'s will, I would rather have you with our Lord God than with
me. It is not only for my sake and for the sake of my child, but

**996**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1100. 1101. 1102.

**997**

but for many pious Christian people who still thirst for you. For my
sake, my dearest Lord, do not worry; I entrust you to his divine will, I
hope and trust in God, he will graciously preserve you.

So, while the doctor was rubbed with warm cloths and warm potions were
placed on his chest and around his feet, he said: \"I feel, praise God,
improvement, the fainting subsides and my strength returns slowly. If I
could only sweat, I hoped that by God\'s grace I would have no further
trouble this time. Then D. Augustin said: We want to leave him alone, if
he could sweat and rest. So we bid him good night and departed from him
in God\'s name, calling those who stayed with him to be quiet. 2c.

May our dear Lord Jesus Christ keep this man alive for a long time, in
honor of His holy name and for the comfort of His faithful, amen.

The next day the doctor said to me: \"Jonah, I must remember yesterday,
it was my turn to go to school and I sat in a hot sweat bath. The Lord
leads into hell and out again. He went on to say that the spiritual
trial he had endured in the morning would have been much greater and
more severe than the physical one he would have faced in the evening.
The Lord, he said, kills and makes alive, for he is the Lord of death
and life. To him be praise, honor and glory forever and ever, amen.

**No. 1101.**

(Wittenberg.) July 13, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

About a marriage case, the church visitation that had begun, the capture
of Rome by the imperial troops, and Luther\'s bout of illness.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
33. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ns. 26, fol. 22d.
Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p.80; b\'ei *Strobel-Ranner*, x. 118; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 187 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 68. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1367.

> To the highly venerable and holy man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, pastor of
> the church at Zwickau, his superior in Christ.

Grace and peace! If this man\'s case stands as he tells it, my dear
Nicolaus, I think he is justified in keeping this wife, since the former
husband has left her for so long a time and has made himself

immediately exposed to all dangers with her. That is my opinion.

The visitation has begun to be fulfilled, because eight days ago the
Lord Knight 1) and M. Philip left for this work. Christ guide them,
amen.

Rome has been miserably devastated with the pope, because Christ reigns
in such a way that the emperor, who persecutes Luther for the pope, is
forced to destroy the pope for Luther. Namely, everything serves Christ
for his own and against his adversaries.

Besides, there is nothing new.

Greetings from my Käthe and my little Hans. Farewell in Christ. I have
suffered a severe fainting spell, so that my head is forced to abstain
from reading and writing. On the day of Margaretha \[July 13\] 1527.
Martin Luther.

**No. 1102.**

Torgau. July 22, 1527.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Because of occupation of the parish of Rodikau.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. LI,* p. 34.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 118 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 70.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! Our councillors
have presented us with a letter you gave them from Erneiten Randwich,
the old priest of Belzig (Belzk), who would like to have the priest of
Rodikaw, who recently resigned; we have read it out. Now we don\'t know
how the same priest is skilled and experienced in this at the time when
the divine word is so brightly and apparently coming to light. But we
request that you hear him (ime) in this; where you will then find that
he is skilled and fit to preside over the common poor people with the
proclamation of the divine word and the administration of the sacrament,
and then deliver our presentation to him and thereby direct him to our
office in Belzig. If, however, he would not be suitable, then you will
know how to report this to us, and also how to send us the presentation
again by chance. In your gracious opinion, we do not want to leave this
unopened. Date Torgau, Monday of St. Mary Magdalene \[July 22\] 1527.

1\) *Dominus Hero* == Knight Hans von Planitz. It is not to read
Hieronymus, therefore also not to understand Schurs.

**998** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1103. 1104. 1105. **999**

**No. 1103.**

(Wittenberg.) July 26, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for Simon Funke.

The original is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. N*. fol. 108.41.
Printed in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 186 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
53, p. 406.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke Johann, Elector of Saxony 2c. To his C.
> F. G. Hands.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! He Simon Funke has asked me for this intercession to E. C. F. G.,
so that his application will be the more respected, because of the house
he wants to buy with E. C. F. G.\'s favor and knowledge. Methinks the
matter is simple, and E. C. F. G. will know how to graciously treat him,
for I do not know how to deny him his request. Hiemit GOtt befohlen,
Amen. Friday after Jacobi \[July 26\] 1527.

> E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1104.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. August 1527.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther recommends a Pole to him and reports on his bout of illness and
the plague in Wittenberg.

From a Munich copy printed in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 189 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 71.

> To the highly famous and highly venerable brother in Christ, M.
> Philippus, who serves Christ either in Jena 1) or close to it.

Grace and peace in Christ! This Pole Andrew, my dear Philip, who was
recommended to us by our friends in Breslau, we also want to have
recommended to you, since he has traveled such a long way to see you. He
is a good man, learned and knowledgeable of many languages, and will
please you, I know, after you have heard that he has secretly left Hanse
for the sake of the opponents of the Gospel.

1\) Because of the plague in Wittenberg, the university was moved to
Jena. Melanchthon was still on the visitation journey and did not arrive
in Jena until August 9. - \"Zu Jena\" is written in the original: xxxxx.

I believe that many things are reported and written about me by others.
I have indeed been tossed about in death and hell for more than a whole
week because of what I wrote the other day, so that I, wounded all over,
am still trembling in my limbs. Having lost Christ almost completely, I
was driven by floods and storms of despair and blasphemy against God.
But God, moved by the prayers of the saints, began to have mercy on me
and saved my soul from the depths of hell \[Ps. 86:13\]. You also do not
cease to pray for me, just as I do for you. But I believe that my
struggle concerns others as well. We are convinced that the plague is
here and of a right kind, but we hope that it will be slow and mild,
since we are Christ\'s, the small and despised host, who are
sufficiently beaten by the public hatred of the whole world and our
evils, not to mention the lack and other humiliations. I long to see
you, in Christ, if I should be worthy of it. Hans Luft has been ill for
the ninth day; yesterday he seemed to be absent-minded, but it is hoped
that he will be restored. Fare well with all yours and ours, and
remember us in your prayers as those who are dead, yet alive; as
prisoners, yet free; 2) as those who suffer, yet safe \[2 Cor. 6, 9.
f.\]. But Christ, the victor over death, the victor over hell, the
victor over sin, the world, and the flesh, be and be strong in us and
you with his Spirit, Amen. August 2, 1527. M. L.

**No. 1105.**

Torgau. August 10, 1527.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector asks Luther to move with his family to Jena because of the
plague. - Luther, however, remained in Wittenberg; there is no reply
from Luther to this letter.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 144.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 119 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 72.

2\) Instead of *vivi,* we have assumed *liberi,* since the text is also
otherwise (in De Wette) severely corrupted several times.

**1000** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1105. 1106. 1107. **1001**

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! Since you know
without a doubt that we have allowed the persons of our university at
Wittenberg to move to Jena at their submissive request and request for
the sake of the mortal runs that are occurring, and we are told that you
should be willing not to move from Wittenberg, we would not like to see
you separate and isolate yourselves from the university at this time for
many reasons, and for your own good, because you know what is happening
daily for the sake of the divine word and the sacraments. Therefore, it
is our gracious request that you direct your affairs accordingly, and
also go there with your wife and child toward Jena, and if you are
inclined to do so, as we provide, then you will give us beneficial
notice of this, \[so\] we will arrange so that you may come there next
with your wife and child. We do not want you to do this in our gracious
opinion, and do us a favor. Date Torgau, on Saturday Laurentii \[Aug.
10\] Anno Domini 26.

**No. 1106.**

Wittenberg. August 12, 1527.

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt.**

Luther thanks him for the comfort he has received, asks him to tell
Valentin Jckelsamer that he forgives him, and informs him that Zwingli
and Oekolampad have written against him.

Handwritten at Zurich in the Simmler Collection, vol. 19. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 342 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 190 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 73. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1046.

I wish you grace and peace in Christ Jesus! I thank you, my dear Justus,
for praying to the Lord for me, and then also for comforting me, both of
which are necessary for me at this time, so I ask you not to cease to
pray courageously for me and to comfort me, because my struggle with
suffering is beyond my strength. Christ has been a faithful sustainer
for me up to now, and I have no doubt that he will continue to be so for
eternity. I have not only been ill in body, but by far the most in
spirit, so Satan with his angels is tormenting me out of the permission
of God our Savior. Therefore, I entrust myself to your prayers and I am
sure that the Lord will hear you and trample Satan under our feet, amen.

I would have written to Ickelsamer 1), but the weakness of the main does
not allow me to deal with all kinds of requests, but you may tell him
that I have forgiven him everything, even before he asked for it, as I
also forgive all other enemies and have mercy on them, so that Christ
and the righteous Father also forgive me and have mercy on me. I wonder
what you write about his grammar 2) because nothing has been reported to
me about these things, nor can I find out where it is or who prints it,
so I cannot answer you about it.

Zwingli and Oecolampad have answered,^3)^ but I have not yet read it,
nor can I read it until I am restored, for I am utterly inactive and
walk idly as a dull Lazarus and sick of Christ. Fare well in the Lord
and remember me as you do. Wittenberg, Monday after Laurentii \[Aug.
12\] 1527.

Martin Luther.

The people of our academy who are already in Jena 4), close to you, I
recommend to you and all of us.

**No. 1107.**

Wittenberg. August 19, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

Of the visitation, and of the plague in Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 213. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 345 d; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 191 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 75. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1050.

1\) Valentin Ickelsamer, from Rothenburg an der Tauber, was a Latin
schoolmaster there and a fanatical supporter of Carlstadt. He wrote a
fierce personal attack against Luther because of his alleged injustice
and tyranny against Carlstadt. After the suppression of the peasant
revolt he had to leave Rothenburg. Now he seems to be reconciled with
Luther.

2\) As Veesenmeyer, Beiträge zur Kulturgeschichte der deutschen Sprache,
St. 1. 2, indicates, Ickelsamer\'s \"Teütsche Grammatika\" 1527, quarto,
8 sheets, was the first attempt at a German grammar.

3\) Zwingli with the writing: \"That these words of Jesus Christ: This
is my body, will eternally have the old unified meaning\" 2c., which is
printed in the St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1122. The title of
Oecolampad\'s writing is given in the introduction there, p. 38a. On
Aug. 21, Luther had not yet seen both writings.

4\) The actual relocation of the university to Jena did not take place
until August 15.

**1002** Letters from the year

1527\. no. 1107. 1108. **1003**

Grace and peace! I rejoice that you are restored and give thanks to
Christ our Lord. Pray, I pray, for me, that I may also be completely
restored to health, if it is the will of God the Savior. May the rumors
of the visitation not worry you, too, because yesterday the Prince sent
the acts of the visitation 1) to me, so that I could see and judge
whether they were worthy of printing. Everything is fine, if only they
would be executed as they are set, as you will see. Let the adversaries
boast with lies, 2) as they are wont to do, they cannot console
themselves with the truth.

The plague has started here, but it is quite merciful; but the fear and
the fleeing of the people is extraordinary, that I have not seen such a
monstrosity of Satan before; so much does he fear, even rejoice, to be
able to make the hearts so despondent, namely so that he alone can
scatter and destroy this academy, which he hates not without cause above
all others. However, during the whole time of the plague until this day,
there have been no more than 18 corpses, with the addition of those who
were inside the city, maidens, children and all. In the fishermen\'s
suburb it has raged more fiercely, in our part of town there is still no
death, although everyone is buried there. Today we buried the wife of
Tilo Dene 3), who almost died in my arms yesterday, and this is the
first funeral in the middle of the city. Those 18 funerals have taken
place around me \"at the Elsterthor\", among them was Barbara, the
sister of your Eberhardin,^4)^ , who was already an adult, which you
will tell M. Eberhard; but also the daughter of Johannes Grüneberg has
died. Hans Luft arose again and overcame the plague, and many others
arise again when they use medicine; but many are so limited (*barbari*)
that they despise the medicine and die without cause. The son of the

1\) That is, the visitation articles that Melanchthon had drawn up on
behalf of the Elector.

2\) It has been said that Melanchthon now teaches differently than
Luther, or: both give in and crawl back.

3\) Mayor in Wittenberg.

4\) That is, the wife of Eberhard Brisger.

Justus Jonas, John, also died. He, with his household, has traveled to
his fatherland 5). I remain, and this is necessary because of this
tremendous fear among the people. Therefore we, Pommer and I, are alone
here with the chaplains,^6)^ but Christ is there so that we are not
alone, who will also triumph in us over the old serpent, the murderer
and workmaster of sin, however much he may prick his heel. Pray for us
and farewell. Wittenberg, on the Monday after the Assumption \[Aug. 19\]
1527.

Greetings M. Eberhard and all of ours and recommend us to them. The
enthusiasts have written against me; I do not have the books yet.
Zwingli\'s second letter 7) to me, however, which is even more defiant
\[than the first\], I wanted to send, but it was not at hand.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1108.**

(Wittenberg.) August 20, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Of the writings of Zwingli and Oecolampad. About the plague in
Wittenberg and the visitation.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
34. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ns. 26, fol. 23 b.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 346b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 192
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 77. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1052.

> To the highly venerable man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the
> church at Zwickau, his superior in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ, who may command your fever to subside, amen.
Dearest brother, I too have not yet seen the books of the
Sacramentarians, and I am surprised that they are not brought, although
Zwingli, in a letter sent to me, which is indeed quite defiant and
threatening, indicates that he is sending the answer; but it has not
been delivered with the letter. Those who read it say that these people
are nonsensical, which I easily believe. Jonas is

5\) namely Nordhausen.

6\) The cavellans at that time were Johann Mantel and Georg Rörer.

7\) This letter of Zwingli from June 20 is not available.

**1004**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1108. 1109. 1110.

**1005**

has gone away with his house to his fatherland, for fear of the plague.
Although the plague is idle with us, Satan strikes the hearts of all
with an incredible fear, so that I and Pommer are alone here; and yet we
are not alone, for Christ is with us, who will protect us and make us
victors in Himself against Satan, as we believe and hope. We are
expecting Philip every day.

There is hope that the visitation will proceed easily, since a very
beautiful order has already been written by the visitators, which the
prince will have printed, so that we can easily come to an agreement and
order what is necessary for the churches.

This I write to you for your comfort, and so that you may pray to Christ
that he will graciously carry out the work you have begun. May you be
well in Him, Amen. Tuesday after the Assumption of the Virgin Mary
\[Aug. 20\] 1527.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1109.**

(Wittenberg.) August 21, 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

Luther complains about his high spiritual temptations.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. and in *Cod. Jen*. B. 24. n, fol. 160.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 347; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 193 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 78. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1053.

> To his brother in Christ, Johann Agricola, the servant of God, the
> instructor of the youth at Eisleben.

Grace and peace in Christ! I thank you, my dear Agricola, for the
consolation you have given me, since you write that your Church is
concerned about me and prays for me; God also comforts you in
tribulation. And I pray that you will not cease to comfort me and pray
for me, for I am wretched and poor. Not that the Sacramentans move us,
whose ravages I have not yet seen nor read, and I hope through Christ
that I will be a despiser of this Satan and even his victor. Satan
himself rages against me with all his power, and the Lord has set me as
a sign for him, as it were as a second Job, and he looks at me.

with extraordinary weakness of spirit. But through the prayers of the
saints, I am not left in his hands, even though the wounds of the heart
that I have received are healed with difficulty. My hope is that this
struggle of mine will affect many. Even though there is no evil that my
sins do not deserve, this is my life, that I know and boast that I have
taught the word of Christ purely and truthfully for the salvation of
many. This grieves Satan, and he would like to overthrow and destroy me
at the same time as the word. Thus it happens that I suffer nothing from
the tyrants of the world, while others are killed, burned and perish for
the sake of Christ, but I suffer all the more from the prince of the
world himself in spirit. In all things praise be to GOD and the Father
of our Lord JEsu Christ, who performs His holy and, O GOD, how hidden
good and pleasing will in me, Amen. Johann Pommer greets you, who is
here alone with me together with the chaplains. But we are not alone,
Christ and your prayers and those of all the saints together with the
holy angels are with us, invisible but effective. The grace of Christ be
with you, Amen. August 21, 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1110 .**

Wittenberg. August 22, 1527.

**To Elfe von Kanitz.**

Luther invites her to come to Wittenberg and start a girls\' school; he
comforts her in temptations.

From the *Cod. Closs*. in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 170 with the wrong
date: \"May 2\" and likewise in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 401.

> The honorable and virtuous maiden Elfen von Kanitz, now at the oak, 1)
> my dear in Christo friend.

G. u. F. in Christo JEsu. Honorable, virtuous virgin Elfe! I have
written to your dear Muhme Hanna von Plausig,

1\) \"zu der Eiche\", a church with Antonian monastery at Nanenhof, two
miles from Leipzig, formerly a famous place of pilgrimage. In 1525 the
monastery was abandoned by the monks, and Hans von Minkwitz bought it
for 9000 gulden. The first Protestant pastor there was Johann Pfeffinger
in 1530-1532.

**1006** Letters from the year 1527. No. 1110 to 1114. **1007**

that she would send you to me for a time; for I thought to use you to
teach young maidens and to set an example to others through you. You
shall be with me at home and at table, so that you shall have no journey
nor worry, so I ask of you that you will not refuse me such. I also hear
that the evil enemy is tormenting you with heavy thoughts. O dear
virgin, do not let him frighten you; for he who suffers the devil here
must not suffer there, it is a good sign. Christ also suffered all these
things, and many holy prophets and apostles, as the Psalter well
indicates. Therefore be of good cheer and gladly suffer such ruths from
the Father; he will also help you from them in his time. When you come,
I will tell you more about it. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At
Wittenberg, on the Thursday after Agap\[iti\] 1) \[Aug. 22\] 1527.

**No. 1111.**

Wittenberg. August 23, 1527.

**To Joachim von Weißbach in Reinersdorf (Ransdorf?).**

Meaning about a divorce because of leprosy.

Manuscript in the Nuremberg City Library, *Cod.* 70, fol. 32b; at
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Aug.* 20. 2, fol. 146 b; at Wittenberg in *Cod*.
*Schleusner*, lob 49 and in the royal library at Vienna. Printed without
the name of the recipient in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 415; in
the Altenburger, vol. VIII, p. 970; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 437
and in Walch, vol. X, 963. Allegedly from the original, with the wrong
address: \"Johann Weißbach\" and without date, in the Leipziger
Supplement, p. 49, no. 60; in Walch, vol. XXI, 220; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 194 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 406. With the
correct address and date (as in the first three manuscripts mentioned)
in Walch, vol. XXII, 1755, § 108 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 61,
p. 242 f.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 811. There, the superscription should be
corrected and instead of \"B.\" read \"Behem\" in the text.

**No. 1112.**

(Wittenberg.) August 26, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther asks him for his intercession because of his challenge.

1\) *Agapitus* is August 18, not April 30, as De Wette assumed.

Handwritten at Zurich in the Simlersche Sammlung, vol. 19. Printed by
Schütze, vol. II, p. 82; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 119; by De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 195 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 80 f. German in
Walch,

Vol. XXI, 1368.

> To the highly venerable man of God, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of
> the Church at Zwickau.

Greetings in Christ, dearest and most esteemed Nicolaus! M. Stephan Roth
is coming to you, from whom you will learn all our news. You know that
this man is respected and loved by us and needs no recommendation from
you. I ask you for Christ\'s sake to help me with your prayers against
Satan and his angels, whom I have as enemies beyond measure, that Christ
may not abandon me, whom he has chosen until now for the furtherance of
his gospel, but may glorify his name in my weakness, whether through
death or life. And this I do not ask in vain, for I need the prayer and
help of the brethren, in whom I worship and adore my Christ. Fare well
in this Jesus Christ, the most sweet Savior. Monday after Bartholomew
\[Aug. 26\] 1527.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1113.**

**(Wittenberg.) August 26, 1527.**

**To Johann Rühel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1980.

**No. 1114.**

(Strasbourg.) August 29, 1527.

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Gerbel feels strengthened in his opinion by Luther\'s writing Wider die
Sacramentirer (Against the Sacramentarians) and asks him to write
against them again. After the Anabaptists who had broken into Strasbourg
were driven out of the city by the city council, the people of
Strasbourg again turned more against Luther. Recommendation of Christoph
Lasius.

Handwritten in *Thes. Tree*, III, 56. Printed by

Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 89 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.82.

**1008** Letters from the year 1527. No. 1115 to 1118. **100S**

**No 1115.**

(Wittenberg.) August 31, 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.** See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2227.

**No. 1116.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. September 1527.

**To Gerhard Wilskamp in Herford.**

Luther thanks the friends for their intercession and gives news from
Wittenberg.

The original is in the royal library at Hannover. Printed in Schütze,
vol. II, p. 81; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 199; in Zeitschrift für
Kirchengeschichte, VIII (1886), p. 295 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
85.

> To the brother to be highly honored in the Lord Christ, Gerhard 1) of
> Xanten, the exceedingly faithful servant of God.

Grace and peace! Before I wrote to Montanus, not to you; now I am
writing to you, not to Montanus, my dear Gerhard, since I see that you
are One Heart and One Soul in the Lord. Therefore, show Montanus this
letter and thank him for praying so earnestly for me; this prayer is
also necessary for us, especially for me, and I am glad that godly
people are so concerned about us. The interpretation of Zechariah, which
is half finished, has been delayed so far by my state of health. The
prophets who began to be translated into German have likewise hung up
their harps through our dispersion 2) \[Ps. 137, 2\]. This you will say
to Jacob for the sake of it, so that he may take care that the more
urgent prayer be made for us, that the cry of our pestilence, for it is
more true than the pestilence itself, may fall away through Christ as a
physician, and that ours may again be gathered together to complete what
is already in print. For Satan has aroused this fear and clamor to
hinder the course of the Word, which he wants to

1\) Gerhard *Wilskamp*, usually called *Viscampius*, was in the
fraternity at Herford and had been won for the Gospel by Jakob Montanus.
From 1528 until his death in 1542, he was the head of the house of
friars.

2\) Instead of *nostri dispersionem* at De Wette we have

with the Erl. Briefw. *nostra dispersione*. - This refers to the
relocation of the university to Jena.

Crush Christ under our feet through your prayers, Amen.

Our wives are very happy and thank you for your kindness and your gift.
Philip\'s wife is with him, he is now away with the academy. Pommer with
his own, and mine with me greet you kindly, and they promise that, God
willing, they will do what you prescribe. You are also greeted by my
son. Fare well in the Lord. On the second of September, 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1117.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. September 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Of Hausmann\'s recovery, of the visitation, and of the plague in
Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
35. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol. 23.
Printed by Schütze, Vol. II, p. 81; by De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 200 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. Vl, p. 87.

> To his brother, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of the Church at
> Zwickau, who is highly esteemed in the Lord.

Grace and peace! With short words I greet you, my dear househusband,
because there is nothing else I can write. And I thank the Lord JEsu,
who has restored you to us; praise be to him forever, amen. I hope that
the visitators, when they have rested a little, will resume their
service; 3) in the meantime, take comfort in patience. At the same time
\[I ask\] that you pray for us, whether perhaps Christ would take away
from us the plague and the clamor about the plague, and gather the
dispersed to spread his name and word longer, Amen. Farewell in Christ.
The second of September, 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1118.**

(Wittenberg.) September 10, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request for salary for the preacher Zeiger at Belgern.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 235b; in the Jena
edition (1556), vol. Ill, p. 425; in the

3\) This did not happen until late 1528.

**1010**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1118. 1119. 1120.

**1011**

Altenburger, vol. Ill, p. 761; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p.552; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 172; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 245, with the wrong
date: \"December 10,\" and likewise in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.
414.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The council and congregation of Belgern have now asked several
times for Mr. Balzer Zeiger, their preacher, who has now served them for
four years, and the monk of Buch 1) has the parish goods inside, also
does not wait for the office, nor is capable of administering them. Now
it is unreasonable that a preacher should support himself, as he has
done so far for the benefit of the people, and can never do so again, so
that it is to be feared that God, greatly angered by this, might let a
punishment go over it.

Now the man, Mr. Balzer, is almost well skilled, and \[has\] suffered
much for the sake of the Gospel, that I am well inclined to forbid him
to help elsewhere. But because I hope that E. C. F. G. will not suffer
such displeasure, my humble request is that E. C. F. G. seriously decree
that the above-mentioned Mr. Balzer be given a handout or tax from the
parish goods until the visitation comes. For God cannot like it that
another shall provide the parish without enjoyment and another shall use
the goods without work, which has happened here for four years now.
Hereby commanded by God, Amen. Tuesday after Nativity of the Virgin Mary
\[10 Sept.\] 2) An. 1527.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1119.**

Wittenberg. September 13, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

About the church visitation.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen.* a, fol. 212 and in *Cod. Dessav. A*,

No. 195. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 351; in De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 204 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 88. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1055.

1\) The Bernardine monastery Jngenthal at Buch, one hour from Leisnig,
had the patronage right over the church at Belgern. The income of the
parish there was drawn by a monk at Buch.

2\) The wrong date in De Wette is due to the fact that he assumed
*Nativitatis Mariae: Conceptionis Mariae*.

> To his brother in Christ, Magister Georg Spalatin, the servant of God
> at Altenburg.

Grace and peace! I am sending two copies here for you and Eberhard, so
that you can see that our visitators are not being thanked in an
appropriate manner by those who are so busy with them. I have
deliberately not corrected certain things, so that it would not seem to
be my little sin. If the adversaries seek to gain glory in these orders,
their boast is a miserable one and will not last long. Yes, that is why
we let them console themselves, blow themselves out, and boast with
false hope and joy (as they used to do until now); I like this order
quite well. For since up to now the same thing has not been kept
everywhere, but each one has acted according to his own sense, added to
it, taken away from it, no uniformity can be brought about unless
something is added or taken away from it. But since no one can suffer
his own to be changed in any part, what is it to be wondered at if
complaints or such judgments arise against the visitators? who, out of
necessity, have changed some things of those people, so that they might
nevertheless order the highest principal things in the best way. Read
and you will approve (as I hope), then beseech the Lord for me, I beg
you, that he may tread Satan. Our pestilence is mild, so that it is
hardly the tenth part of the rumor, yes, I hope that it will be stopped
for the sake of Christ, amen. In him be well. Wittenberg, 1527, on the
day before the Exaltation of the Cross \[Sept. 13\]. 3)

Martin Luther.

**No. 1120.**

(Wittenberg.) September 16, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks that the Barefoot Monastery in Wittenberg be established as
a hostel for the poor.

3\) *Crucis* without addition is [always]{.underline} *inventio crucis*,
thus May 2. But this dating is impossible here because of the content, a
proof that therefore also *Crucis* without appendix can be *exaltatio
crucis* (Burkhardt, p. 120).

**1012** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1120. 1121. 1122. **1013**

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 237d; in the Jena
edition (1556), vol. Ill, p. 437; in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p.
761; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 582; in De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 176, with the wrong date: \"May 6,\" and likewise in the Erlangen
edition,

Vol. 53, p. 402.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke John, Elector of Saxony 2c. To Sr. C.
> F, G. himself.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most
Gracious Lord! E. C. F. G.. have recently donated the Barefoot Monastery
there to the Council of Wittenberg for the sick; accordingly, we, the
priest and I, together with the Council, have inspected it and found
that Greger Bürger 1) has obtained from E. C. F. G. the best and most
useful part, as well as the well, tubewells, bathrooms, brewery, and
other common rooms and rooms, without which the other part of the
monastery can be of little use. When we talked to him about it, he
willingly offered to give it away for the benefit of the poor people,
hoping that E. C. F. G. would pardon him with another one.

Because such a monastery, as an old princely burial place, is nowhere
more cheaply used, after both Jews\' and Gentiles\' burial places are
held in great honor, than that it be decreed for God\'s service and poor
people, in whom Christ Himself is preached: for this reason, in addition
to the council, my humble request is that E. C. F. G. may decree and
give such a monastery, together with the room and building of Greger
Bürgers, to our Lord Jesus Christ as a hostel and dwelling place for his
poor members; for he says: \"As you do it to the least of these, you do
it to me\" (Matth. 25,40.); and may also earnestly command the council
to prepare it properly and without demolition, lest the claws of
graspers fall on it and bite it down in time. Hiemit GOtt befohlen,
Amen. Monday after Crucis \[16 Sept\] Anno 1527.

E. C. F. G.

menial servant

> D. Martinus Luther.

1\) The locksmith at Wittenberg.

**No. 1121 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 17, 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

From a Johann Mensarius and from Luther\'s writing to the Christians at
Halle.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in the Zeitschrift für hist.
Theologie 1872, 349 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 90.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother Johann Agricola, the wise
> educator of the youth at Eisleben.

Grace and peace in Christ! Of that Johannes Mensarius of whom you write,
my dear Agricola, I do not know who and where he is, but wherever he is
found, I will see to it that he is sent to you. For I did not want to
hold out the messenger so long. I will write to those at Halle and
refrain from mentioning the name of the bishop, but to conceal this is
not honest, because the authorities, whoever they may be there, do not
care, and let it go unavenged. The bishop may write, and one may believe
that he is innocent, I allow that. But this murder is still not avenged,
nor is the country cleansed of these blood debts (as the Scripture \[Ps.
106, 38\] speaks), but the blood still cries out to heaven \[Gen. 4,
10\]. He may have no knowledge of the deed, but the fact that it
remained unpunished cannot be hidden from him. I pray that you and the
church will not cease to pray for me, so that my Christ may tread Satan
under my feet. On the day of Lamberti \[Sept. 17\] 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1122.**

(Wittenberg.) September 19, 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

About Johann Mensarius, whom Luther recommends as pastor in Hedersleben.
About the plague in Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 351 d;
in De Wette, vol. III, p. 205 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 91.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1056.

**1014**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1122 to 1125.

**1015**

> Your brother Johann Agricola, teacher of the youth in Eisleben, who is
> highly esteemed in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! Behold, here comes that Johann Mensarius,
about whom I answered you yesterday, and promised that I would send him;
therefore, you will take pains that he be sent to those of Hedersleben.
Besides, I have nothing to write about. The clamor about our plague is
much greater than the plague itself, which comes from the flight and the
outrageous fear of our people. This is how Satan plagues us: where he
cannot rule sufficiently according to his pleasure through death, he
rules through fear of death. Christ tread him under our feet, amen. Pray
for us and be well in the Lord with Elsa and your children and all
yours. Thursday after Lamberti \[19 Sept.\] 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1 123.**

Jessen. September 26, 1527.

**Urban Sprecher, pastor at Jessen, to Luther.**

About the occupation of the parish at Elster and the order of the income
of the same by a contract between the old pastor Antonius Thome and the
new one to be appointed, Wolfgang Schwan, which is to be secured by the
Elector.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, lieg. I\^I, p. 74, No. 59. 15.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 120 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 91.

Grace and peace in Christ. Respectable, worthy Doctor! At present,
Wolfgangus Schwan (Suän) of Niemeck (Nymigk) has been staying with me,
and \[has\] indicated to E. A. W. Person that I should make an effort
and make an effort with the pastor of Elster, so that he would be
provided with the parish, as I did, and so far brought that said pastor
in the village, located near Jessen, with the name Ruesdorf, and him
attached desert brands, attracted, which all bears annually eight times
and 2 bushels of grain. In addition, there remain 16 times of grain to
the Elster and its adjoining villages and meadows, which he wants to
leave with the parish, so E. A. W. by my most gracious lord wants to
assure him in writing with letter and seal that \[it\] may be held on
both parts; and after his death shall be given to the parish.

The village will fall back into the parish of the Elster. And because
the above-mentioned priest is well by day, he Wolfgangus shall also
curate the above-mentioned village of Ruesdorf for the rest of his life
and provide it with sermons; so also, if possible, he Wolfgangus death
would sooner depart, that the above-mentioned priest nevertheless keeps
the village with the above-mentioned items and appendices If this can
happen to him and is verified in writing, it shall all be in E. A. W.\'s
hands. A. W. hand. Herewith GOtte commanded. Pray God for me. From
Jessen, Thursday after Mauritii \[26 Sept.\] in the 27th year.

> The name of the priest \[is\] Antonius Thome. Urbanus Sprecher, parish
> priest at Jessen.

**No. 1124.**

(Zerbst.) Sept. 29, 1527.

**The Zerbst City Council to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Since the preacher Niclas Pintzelt, whom Luther had sent to them (see
No. 1055), does not want to remain in office any longer, but wants to
leave at Michaelmas, and the pastor Johann Luckow has died, they ask
Luther to send them another preacher.

Printed in Sintenis\' Denkschrift zum 18. Febr. 1846, p. 28; in Kolde,
*Analecta, p.* 91 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 92.

**No. 1125.**

Wittenberg. September 30, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks for confirmation of the contract between the outgoing and
the incoming pastor at Elster.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ll,* p. 74, No. 59.15.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 121 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 94.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most
Gracious Lord! The matter of the Elster parish has been with me for a
long time. Namely, because Antonius Thome, the current pastor of the
Elster, is now almost incapable and unable, due to his age, to care for
the parish, he has therefore negotiated with some that he wants to cede
and concede to a more capable one, and in this he desires my counsel,
whereupon I have myself admonished them among themselves to come to an
agreement, as then, \[when\] E. C. F. G. from at the

**1016** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1125 to 1129. **1017**

1\) will take place. Since they then desire all this my intercession,
and I am inclined, where it is done so friendly among each other, to
promote, so I ask, E. C. F. G. would confirm such their contract and
assure with writings the two parts; because I respect the good man
Wolfgang Swahn proficient enough, and has the most learned nun for wife,
as is in the country, in Latin and otherwise, that if the man were not
learned, his wife could well make him learned. E. C. F. G. will probably
know how to keep to this, because this Wolfgang, like many others, has
suffered great poverty so far, that he is well tempted with poverty.
Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Monday after Michaelmas
\[Sept. 30\] 1527.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1126.**

Torgau. September 30, 1527.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector orders Luther and Bugenhagen to overlook the visitation
articles discussed at Torgau; and especially to add a statement about
the article on repentance and confession, so that the rejoicing of the
papists can be countered.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji*. fol. 46, 4.
1527. 3. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 122 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
95.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! After you and
the pastor of Wittenberg have recently been here on our council\'s
letter and have overlooked and considered the trade concerning the
visitation, along with others of our council and those we have received,
and it was considered good at that time that the same trade, if it were
to be rewritten, should be sent to you and Pomeran again, so that it
could be further overlooked, we are therefore sending you such trade
herewith. And it is our gracious request that you, in addition to the
priest, read through and move it diligently once more, and what you will
do about it or from it, that you will record and make known to us,
\[so\] we will know how to show ourselves further, so that the trade
will be promoted and then printed.

We also do not want to reassure you, in your gracious opinion, that it
seems to us that the papists should

1\) No. 1123.

2\) Here we have deleted \"to\".

have some joy that this order of the visitation should go out in such a
way as with titles of the repentance report. For they want to interpret
this as if one now wants to fall back from previous teachings to their
abuses. And even if the opinions under the titles mentioned do not
compare with the abuses of the papists, which they have led up to now
because of the report of repentance, we do not consider it unacceptable
that you should have distinguished between the report of repentance and
what is similar under a written title of the papists, and how this order
speaks of it, with an explanation, so that their useless talk would be
countered all the more with it 3) and that the same would be rejected,
and that it would not compare with their opinion. You do us the favor of
recognizing this with grace. Date Torgau, Monday after Michaelmas
\[September 30\] Anno 1527.

**No. 1127.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of September) 1527.

**To the Christians of Halle.**

See St. Louis ed. vol. X, 1960.

**No. 1128.**

(Wittenberg.) (September?) 1527.

**To Joh. Heß and the other preachers at Breslau.**

See St. Louis Edition, vol. X, 2008.

**No. 112S.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. October 1527.

**To Johann Agricola.**

Luther asks him to take in the children of the apothecary Ignatius,
whose wife, the sister of Agricola\'s wife, had died, during the time of
the plague. Of his spiritual temptations.

Handwritten in *Cod, Ratzenb*. Printed in the Zeitschrift für hist.
Theologie 1872, 349 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 99.

> To his exceedingly dear brother in Christ, M. Johann Agricola, the
> faithful servant of God in the education of the souls of the youth at
> Eisleben.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus! This letter to you has caused me a
somewhat sad distress.

3\) \"encountered\" put by us instead of: \"beanget\".

**1018** Letters from the year

1527\. no. 1129. 1130. **1019**

I have forced you out of it. On my advice, Ignatius, your
brother-in-law, comes to you and brings his children, so that they may
be free of danger for a while, and he himself might not come under the
bad reproach of being negligent as a stepfather. ^1)^ For his wife
Hanna, your sister-in-law, the sister of your Elsa, has gone to Christ
through a good and holy end, as befits a woman who was well afflicted in
this life to be called by Christ. You alone are the refuge for these
poor, which God has prepared for these infants and orphans. And we will
gladly assist you with advice and deed, when the bequeathed property is
to be dealt with the Senate and the debts. In the meantime, I beg you,
keep and care for \[the children\] until this little plague passes and
they can return. The LORD will give thee as thou knowest thou art able,
and even abundantly. Yea, thou shalt give thanks that thou art counted
worthy by Christ to serve him in these arms. Comfort your Elsa with the
very good and salutary death of her sister, as you will hear all from
Ignatius himself. I have to deal with the evil spirits under heaven,
who, if they cannot do it by force, hope to ruin by constant persistence
and impiety. But our prayers and those of the brethren will accomplish
what they accomplish by Christ\'s grace, amen. Fare well in the Lord. My
Käthe greets you and your Elsa. Thursday after Michaelmas \[Oct. 3\]
1527.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1130.**

(Wittenberg.) October 6, 1527.

**To Severinus, an Austrian monk.**

Luther admonishes him to give up the monastic life.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 351 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 207
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 100. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1057.

1\) The pharmacist Ignatius had married his wife as the widow of the
town clerk of Wittenberg, M. Andreas Meinhard, who died in 1524.

2\) In the manuscript there is an illegible word here. We have assumed
*libenter.*

To the Austrian Severinus.

God\'s grace and peace through Christ! Here, my dearest Severinus, you
must truly see for yourself what you do; for what better counselor could
you call upon in such a great matter than your own conscience? This will
tell you everything in your ear: first, how highly you should regard
Jerome\'s opinion of the monastic life in the letter to Heliodorus,^3)^
, then your weakness, then your old and helpless father; second, how
highly you should regard it, even if the mob, after its sacrilege,
should say that you have thrown off the garment pleasing to God;
Finally, what is a right profession, and again, whether it is not to be
considered the greatest danger that you, against your conscience, so
often say mass in such an ungodly manner, yes, crucify your God, Christ?
For what do you want to pretend here, wretched man? then, why do you not
rather consider it an ungodliness, if you stay longer in this Babylon,
than a presumption, if you go out? For, if you want to hear me speak
more expansively to you: first of all, in this matter I give nothing at
all to Jerome, since I see, although he is a great man in many other
things, that here, however, he has had absolutely no Christian judgment
in regard to the monastic life and the celibate state. For he who dared
to compare the monastic life with baptism was completely nonsensical and
also lacked common sense, so that one would like to say that it was
rather a clod than a *beast who had* gossiped about such things. How,
then, will you believe Jerome, who speaks such ungodly things against
God, who commands that parents be held in the highest honor immediately
after him? And wilt thou rather hear Jerome, who so often errs, who so
often lacks, in short, a man, than God Himself? Therefore, go now and
hold for it, as Jerome writes, that one must trample parents underfoot
in order to break out into the. To break out into the desert. Thus

3\) *Hieran. ep.* 14. in *Misgne, Patrol. lat.* XXII, 348. The passages
attracted by Luther are § 2: *Recordare tyrocinii tui diem, quo Christo
in baptismate consepultus, in sarcamenti verba jurasti: pro nomine ejus
non te matri parciturum esse, non patri; unb per calcatum perge patrem*.

**1020**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1130.

**1021**

then there will also be no weakness in this piece that it could be
considered against the Lord. For thus says the Lord to Paul in the
Epistles to the Corinthians \[2 Cor. 12:9\], \"My power is mighty in the
weak.\" But so that even your helpless father is not to be esteemed
higher than God\'s honor, you know the word of Christ in Matthew and
Lucas \[Matth. 10, 37. Luc. 14, 26.\], that he who loves his parents
more is not worthy of him, he cannot be his disciple. Moreover, if some
have unseemly cast off the garment, let them see for themselves. But if
you kept yours,^1)^ since perhaps God\'s word is not so unknown to you,
what would that be other than that you nevertheless wanted to keep up
hypocrisy longer with these larvae? For if everything does not deceive
me, then even if the whole world contradicts you in this, only your
conscience will retain the victory against the judgment of the whole
world. I can be deceived, but God, who searches the hearts, never ever.

But as far as the calling is concerned, I would also advise you to wait
for the will of the Lord; for this was that I did not want you to be
called, but rather to be called out in this way, unless by the will of
God, by the people calling, whom you should serve in the office of the
Word. But now, does not what you oppose, already by yourself, whether
you want it or not, reveal that you remain in the monastic life with a
not so good conscience after the gospel has been revealed? For how? then
you will say mass longer, and meanwhile, if it pleases GOtte, you refuse
to be a preacher of the divine word? What, I ask you, can you say here
with a sure conscience? Hereafter you see what presumption it could be
considered, if you take off the monk, who is never commanded by God,
never appointed, never indicated, never described. Read Isaiah, cap. 29
\[v. 13.\], Matth. 15 \[v. 8. f.\], Marc. 7 \[v. 6. f.\], for there you
will see how high human statutes are to be held, and yet we are still in
such filthy muck.

1\) Instead of: *Tuum vero* we have: *Tuam vero, si retineres*. It is
obvious that a supplement is necessary.

Here, therefore, I wish that Christ would be completely gracious to you
and make clear to you everything that is still in darkness there, for I
hope that something of the splendor and the will and the goodness of God
has enlightened you. In short, this is my opinion: Above all, God must
be called upon so that you can completely surrender to His words and
will, for in this way you will counsel yourself and your father through
faith. For thou knowest the passage in the Acts of the Apostles \[Cap.
16, 30. f.\], that Paul said to the jailer, who asked him the way to
salvation, \"Believe on the LORD JEsum, for so shalt thou and all thy
house be saved.\" For what wilt thou fear, that either thou or thy
father shall die of hunger, that believeth on GOD? You will sooner see
heaven fall than believers should lack food, for you know the
exceedingly rich promise of Christ, Matt. 6:33: \"Seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you.\" What now the Lord has given me so far, I will plead
\[for you\], that he deliver you as soon as possible from this monastic
life, from the quite proper, all-deceptive larva of hypocrisy. For what
shall I flatter here? what shall I say pleasant things? did not Christ
command, Matt. 24:15 f., \"When ye therefore shall see the abomination
of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, that it shall stand in
the holy place, then let them which are in the land of Judaea flee unto
the mountains\"? Do we not already see that abomination of desolation?
and yet you would still have misgivings about fleeing from there? But
nevertheless consult the Lord seriously before you leave the monastic
life. For if thou believest not Christ, who, as thou knowest, saith
\[John 14:6\], \"I am the way, and the truth, and the life,\" more than
the whole world, I would (as they say) wash a brick, though I wrote much
more. Fare well in the Lord and pray for us. In haste. On the Sunday
after Remigius \[Oct. 6\] 1527. 2) Yours, Martin Luther.

2\) Here Aurifaber and De Wette still have the addition: \"1.
*Octobris*\", the date of Remigiustag. This does not come from Luther.

**1022** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1131. 1132. 1133. **1023**

**No. 1131.**

(Wittenberg.) October 8, 1527.

**To Michael Stiesel in Tolleth.**

Of the history of Leonhard Kaiser sent to Luther (see No. 1086) and the
writings of Erasmus, Zwingli and Oecolampad. He sends him the Latin
translation of the *Octonarius* (119th Psalm).

Manuscript at Copenhagen in the old royal library, 1393, fol. 128 and at
Dresden in *Cod. Solger*, C 351, fol. 35 b. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 353; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 209 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 103. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1060, - The Erl. Briefw., that this
letter is found in the Wittenberg edition, vol. IX, p. 243 d, is
erroneous; this proof should rather have been placed with the letter to
Stiefel of Oct. 22, where it is missing.

Grace and peace! My dear Michael, I received your letter together with
Leonhard Kaiser\'s history. Although another one, which has been printed
elsewhere, has preceded it, one will nevertheless make an effort that
yours will also be printed again, as much as we think good. The Erasmus
viper has concocted two hyperaspistes 1) or rather hyperaspides against
me, which are truly viper-poisonous and over-viper-poisonous; then
Zwingli and Oecolampad do not stop either; I will see what Christ will
give against them. But since you write that my booklet has been snatched
from you, I will not send it, but I wonder who has caught the one I sent
to you; but I will send the octonary 2) of David. For I have been
suffering almost three months, not so much in body as in spirit, so that
I have written nothing or little; so Satan has shaken me in his sieve.
Please pray to the Lord for me, that He may uphold me, as He does. My
Käthe sends you her love. You may send many greetings to your mistress
from us. Farewell in Christ. October 8, 1527.

> Martin Luther.

1\) The second book of the *Hyperaspistes diatribae* appeared in
September 1527, after the first part had already been published in 1526.
See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 67.

2\) That is, the 119th Psalm. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. V, 1252, note.

**No. 1132.**

Wittenberg. October 9, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks for the employment of Stephan Gratz as pastor at Schwanbeck.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, p. 108. 41. Printed in
the Leipzig Supplement, 48; in Walch, vol. XXI, 217; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 210 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 408.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia, Margrave of Meissen, my
> most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The castle owner of Beltitz 3) has asked me to prescribe this
letter pointer, Stephan Gretz,^4)^ , so that he may obtain the vacated
parish of Schwanbeck, as his letter herewith indicates. Because he has
been the chaplain at Beltitz, where he is a fine priest, I believe he
will not have an unfit chaplain. And because the people themselves ask
for him, even though he is close to Beltitz, I think it should go well:
therefore I ask, as I am asked, that E. C. F. G. would graciously
command him such a parish, so that the people no longer remain without a
pastor. It is a poor parish and a little house should have come from it,
which E. C. F. G. could also order, and what more justice belongs to it,
to bring back to it. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg,
Wednesday Dionysius \[Oct. 9\] 1527.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1133.**

(Wittenberg.) October 12, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2185.

3\) On October 2, Nicolaus Luterot, the Belzig castle owner, wrote to
Luther in the name of the judges and the community of the village of
\"Schwaneburg\" and asked for Stephan Gratz as pastor.

4\) In the album: *Steffanus de Aschesrsleben*, immatriculirt on Nov.
16, 1518.

**1024** Letters from the year

1527\. no. 1134. 1135. **1025**

**No. 1134.**

(Wittenberg.) October 19, 1527.

**To Justus Jonas in Nordhausen. ^1)^**

From Erasmus\' Hyperaspistes. Luther\'s state of health is not yet
satisfactory. About the plague in Wittenberg.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 353 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 212
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 105. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1061.

Grace and peace through Christ! I wish you luck, best Jonas, because of
your retraction, in which you finally paint that Erasmus of yours with
his right colors, the adder, full of deadly spines, rightly recognize,
whom you praised before in many respects. 2) I am glad that you have
profited so much by reading the One Hyperaspistes and have changed your
judgment about him. And when I read this part of your letter to my wife,
she immediately said: \"Has not theur man become a toad? Behold!\" She
is also pleased that you agree with me about Erasmus. You realize, my
dear Jonas, that those who prescribed that no one should be praised
before his end were certainly right. But enough of that.

The Lord has not yet completely restored me to my former health, indeed,
according to the counsel of His good will, He leaves me in the hands of
Satan\'s angel to be beaten and attacked; but in the meantime the
helping and protecting Lord does not elude me. In addition, two days ago
I had a severe pain in my gums (as it seems), which troubled me very
much in the beginning, but now I have it to a lesser extent; therefore,
do not stop praying to the Lord for us. Hear this about our plague; in
the hospital, during the whole time of the plague, not more than fifteen
died, while in total about a hundred were brought there. Then, out of 40
people who were treated by M. Bohemus, no more than

1\) Jonas had gone to his hometown Nordhausen, where he stayed because
of the plague from mid-August 1527 until the end of January 1528. As
Jonas wrote to Lang on Oct. 17, Luther had already written two letters
to him there; they are lost.

2\) Earlier, Jonas had been a great admirer of Erasmus, and in 1519 had
even gone from Erfurt to Antwerp to see him, had also often praised him
against Luther (cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 415, § 6), but now he
changed his judgment.

Only six of them died. Thus, even in the midst of death, the Lord is
with us as Savior and Salvation. We pray with all our heart and mind to
God and the Father of mercies to take away this plague from us for the
glory of His name, so that our enemies will not rejoice over us. And
also dll not cease to pray, especially since you see these fruits of
prayer, that out of such a large! Number of disease cases so few die.
Fare well. You will greet the child 3) with many kisses instead of me
and my little house, who today has learned to poop alone with bent knees
in every corner, yes, he has indeed pooped with extraordinary busyness
in every corner. He would have told me more about you if he had had
time, because he was soon bathed and went to sleep. Don\'t be surprised
that I write about pooping, another time I will write about other
things. My Käthe sends you her love and asks that you pray for her,
since she will soon be in childbirth. ^4)^ Christ be with her. One thing
I want is that it not be hidden from you, that you see that our prayers
are not in vain. Bohemus lost only eight patients out of 48; there were
only 15 deaths in the hospital during the whole plague period, although
over a hundred who were brought in and came in were lying there, so that
you can see that Christ hears those who pray. This is certain and true.
Joh. Weber has been speechless and without hope for five days now, but
his Dorothea, who lay down with him with little hope for life, is
beginning to revive and will live. Greetings to your Käthe and all. On
Saturday after Lucas \[Oct. 19\] 1527. Martin Luther.

**No. 1135**

(Wittenberg.) October 22, 1527.

**To Michael Stiefel in Tollest.**

Luther informs him that in addition to the history of Kaiser sent by
Stiefel, he has also received Kaiser\'s own manuscripts through his
relative, which will be published shortly. Luther complains about his
temptations and praises Leonhard Kaiser.

3\) In the text: *tuum Dictative,* which Walch gave in this way; we do
not know any better.

4\) This did not occur until December 10.

**1026**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1135 to 1137.

**1027**

Manuscript at Copenhagen in the old royal library, 1393, fol. 129 and at
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod.*

*Aug.* 11. 10, fol. 235d. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 354d; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 213 s. and in Er, langer Briefwechsel, vol.Vl, p.
107. German in the Wittenberg edition, vol. IX, p. 243d; in the Jena
(1556), vol. Ill, p. 455; in Walch, vol. XXI, 211 and (duplicate) Col.
1063, and in the Historie von Kaisers Märtyrertod in the Altenburger,
vol. Ill, p. 780 and in the Leipziger, vol. XIX, p. 577. - All
references to the locations in the German editions are missing from the
Erl. Briefw., with the exception of \"Walch, XXI, 1063.\"

Grace and peace! I have, my dear Michael, received your histories from
Leonhard Kaiser, but in the meantime also from his uncle all manuscripts
of Leonhard himself. I will now publish them soon, Christ grant his
grace. By the way, pray for me, who am being beaten hard with fists by
Satan\'s angel, that Christ may not abandon me. Oh, over me wretched,
who am so unlike Leonhard: I am an eloquent preacher, he a mighty doer
of the word. Who will make me worthy to overcome Satan and depart from
this life not with a twofold spirit, but only with half of his spirit?
Praise be to God, who has shown us unworthy ones, among so many
abominations, at least this One glorious sound play of His grace, so
that it may not seem as if He had abandoned us altogether. Pray for me,
Brother Michael, Christ grant that we too may follow Leonhard. He is not
only called a king, but rightly an emperor (Caesar), because he defeated
him whose power is not equal to any other on earth. He is not only a
priest, but also a high priest and a right priest, because he gave his
body to God for such a pleasing, living and holy sacrifice (Rom. 12,1.).
Yes, he is also rightly called Leonhard, which is lion strength;
certainly he was a strong and undaunted lion; all names point to his
fortune. He first consecrated and fulfilled his family name.

My almost stammering Hänschen thanks your mistress and sends her
greetings; I and my Käthe also pray for her that she will be well in
Christ together with her children. Pommer loves you very much and sends
you his greetings. Fare well in Christ. Tuesday after Lucä \[Oct. 22\]
1527. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1136.**

(Wittenberg.) October 27, 1527.

**To Melanchthon in Jena.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2630, annex, no. 121.

**No. 1137.**

(Wittenberg.\> 27 October 1) 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther recommends M. Augustin Himmel as preacher in Neustadt a. O.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Ll, pag. 161, No. 114. 1.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 124 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 142. .

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Magister Philippus has written to me from Jena that I should take
pains to notify E. C. F. G. of a preacher in the new town, and he
himself calls Magister Augustinus Himmel(Hymel) and considers him
capable there. If he pleases E. C. F. G., then I ask that E. C. F. G.
will appoint him there, and have the writing or letters brought forth
with this messenger, or otherwise, because he is a fine, quiet, sedate,
learned, pious man, and is well tried and known with us in Wittenberg,
and now provides the preaching ministry at the castle there. I would
have sent him to Torgau myself, but he is currently under arrest and
cannot leave because his wife is ill. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Sunday
after Crispini \[Oct. 27\] 1527.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1137.**

Wittenberg. November 1, 1527.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther reported that his house was full of sick people.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 344b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 216
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. III. German in Walch, vol. XXl, 1047.

1\) Crispinus is October 25, therefore the Sunday after it is October
27. Burkhardt and the Erlangen correspondence have the date: \"December
1\". The latter later recognized this error and corrected it, Erl.
Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 347, note 1.

**1028** Letters from the year

No. 1137. 1138. **1029**

Grace and peace! As it pleases the Lord, so it happens, my dear Amsdorf,
that I, who used to comfort everyone, am in need of all comfort myself.
This one thing I ask, and you will ask it with me, that my Christ do
with me what pleases him, only may he protect me so that I do not become
ungrateful and an enemy of him whom I have so far preached and
worshipped with such great zeal and fervor, even though I have meanwhile
offended him 1) with many and great sins. Satan desires that Job be
given to him anew \[Job, Cap. 2\], and to sift Peter together with the
brethren (Luc. 22, 31.); but Christ deigns to say to him \[Job 2, 6.\],
\"Spare his life,\" and to say to me \[Ps. 35, 3.\], \"I am thy help,\"
as I still hope that he will not be eternally angry at my sins. I wish
to answer the Sacramentarians, but if I do not become stronger in
spirit, I will not be able to do anything, I will keep your copy, but I
will return it in its time.

In my house it has begun to be a hospital. Hanna, Augustin\'s 2) wife,
has had the plague internally, but is getting better. Margaretha Mochin
3) has frightened us with a suspicious ulcer and other signs, although
she is also getting better. I fear very much for my Käthe, who is close
to giving birth, because my little son has also been ill for three days,
does not eat anything, and is in a bad way. They say it is the eruption
of the teeth, and it is believed that both are in great danger. For the
wife of Capellan Georg,^4)^ who is also close to childbirth, has been
seized by the plague, and they are now trying to find a way to save the
child. May the Lord Jesus mercifully help her. So there are internal
struggles, internal fears, and even hard ones, Christ is haunting us. It
is a consolation that we oppose the raging Satan, namely, that we at
least have the

1\) The reading *non sine* is so offensive to us that we have adopted
*sane* instead. Even to your old translator it did not seem right.

2\) Augustin Schurs, professor of medicine in Wittenberg.

3\) Margaretha von Mochau from Segrehn, probably a sister of
Carlstadt\'s wife.

4\) Rörer. His wife, Bugenhagen\'s sister, died on Nov. 2.

Word of God to preserve the souls of those who believe, however much he
may devour the bodies. Therefore, may you commend us to the brethren and
to yourself, that you pray for us, that we may suffer the hand of the
LORD valiantly, and overcome Satan\'s power and wiles, whether by death
or by life, amen. Wittenberg, on the Day of All Saints \[Nov. 1\], in
the tenth year after the indulgence came to ground, in memory of which
we drink at this hour, comforted on both sides. 1527.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1138.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. November 1527.

**To Justus Jonas in Nordhausen.**

News about the dead and sick in Wittenberg.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 356 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 217
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 113. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1065.

> To Doctor Justus Jonas, who is in hiding in Nordhausen.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I really have nothing to write about, my
dear Jonas, I who can hardly breathe because of restlessness and
pusillanimity of spirit. I was almost lost on Saturday, when the wife of
Capellan George had a miscarriage, and she herself immediately followed
the child and died, and that of a twofold death, first through the pain
of childbirth, then poisoned to the utmost by the poison of the plague;
and Christ heard neither our tears nor our prayers for her preservation
at that time. But this gave some comfort that she went to Christ in a
very good end, that is, full of faith and spirit. Since everyone was
moved by terror, I took the priest and his family to my home. My Käthe
is still strong in faith and healthy in body. My little house has been
ill for eight days with a doubtful illness (as I almost suspect \[of the
illness\] of this time), but they say it is the eruption of the teeth,
and so they believe. According to the Capellan\'s wife, no death
occurred yesterday or today.

**1030** Letters from the year 1527. 1138. 1139. 1140. **1031**

Christ grant that this may be the end of the plague. In the fishermen\'s
suburb the plague has already ceased, and there the weddings are
beginning anew, and they are resuming their amusements, but nothing
certain can be promised. For eight days ago the plague had almost ceased
in the city, so that there was hardly a death every day, but suddenly,
as the air changed, within two days there were twelve deaths in one day,
although most of them were children. Augustin\'s wife lay eight days and
longer with an internal ulcer, and nothing other than the plague can be
suspected, but she is recovering. In the same way, Margaretha Mochin is
lying down with me; they say it is a disease of her rule, but they fear
it is the plague. So, if you look at the suspicion, I am in the midst of
the plague in my house, but if you look at the matter, it is life and
salvation, albeit a contested one. I will have 1) commended us to your
prayers. Dorothea\'s husband 2) has died, she is in any case out of
danger, although an ulcer remains stubbornly unresolved, neither
receding nor ripening. My Käthe sends you her regards and explains why
you did not come to visit us, since there is peace within our borders.
Greetings from Pommer, who today took a purgative to purify his body
(*cacator purgandus factus*). Christ be with us, Amen. 1527 on Monday
after All Saints\' Day (Nov. 4). Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1139.**

(Wittenberg.) November 7, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

About the visitation and Luther\'s situation in Wittenberg.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
36. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 23.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 357; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 219 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 114. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1066 f.

1\) In the Erlangen Briefw. (due to a printing error) *non* instead of
*nos*.

2\) Johann Weber; see No. 1134.

> To the highly venerable man in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> extremely faithful bishop of the church in Zwickau, his superior in
> the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! The visitation that has begun will not be
abandoned, my dear Nicolaus, as far as I have understood, so let us have
good hope, even though the adversaries may say whatever they want. We
hope that the plague will end here, although it plagues us in many ways:
sometimes it rages, sometimes it is mild. We are in various fears: I,
through my own affliction, then through the care of my wife, who is
about to give birth; you pray for us. I have had the plague in my house
three times. My son has been ill for more than eight days, that he has
not eaten anything and has been nourished by drinks alone, so that I
despaired; now he is beginning to feel better. I have been troubled for
many months now by restlessness and faintheartedness of spirit, since
Christ wills it so; you pray that my faith may not cease \[Luc. 22,
32\]. My Käthe sends I don\'t know what money to buy linen for it; I
didn\'t want to burden you with this effort. Pommer, who lives with me,
sends you his best regards, not for his sake but for mine, even though
the plague has taken the wife of the chaplain in the parish, so that he
may be the comrade of my loneliness. My Käthe also sends you her
greetings and commends herself to your prayers in Christ Jesus.
Farewell, dearest brother. Thursday after All Saints\' Day \[November
7\] 1527. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1140.**

(Wittenberg.) November 9, 1527.

**To Andreas Kaugisdorf in Eilenburg.**

Luther admonishes him to be compatible with his fellow officers.

Handwritten in *Cod Jen.* B 24. u. Printed in De Wette, vol. Ill, L 219
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 115.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I have also written to you before, 3) my
dear An

3\) No. 1082.

**1032** Letters from the year 1527. No. 1140 to 1143. **1033**

dreas, about the question between you and the preacher Juno at the
church in front of the castle, so that peace and love among you would be
strengthened. Now I am compelled to write again because it has been
reported to me that you are not on good terms with M. Aegidius either,
and that complaints have arisen among you, especially against you, as if
you were acting in a less than friendly and brotherly manner with him,
charging him with I do not know what kind of spitefulness. But you, my
dear brother, who know the thoughts of Satan, since he seeks to arouse
infinite evil from small causes, and breaks in by seeking whom he may
devour, do not despise the weaker brethren\'s complaints or offence, but
rather see to it for Christ\'s sake, Rather, for the sake of Christ, see
to it that you surpass them in kindness and love and thereby overcome
them if there is any weakness or offense in them, so that I will not be
so compelled to hear complaints against you, as you know and can know
from the holy Scriptures through the grace of Christ even without me. I
already have enough to complain about, so that your disagreements do not
plague me as well. Do so, my dear brother, that we may rather rejoice
over you in Christ, who is with you with his peace, amen. On the
Saturday after St. Leonard \[Nov. 9\] 1527.

Your M. L.

**No. 1141.**

(Wittenberg.) (November 11, 1527, or shortly thereafter.)

**To Justus Jonas in Nordhausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2645, annex, no. 130.

**No 1142.**

(Wittenberg.) November 12, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request for employment of a displaced person as a pastor.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, N 108. 41. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 48, No. 58; in Walch, vol. XXI, 218; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 223, with the wrong date: \"November 19,\" and likewise in
the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 410.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke John, Elector of Saxony 2c. To Sr. C.
> F. G. Handen.

*Suppl. Mart. Luth.*

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Here He Werner Stechau, a fine man, who had recently been granted
the parish of Lüttau by E. C. F. G., has agreed with He Peter Ehlen, so
that he ceded the previous parish of Buchholz and Ludersdorf, and until
E. C. F. G.\'s order grant him and leave it. Now, however, the
aforementioned Werner has been driven out of the market for the sake of
the Gospel, and has had to leave everything to his own people in a
somewhat respectable manner, as a canon of Brandenburg, and thus live in
misery and poverty: my humble request is that E. C. F. G. would pardon
him with the same parish; for who knows what he would still be useful
for? He would be worth much better, but because nothing else is
available, he must suffer hardship until \[it\] becomes better. Hiemit
GOtt befohlen, Amen. Tuesday after Martinmas \[Nov. 12\] 1527.

E. C. F.G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1143.**

(Wittenberg.) , November 17, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther gives thanks for comfort received.

Handwritten at Zurich in Simler\'s collection, vol. 19. Printed by
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 357 f.; by De Wette, vol. III, p. 222 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 119. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1068.

Grace and peace in Christ! So may our Christ comfort you again, my dear
Nicolaus, as you comfort me. I, who am a sinner, give thanks to my Lord
that he has not yet allowed Satan to fulfill his will on me, no matter
how much he has sought to do so with strange and great power and
cunning. You pray that Christ may prevail in me to the end against his
attempt. Indeed, I suspect that not some common devil, but the chief of
the devils himself has risen against me, so great is his power.

**1034**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1143. 1144. 1145.

**1035**

is his power and wisdom, which is exceedingly armed with Scripture, so
that if I do not hang on the words of another, my knowledge of the
Scriptures is not sufficient. I say this so that you may pray for me all
the more, and when the fall comes, you may know the depth of Satan (as
they say) \[Revelation 2:24\]. My Käthe began to feel contractions
today; Christ help the woman in childbirth, amen. On the Sunday after
Martinmas \[Nov. 17\] 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1144.**

(Wittenberg.) November 21, 1527.

**To Friedrich Pistorius, Abbot in Nuremberg.**

About a certain Joh. Hofmann, against whom Luther, on Pistorius\'
recommendation, declared himself willing to do all favors.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 358; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 224 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 120. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1069.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu! You make my little one too great against
you, my dear father; God would that I could do something worthy of your
so great gratitude and love. Hofmann 1) did not come to me, but stayed
in Jena and sent me a letter. Therefore, I do not quite understand what
you have instructed him to do; but if he will come and talk to me, it
shall be done. For I too will do nothing better than to serve you and
men like you in Christ, if I am worthy and able to do so, not only out
of reverence for my Christ who reigns in you, but also because of my
need, so that through your prayers and your faith I may be helped in my
trials. Therefore, I commend myself to your holy prayers and those of
your brethren. This recently; the hurry of the carriage compels me to
break off, at other times, God willing, more. Thursday after Elizabeth
\[Nov. 21\] 1527. Martin Luther.

1\) Brother Johann Hofmann from Nuremberg, an Augustinian, was first
immatriculated in Wittenberg in Nov. 1520 and came to Schwabach as a
pastor in 1524. With the support of Pistorius, he went to Wittenberg
again to continue his studies, where he became a master on Sept. 15,
1528.

**No. 1145.**

(Wittenberg.) November 22, 1527.

**All Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Of Luther\'s books to be sent, of his literary works, and of the plague.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 3585; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 224
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 121. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1069.

Grace and peace! Behold, I break silence, my dearest Wenceslaus, and
what is it to wonder if I remain silent? By the mercy of God, I am quite
well in what I live according to the body, but what I am or do according
to the spirit, I myself do not know for sure. What the world does, the
pope, the emperor, the kings, I care little for; I sigh for Christ and
his grace to blessedness. I have certainly ordered my Wolfgang to send
to Endrissus 2) and to you the books that you wanted; and if that does
not prevent this letter from being delivered at the very hour in which I
received yours, I have again ordered him to have them ready. But I mean
to have sent thee anew the whole of Genesis 3), and I am almost certain
but I send it again altogether, or will send it. The Zechariah I have
almost finished. 4) I answer the enthusiasts once again with the
confession of my faith. 5) Satan is bent on it and would like me to
write nothing more, but to go with him to hell; Christ tread him down,
amen. You also pray for me, my dear brother. There would be no
pestilence among us if the rumor that we are suffering from the
pestilence did not give us a bad name; so kindly does Christ deal with
us in a wonderful way. About 15 have died in the hospital, while more
than 100 sick people have been brought in; most of the patients have
died.

2\) See. No. 1098 - Aurifaber reads *Bidisso* instead of *Endrisso*.

3\) St. Louis Edition, Vol. Ill, 1, the sermons on Genesis 1.

4\) It came out at the end of Dec. 1527. See St. Louis edition, vol.
XIV, 1768.

5\) Luther\'s so-called Great Confession of the Lord\'s Supper, St.
Louis edition, vol. XX, 894. It appeared in March 1528.

**1036** Letters from the year 1527.

No. 1145 to 1148. **1037**

The people who died are children. My wife is near her delivery, pray for
her. Fare well in your Lord with your own. Friday after Elizabeth \[22
Nov\] Anno 1527.

**No. 1146.**

(Wittenberg.) November 27, 1527.

**To Eberhard Brisger in Altenburg.**

Luther gives thanks for the consolation he received, asks for further
intercession in his temptations, and gives several messages.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Gud*. 214, fol. 635, and in two other
incomplete copies. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 359; in Schütze,
vol. Ill, p. 235, incomplete; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 225 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 122. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1070 f.

> Semem brother in Christo, M. Eberhard Brisger, the exceedingly
> faithful evangelist in Altenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu! You comfort me through your letter, my
dear Eberhard, for which I thank you. The Lord comfort you again in due
time, but I add this one thing, that you may pray earnestly to the Lord
for me, because I am weak, that I may not be forsaken full of Christ. I
know that I need to be challenged so that I may be humbled and God may
be glorified in me, but that I may not succumb. I truly believe that
Satan is raging against me, for I have done and said and written many
things against him, but this is my comfort, when I firmly believe that
these very things have pleased the Lord and His anointed. So I am tossed
about in the midst of these two vile princes and crushed quite
miserably. But I still hope to please my Christ, even though I have done
and do many things that are Satan\'s, for he is merciful and forgiving;
but whatever I sin against Satan is done for Christ; I am not sorry, nor
do I ask forgiveness, since he is a murderer and the father of lies.

Therefore, I command myself to your prayers and those of the brethren,
all the more so since you yourself recognize that I am seriously desired
by Satan, who rages with unbelievable anger and fury, which I am very
much compelled to feel.

It is to be marveled at how he pretends to Christ Himself (2 Cor.
11,14.), yes, to God Himself (to say nothing of an angel of light), and
uses all his powers against me to destroy me. But Christ has still
faithfully preserved me, who will also preserve me to the end, so that
the enemy will not boast of his power, amen. In Him, be at ease with
your Margaretha. Bruno\'s son has also died. ^1)^ A son Johannes was
born to your father-in-law, and I have become his godfather. My Käthe is
expecting her birth at any hour. Pray for us. Augustin\'s wife has
recovered. Margaretha Mochin has barely escaped death. 2) On Wednesday
after Catharina \[Nov. 27\] 1527. Martin Luther.

**No. 1147.**

Torgau. November 28, 1527.

**To Johann Brenz in Schwäbisch-Hall.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2632, annex, no. 122.

**No. 1148.**

(Wittenberg.) November 29, 1527.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther asks him to return to Wittenberg and gives news from there.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 3595; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 241
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 126. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1072.

Grace and peace in the Lord! That you pray for me, my dear Jonas, and do
this diligently, you are doing a thing that is necessary for me poor
sacrifice of Christ \[1 Cor. 4:13\], again I pray for you from the
bottom of my heart that Christ may have mercy on you, for I hear that
you are again heavily afflicted with the stone. I would almost advise
you to return to us in the near future, since our

1\) This news makes the date of this letter doubtful, since Luther
writes in the postscript to the letter of Nov. 29 to Jonas that Bruno\'s
Söhnlein is dying. Perhaps this letter is also from the same date, and
made from *Feria* VI: *Feria* IV.

2\) This sentence is only in two manuscripts. This passage seems to
indicate that this letter is later than letter No. 1148.

**1038** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1148. 1149. 1150. **1039**

The plague has been alleviated by Christ\'s grace, at least our
inhabitants are resuming weddings and are beginning to be safe, as if
the plague had been overcome. Then, after the death of Ignatius\' wife
and John, Dorothea\'s husband, your region has remained almost pure, as
far as the parish and the market. May the Lord counsel you to do what
pleases Him and is beneficial to you, amen. Give my best regards to your
Käthe and little Justus. ^1)^ Augustin\'s wife has come back. If
Margaretha Mochin gets through, she will get through with difficulty,
but we hope she will stay alive. She has been down for about 7 weeks, is
deprived of hearing and talks with much difficulty. My Käthe is
expecting her birth at any hour, Christ be merciful to her, amen. On the
day before St. Andrew\'s Day \[Nov. 29, 1527\] Martin Luther.

2\) We still have your house clean, as well as the whole Coswig area,
therefore, since you are absent, I have put the wife of the other
Capellan Johann 3) and her children in as your hostess, because this
woman was extremely distraught about the departure of her lost collegiun
4) so that she could not be comforted in any other way; but the
Capellans themselves both remain in the parish and sleep there.
Therefore, see to it that you interpret this necessary audacity of mine,
which interferes with your affairs, for the best, but with the promise
that if the plague should also affect any of them there, I will bring
them back to the parish as soon as possible. So may Christ make you
happy in Nordhausen with a Hanseatic League, while we enjoy yours here
in this distress. Our Bruno\'s son will hardly survive today, the little
child is fighting with death. Farewell in Christ.

1\) Justus Jonas the Younger, born Dec. 3, 1525, beheaded in Copenhagen
June 28, 1567 (cf. *Eberi Calend*. 219. 385). (Erl. Briefw.)

2\) The Erlangen correspondence assumes, because the date of No. 1146,
which is attested by several manuscripts, seems more certain to him than
that of this postscript, that Aurifaber arbitrarily added this
postscript, which may have been a piece of an incomplete letter written
on Nov. 26 or 27.

3\) Joh. coat.

4\) of Mrs. Rörers.

**No. 1149.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of November 1527.)

**To Carlstadt.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 324.

**No. 1140.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. December 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for a pastor imprisoned for wrong judgment in a matrimonial
case.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 238 ; in the Jena
edition (1556), vol. Ill, p. 438; in the Altenburg edition, vol. Ill, p.
808; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p.553; in Walch, vol. XXl, 218;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 242 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.
413.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn 2c. E. C. F. G. have
had the priest of N. 5) sentenced to N. because of his judgment, which
he rendered carelessly in a matrimonial matter. But because he confesses
his guilt, as it is not well done, and thus humbly offers himself for
correction, he is worthy of forgiveness and grace. So I humbly ask that
E. C. F. G. be merciful to the poor man and release him, considering
that he is a good and honest friend here in Wittenberg, for the sake of
which reputation, admonished by such a serious punishment, he will
doubtless take better care from now on. Satan has easily led a man into
disgrace and dishonor, especially those who are to preside over others,
as we well know every day. Therefore, it is no wonder that he has also
hurried this good pastor with this matter and led him into disgrace. E.
C. F. G. will, I hope, graciously stand against him. Hereby commanded to
God, Amen. Monday after St. Andrew\'s \[Dec. 2\] Anno 1527.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

5\) It seems to have been the priest in Düben, of whom *Manlius, loc.
comm. Coll.*, p. 338, who was imprisoned at Torgau.

**1040**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1151 to 1154.

**1041**

**No 1 151.**

Wittenberg. December 5, 1527.

**To the Zerbst City Council.**

After the departure of Nicolaus Pintzelt, Luther promises to send
another preacher. - This letter is the answer to No. 1124.

The original is in the Rathsarchiv at Zerbst. Printed in Sintenis\'
Denkschrift 1846, p. 30; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 83 and in
the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 172.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> dear gentlemen and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable and wise dear lords and friends! I
have heard that E. I have heard that E. W. has requested me through your
skilful mayor and friend of the town council. Therefore, I am willing to
serve E. W. and the common people of Zerbst 1) and to send, if I can, a
preacher or pastor, who will teach and sit as much as possible. Please
be patient for a short time. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg,
Thursday after St. Andrew\'s \[Dec. 5\] 1527. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1152.**

Berlin. December 7, 1527.

**Margaretha Blankenfeld 2) to Luther.**

She reported to Luther that her daughter Catharina, wife of Wolf
Hornung, wished with all her heart to live together again with her
husband, from whom she had been deprived by Joachim I, Elector of
Brandenburg.

The original is in the State Archives at Marburg. Printed in Kolde,
\^nuleotu, p. 92 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 143.

1\) Here we have deleted a superfluous \"I\".

2\) Margaretha Blankenfeld was the widow of the mayor of Berlin, Thomas
Blankenfeld, who died in 1504. Her daughter Catharina was married to
Wolf Hornung, a respectable citizen of Cologne on the Spree, but lived
with the Elector Joachim I in adulterous relations. During a dispute
about this, Wolf stabbed his wife with a knife, therefore he had to
swear an oath of secrecy and leave the territory of the Elector on March
22, 1525. He stayed for some time in Mansfeld and fed himself with his
own work. Finally the conscience of the unfaithful woman stirred and she
presented her case to Luther. The latter had Hornung summoned to
Wittenberg, informed him of his wife\'s request for readmission, and
persuaded him to write to his wife that God may lead her to the
realization of her guilt; if she knows a means to get away from the
tyrant,

> To the highly esteemed, worthy and respectable Mr. Martino Luther, the
> divine Scripture Doctori, my favorable patron and sponsor.

My poor sinful prayer against God is your respectable dignity all the
time before. Most honorable, worthy and respectable Lord! So you have
written to me, I have noted the contents, and understand, praise God!
not otherwise, than that the person 3) has put all her desires there,
and asks God and lets ask, that God from heaven would let her come again
to the place to her husband, so she is ordained by God. ^4)^ And will
have asked E. A. W., so the one, 5) reported in E. If God from Heaven
would give His divine grace, \[that\] the two persons would again be
gathered in Christian order and love; and therefore \[I\] do not want to
spare any effort to ask the Almighty besides the other people. God be
commanded! Date Berlin, on the Saturday after Nicolai \[Dec. 7\] in the
27th. Margaretha,

widow Thomas Blanckfeld.

Worthy Lord! Let E. A. W. not be displeased with my answer, even if it
is not formal, because I am once again, praise God, burdened with a new
challenge in all things, for the sake of my son, the bishop,^6)^ , as E.
A. W. will probably learn. Therefore, God asks for patience on my
behalf, for He sees all our works.

**No. 1 153.**

(Wittenberg.) December 10, 1527.

**To Justus Jonas at Nordhausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2228.

**No. 1154.**

(Wittenberg.) December 13, 1527.

**To Spalatin.**

About an intercession with the Elector; about a letter to be arranged,
and news.

she should report it to Luther. Luther sent this letter to Hornung\'s
mother-in-law. Our letter is the answer to it. An Actenfascikel in the
state archives in Marburg contains a large number of documents that
refer to this case.

3\) her daughter.

4\) \"let\", set by us, is meant in any case. Original: \"made\".

5\) Wolf Hornung.

6\) Her son John, Bishop of Riga, died of poison at Torquemada in Spain
on Sept. 9.

**1042** Letters from the year 1527.

No. 1154. 1155. 1156. **1043**

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 257. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 57; by De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 245 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 149. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1075.

> To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Bishop of Altenburg,
> his brother in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I write to the prince, my dear Spalatin,
for this poor man, and hope that there will be no danger, that the
prince will be reminded in this way (which I remind him of in the
letter) how faithfully his great ones carry out his command when they
are commanded to give something to such poor people.

But you answer me nothing at all, nor do you send me any answer about
the letter, which I \[handed over\] to you at Torgau, 1) to send it to
Mylen, and \[asked,\] to send the messenger back to me at my expense.
For this is a wedding matter, that is, a very great matter. Therefore,
it will be through your fault if the latter should lose the girl. For a
suitor here in this place is urging me to hand over Penelope to him
while Ulysses is absent. My Käthe gave birth to a little daughter
Elisabeth in the tenth hour of the tenth of December, for it has pleased
\[us\] to name her so after the mother of John. Thanks and praise be to
God. We are all healthy, and the plague has completely stopped, so that
not even one person is sick today, indeed, not in the whole week. My
Käthe sends you and your Käthe many greetings. Farewell in Christ. On
the day of Lucia \[13 Dec.\] 1527.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1155.**

Wittenberg. December 13, 1527.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther sends Johann Pfeffinger as pastor.

The original is in the state archives at Zerbst. Printed by Sintems,
Denkschrift, p. 31; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 173 and by De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 83.

1\) In the original, the verbum is missing here.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> dear lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! As I wrote
to E. W. the next day to provide you with a pastor, so here comes Johann
Pfeffinger, formerly pastor of Sonnewald, whom we all consider capable,
as he is learned and pious. To the same we also command E. W. as parish
priest, as far as you both like each other. Hiemit GOD all commanded,
who give you his grace to lead fruitfully in his word, Amen. At
Wittenberg, Friday Luciae \[13 Dec.\] 1527. Martinus Luther.

(An inserted note.)

E. Wisdom have also let themselves be heard by the skilful mayor and
have offered to pay the costs and fees that would go on the messenger\'s
wages and the journey, in which you will know how to hold yourselves
against John.

**No. 1156.**

(Wittenberg.) December 14, 1527.

**To Nic. Househusband.**

Luther gives news of the birth of a daughter, of the easing of the
plague, of his temptations and labors.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum*, Ms. 26, fol. 24 d. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 362; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 246 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 150. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1076.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> extremely faithful bishop of Zwickau, his dearest \[friend\].

Grace and peace in the Lord! My Käthe thanks you, dear husband, for your
effort and kindness in procuring the Chemnitz canvas for her. She gave
birth to a little daughter, Elisabeth, on the tenth of December. To
Christ be praise and honor.

Also the plague has completely stopped in our country. Praise be to God,
the Father of mercy. Neither the physicians nor the chaplains have had
anything to do with the sick this week, nor is anyone ill anywhere. At

**1044**

Letters from the, year 1527. no. 1156. 1157. 1158.

**1045**

In the hospital, the last two and the remaining ones also recovered,
because more than 14 used to lie there at the same time. And in the
whole time of the plague, hardly 15 died in the hospital itself,
although far more than a hundred were brought in sick, and they were
down in such large numbers at the same time: so Christ had mercy on us.
Of course, I am not yet freed from my affliction, nor do I wish to be
freed, if it is for the glory of God, my sweetest Savior, amen. But do
not cease to pray for me and to fight in this truly exceedingly fierce
battle with Satan himself, the most powerful prince; for I have offended
him with many books, that is the cause why he rages; but he may rage
against Christ, who rather angers him through me, his exceedingly weak
little vessel. Farewell, my dear brother in Christ, with all of us.

The Lord will provide the church order 1) in the near future. I will
publish Zechariah at this fair in Leipzig 2) and after that, at the
Frankfurt fair, the other and last writing against the Sacramentarians.
May Christ only help us, Amen. On the Saturday after St. Lucy\'s \[14
Dec.\] 1527.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1157.**

Wittenberg.) December 16, 1527.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for Simon Mannewitz, who was deprived of his property by
the Bishop of Meissen for the sake of the Gospel.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, pag. 108. 41. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement. P. 49, No. 59; in Walch, vol. XXI, 219; in De
Wette. Vol. Ill, p. 247 and in the Erlanger Ausg., Vol. 53, p. 415.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave in
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! It

1\) The visitation order.

2\) Meant is the Leipzig New Year\'s Fair. See St. Louis edition.
Luther\'s great confession of the Lord\'s Supper appeared in March 1528,
i.e., around the time of the Frankfurt Easter Fair.

E. C. F. G. has previously prescribed this man, Simon Mannewitz, who has
been burdened by the Bishop of Meissen and deprived of his paternal
inheritance, as for the sake of the Gospel, as he reports to me: I
humbly request that E. C. F. G. once again prescribe the poor man,
especially because his GMlin is under the Wurzische Strich in E. C. F.
G.. C. F. G.\'s land protection, so that he would not be so unreasonably
burdened and deprived of his possessions, but would receive his rights
there through safe conduct. E. C. F. G. will know well how to keep
graciously and Christianly in this matter 3). Hereby commanded by God.
Monday after Luciä \[Dec. 16\] 1527.

E. C. F.G.

subservient Mart. Luther.

**No. 1158.**

(Wittenberg.) December 21, 1527.

**To the composer Johann Walther in Torgau.**

Luther sends him sheet music for the German Mass.

From the original, in the possession of Otto von Schönberg, in De
Wette - Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 713 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 152.

> To the careful Johann Walther, composer, Musica zu Torgau, my good
> friend.

G. u. F. That I have written to your next letter, my Walther, you may
well understand from these letters, for I would certainly like to prove
help and advice to you. But the messenger should have received these
letters early in the morning, as you write, because how can I know where
the messengers hide in the evening, or let them run after them? They do
this: when they give the letters to my servants, the wind takes them
away and they do not come back. So I write another one, as you ask.
Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Saturday St. Thomas \[21 Dec.\] 1527. Martin
Luther.

3\) Here we have deleted a superfluous \"know\" (which is in the
original).

**1046**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1158. 1159.

**1047**

Supplement. 1)

To the Jutroit shall go a psalm, to the allerengste composed, ut sit

I will praise the Lord in all time, being

Praise shall always be in my mouth.

Also, because German language is almost monosyllabic, the final notes
must have a special kind, as you well know. The epistle notes would have
to go somehow in ootavo tono 3), but almost dogs.

[- -]{.underline}

[M W E \"\",]{.underline}

Now we-are-right-fer -right , ha -ben

88-888 k a 8

we frie - de with GOD by 2c.

Of the Gospel notes *Quinti toni* also dogs.

8888 8888\^ \" 88

[\"\" M \" \"]{.underline}

In the night when JE-sus the - ra-then was,

1\) On an enclosed small half sheet - Luther drew the lines freehand and
they are not all straight - the following is written: (Seidemann.)

2\) We dissolve the notes according to our present system and write them
with their letters over it. (Erl. Briefw.)

3\) According to Walther\'s words in *Mich. Praetorius, syntagma music*.
I, 451, Luther himself assigned the chorale notes *octavi toni to* the
epistle and *sextum tonum* to the gospel, also made the notes on the
epistles, gospels and on the words of the institution of Holy Communion
himself, \"sang them to me and wanted to hear my concern about them.
About the character of the above-mentioned keys Luther spoke: \"Christ
is a friendly Lord and his speeches are sweet, therefore we want to take
*sextum tonum to* the Gospel, and because St. Paul is a serious apostle,
we want to arrange *octavum tonum to* the Epistle.\" According to
Vilsacker, Lehre des röm. Choralges., 1842, p. 37, *octavus tonus* goes
*from d* to d with g in the middle as the center of gravity; *sextus
tonus* from c to c with f as the center of gravity; *quintus tonus* from
f to f with the center of gravity on the opening note, whose character
is joyful and jubilant.

  ---------------- ------ -------- ---------- -------- --------------------
                   8      8        8-d        8        888

                                                       

  M\" .                                                

  took             he     the      Brod,      thanks   and broke it and

  8                8      6        66         4        6-44
  ---------------- ------ -------- ---------- -------- --------------------

\" \' , W \" W

gave it to his disciples and said: Take

  ------------------ ------ ------- ------ ------- ----- -------------- -------
  \<1 4              4      64             4       4     64             **6**

                            **W**                                       

                                                                        

  towards            and    it -    set,   the     is    my body,       the

  66                 6      4       6      6                            
  ------------------ ------ ------- ------ ------- ----- -------------- -------

is given for you.

**Huuesitum** . 4)

88866Ü6644

JE - sus said to be - new disciples: Do you know, 44444v44o

that over two days there is a star?

After that there is the *Sanctus* and *Agnus Dei,* so the mass is
complete.

**No. 1159 .**

(Wittenberg.) December 24, 1527.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther, since Pfeffinger was held back by his congregation, sends
Hieronymus Werner as pastor.

The original is in the municipal archive at Zerbst. Printed in Sintenis,
Denkschrift, p. 32; in the Erlangen edition, vol.56, p. 174 and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 84.

> To the honorable and wise, Mayor and Rathsmanne of Zerbst, my
> favorable dear gentlemen and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! The closest is
Lord

4\) The *quaesitum* differs from the other ueeontus by the peculiar
ending; the prime example of this:

**ccccc c h c d**

sic sig-num in-ter-ro-ga-ti-o-nis to sing.

**1048**

Letters from the year 1527. ,No. 1159. 1160.

**1049**

Johann Pfeffinger came to you and accepted the parish with you through
our request and prayers, so that he would also be moved. But the matter
has gained an impetus. For, praise God, people are beginning to think
that clever people want to become expensive, and both the council and
the congregation of Sonnenwald, together with their overlord, Mr. Nickel
voll Mynkewitz, have opposed it so strongly and have asked and written
so humbly, Christianly, diligently, twice now, not to take such their
pastor from them, and also do not want to let him do so for obvious
reasons, which they indicate, so that they not only catch the pastor\'s
conscience, but also ours, but also our conscience, because they also
promised and bound themselves to take care of him in a respectable and
honest way, so that we do not trust you to provide this Johann, because
we do not like anything against conscience and force, hoping that you
will grant us such, because it happened in the opinion that we did not
know otherwise at that time, and also held in truth that Johann
Pfeffinger was loose and could easily be demanded away.

But so that you may nevertheless feel that we are inclined to you and
willing to serve, we hereby send you Hieronymus Werner, 1) letter
pointer, whom you may hear this holiday and try how he pleases you; for
he travels to you at our will, promised nothing, and, if he pleases you
and you desire his, indicate to us in writing, so that we may talk
further with him, to accept the office with you. But ask E. W. kindly to
inform your citizens that skilled teachers and pastors are truly
expensive now, and not as mean as the Terminarians 2) were in the past,
and begin to discuss why a city now in evangelical times wants to be
burdened to give a hundred guilders to an honest, pious pastor, when
before it may have given three or four hundred guilders to a single
pastor, who nevertheless preached nothing or ever preached no gospel.
Such meagreness truly makes skilled preachers expensive now, and in time
will again become a vain ass, or worse than a mule.

1\) Werner was not accepted as a pastor in Zerbst.

2\) Terminarians == wandering mendicant monks.

Donkeys, as the seducers are, bring to the parishes. For it is easy to
find someone who would take twenty guilders and be a parish priest; but
how the parish is supplied with it will be found out. I ask you to
consider this and not let it be difficult for you to provide for an
honest man honestly. Hereby commanded by God. On Christmas Eve \[Dec.
24\] 1527.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1160.**

Wittenberg. December 28, 1527.

To Spalatin.

Luther returns papers concerning the trade of the von Einsiedel family
with his expert opinion. He encloses the interpretation of Zechariah and
the history of Leonhard Kaiser (No. 1086).

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 258. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 57; by De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 248 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 160. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1078.

> To his in Christ exceedingly dear brother, M. Georg Spalatin, the
> exceedingly faithful Bishop of Altenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! We return everything, my dear Spalatin, which
the Einsiedeln have sent to us through you, by answering 3) what our
conscience dictates. The misdeeds of this Amalek 4) are not yet full,
but will become full in his time. I pity the noble and faithful young
men, and ask Christ to be their protector and helper in the tribulation
in due time, amen. I also send the Zechariah and the history of the
Bavarian martyr Leonhard \"Keysers\". We have nothing new, only that it
is said that the Anabaptists are multiplying and spreading in all
places. God tread Satan under our feet in a short time \[Rom. 16, 20.\],
Amen. My Käthe greets you, at the same time also Pomeranus. We hope for
the return of our school. Farewell in Christ. Wittenberg, on Saturday
\[28 Dec.\] 5) the day of the engagement of Hanna von Sala, 1527.

Martin Luther.

3\) The following number.

4\) That is, of Duke George of Saxony.

5\) This date is derived from No. 1162.

**1050**

Letters from the year 1527. No. 1161.

**1051**

**No. 1161.**

(Wittenberg.) (December 28, 1527.) 1)

**Luther and Bugenhagen to the Lords of**

**Einsiedel.**

On Saturday after St. Lucy\'s Day (Dec. 14), Duke George had forbidden
the 18 villages belonging to the Einsiedel brothers, Heinrich Hildebrand
(b. 1497, d. 1557) and Heinrich Abraham (d. 1568 at the age of 64), were
forbidden to do interest, pension, service and wages, because the
Einsiedels should have a priest at Gnandstein (located in the
Chursächsichen area not far from Altenburg), who had a wife, likewise
because they would have dropped the mass, and would not have had the
bridal mass said at their sister\'s wedding (Spalatin *apud Menck.*..,
II, 2129). The Einsiedels then turned to Luther, who gave them his
advice. On Jan. 9, 1528, the Einsiedels went to Dresden and, through
Haug von Leißneck, Wolf von Schönburg and other friends, asked the duke
to drop his disgrace and to abolish the hindrance of their interest and
services. The success of these efforts is shown in the Wittenberg
edition, Vol. IX, p. 246 d, in the document that precedes our letter:
\"Duke Georgm gave his farewell to those of Einsiedel 2) 2c. After much
negotiation, this farewell is finally given by his F. G. on Friday after
Erhardi \[Jan. 10\] 1528:

\"Heinrich Hildebrand and Heinrich Abraham von Einsiedel, brothers,
shall in all our fiefdoms and principalities, where they have authority,
keep all Christian order, and drive out the heretical priests and
appoint others in their place who are Christian priests, or request them
from those who have to grant the fiefdoms. If they lack this from the
same, they shall seek our help and counsel, which they shall not be
denied.

\"They themselves, in order that they may have acted contrary to the
obedience of the Christian church, shall obtain absolution from the
bishop, as the highest prelate, or elsewhere, where such absolution may
be obtained. And they shall observe masses, hear sermons, confession and
communion, as befits the order of Christian churches. Then we want to
let go of what they consider to be disgraceful to them.

\"But nevertheless, for the intercession of their lords and friends, and
also for the sake that we may not be noted as seeking our benefit, but
not their souls\' salvation, we will leave them the goods, so that they
may sell those between here and Bartholomew, and turn to the end, where
their disobedience may be suffered 2c.

\"Duke George wants to know clearly and without any doubt whether the
von Einsiedel want to renounce the Lutheran doctrine, and to keep and
show themselves with confession and reception of the reverend sacrament
2c.\" The von Einsiedel asked for and received 5 weeks to think about
it, and are supposed to have given an answer again on Friday Valentini
\[Feb. 14\] (Spal. l. c.; Kapp, Nachlese, Vol. I,

1\) There can hardly be any doubt that this letter is to be provided
with this time provision, since it was sent with the above letter.

2 s Instead of the \'names set by us, the Wittenberg has \"N.\"
everywhere.

This writing is found in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p.
246b; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 3136; in the Altenburg
edition, vol. IV, p. 369; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p. 662; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 220; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 264; and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 53, p. 423.

To the Lords of Einsiedel.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus, amen. Strict, honorable, dear lords and
friends! We are sorry for your misfortune and cross, which you have met
through your tyrant. May Christ our Lord comfort and strengthen you in
this and all distresses, and may He punish Satan in time and in the near
future, amen.

At your request, if you seek our counsel, we find it no other way than:
because you do not have preachers in the places that are in Duke
George\'s fief who are against him, he therefore has no power nor right
to punish you. If there are such preachers in the same places, you may
in good conscience allow them to leave, and leave room for the tyrant of
his will, in which he has power and authority 2c.

But because N. and N. and the like lie in the Electorate\'s territory
and sovereignty, he has neither the right nor the power to punish what
happens to your persons. Therefore, I think it is justified that E.
Gestrenge must let things go as they are in the Electorate and not have
the power to change anything, as you have answered Mr. N.

If this does not help, it seems to me that the Elector should be called
upon to intercede, in this opinion, that his C. F. G. Duke Georgen
should be asked to intercede. Duke Georgen, because it would be divided
principality, and treaty happen that each one in his principality should
let believe as he likes: so his request would be that, as Duke Hans
punishes none, in Duke Georgen land sat, at the goods, so nevertheless
from the Elector go to the fief, so he also does not want to punish
those, who sit in the Electorate 2c., even if they commit crimes in his
fiefs; for such would be unjust and unequal. Such, I think, you will
better consider together with good friends and tell, than we can write.

Above all, you must not let him urge you to drive out the priests or to
bring back the old way of being.

**1052** Letters from the year 1527.

No. 116I. 1162. 1163. **1053**

Nor confess that you have sinned at the bride\'s mass; but if anything
is wrong in all or some of this, you shall suffer from the prince, to
whom it is due, as the end overlord, what is to be suffered. Summa, if
he wants to go out with his head, you must stand and confess what he
wants to condemn and wrong. For there Christ stands, \"Whosoever shall
deny me, him will I deny again.\"

But if he is satisfied that his fiefdoms are in accordance with his
will, you are excused, for you cannot resist force. The prince is
obliged to defend as far as his territory extends. If he does not defend
you, Christ will defend you, who says: \"A hundredfold shall be restored
to us that which we must leave undone for his sake. Hereby commanded by
God, Amen. D. Martin Luther.

> Mr. 1) Johann Pommer.

**No. 1162.**

Wittenberg. December 29, 1527.

**To Justus Jonas in Nordhausen.**

Luther invites him to return to Wittenberg, since the plague is over.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 364d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 249
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 163. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1080.

Grace and peace! You have not yet returned, my dear Jonas, which I am
surprised about, since the plague is so dead and buried, or dll should
at least visit the afflicted, of course at our expense. Those who had
fled are returning in droves, almost all the citizens, tomorrow the
authorities will also be there, finally the academy will be there
shortly, as Philip writes. God has had mercy on us in a marvelous and
wonderful way, so that He may show that the prayers of our Gospel are
very pleasing to Him, no matter how great sinners we may be. Margaretha
Mochin is from death

1\) We can only explain this \"Lord\" by the fact that Bugenhagen did
not sign it himself, but added Luther\'s name.

She returned herself, as she was in despair, because she could no longer
hear and was not in her right mind; she gave up her brother for herself
in Segrehn. Finally, we are all well. My Käthe and our little daughter
Elisabeth are also well; she sends you her most affectionate greetings
(*valdissime*), but she wishes even more that you and your entire family
be here safely. We engaged Hanna of Sala yesterday; if you wish, you can
be at the wedding in the evening on the day of the circumcision. She is
marrying a certain Peter, a priest from Halle, from a good and honorable
family, to which the priest in Dresden, Peter, 2) the enemy of the word,
is also counted as a very close relative. I am healthy in body, in
spirit, as much as Christ assists me, who hangs on me by a thin thread
and I on him. But Satan hangs on me with mighty ropes, and even with
ship\'s ropes,^3)^ and drags me into the deep, but the weak Christ,
through your prayers \[in me\], still has the upper hand, or at least
fights valiantly. Therefore, continue and by your prayers make the weak
Christ \[in me\] strong, that by his powerlessness he may break the
power, rather the defiance, of Satan. Avenge me by destroying his hope,
who avenged you by revealing his wisdom and cunning, but all and all in
Christ and from Christ. Be well in Christ. Greet your child 4) and all
yours, and return soon and come. Wittenberg, on Sunday after the birth
of Christ 1528 \[Dec. 29, 1527\]. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1163.**

(Wittenberg.) December 29, 1527.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

News, especially of Luther\'s affairs.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 365 d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 250
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 164. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1082.

2\) Peter Eisenberg from Halle, since 1512 pastor in Dresden and Duke
George\'s court preacher and confessor until his end.

3\) *camelis*; xxxxxxx == ship\'s rope, anchor rope.

4\) Here we find again: *tuum Dictative* as in No. 1134.

**1054**

Letters from the year 1527. no. 1163. 1164. 1165.

**1055**

Grace and peace in the Lord! The Lord has given me a little daughter and
at the same time freed me from the worry I had for my pregnant wife, who
I feared would be infected by the plague, as it tends to happen and has
happened to many here. For the plague was with me within my walls, but
the Lord prevented it and sent it into my sows. There is no news, except
that it is said that the Turk will come forth with a very great armor.
The LORD scatter them that love to war \[Ps. 68:31.\], Amen, as I hope
it shall come to pass. See that you do not cease to pray for me and to
fight with me in my battle. The Lord will have mercy on you in his time.
Greet Osiander and exhort him to be strong against the spirit of the
Sacramentans. I, too, am now going against them for the second time and
will provoke the Anabaptists by a letter 1) instead of a prelude; Christ
will assist. The plague has stopped by God\'s grace, and when the
academy will have returned, Christ will give other things to do. You
will take care of more seeds in my garden, as many as you can, because
if I stay alive, I will become a gardener. Farewell and kiss your little
daughter, and embrace her mother, to spite Satan, who persecutes us. On
the Sunday after the birth of Christ 1528 \[Dec. 29, 1527\].

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1164.**

(Wittenberg.) December 30, 1527.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About Melchior Hofmann. News from letters of Joh. Heß 2c.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 364; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 251 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 166. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1078.

Grace and peace in Christ! Philip writes this letter to you, my dear
Amsdorf, I believe, in order to purify himself towards you, I do not
know because of which matter. That Melchior Hofmann 2) has written to me

1\) On rebaptism, to two parish priests. St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVII,
2187 f.

2\) See No. 1084.

the Qnaterne published by you, with glosses against you. But Marquard 3)
gives written testimony about him in such a way that he is completely
suspicious to me in many respects; he is also vain and will hardly rest
until he brings misfortune upon himself. I will warn where I can that
one should beware of him. I want you to read the exceedingly bad news in
the letters of Hess; thus Satan rages, for certain proof that our word
is God\'s word, by which his wrath is so provoked. It is said that the
Turk is preparing to return to Hungary with a very large army to shed
blood, including that of the Germans, as I fear. Send back the enclosed
letter of Hess. Farewell and pray for me, a wretched vessel, that my
faith may not cease, as I expect you to pray. Monday after the birth of
Christ 1528 \[Dec. 30, 1527\]. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1165.**

(Wittenberg.) December 30, 1527.

**To Justus Jonas in Nordhausen.**

Luther complains about his temptations and wishes for the return of his
friends.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 321; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 251 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 167. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1016.

> To his brother in Christ, Justus Jonas, the sincere servant of Christ,
> at Nordhausen.

Grace and peace in Christ! See that you do not cease to pray for me and
to fight with me, my dear Jonas (for at times my temptation is eased,
but at its hours it returns more fiercely), that Christ may not forsake
me, and may not let it be a torture of the wicked, but of the children,
so that my faith may not cease to the end. Would God that all of you
were present here again. We have prayed to the Lord against the plague
and seem to be heard, for there is no more plague, not even in the
fishermen\'s suburb. ^4)^

3\) See No. 938 Marquard Schuldorp.

4\) Dr. Wette erroneously remarks here: \"But she had not been there
from the beginning. See No. 1138.

**1056** Letters from the year 1527. no. 1165 to 1170. **1057**

The air is pure and healthy above. You may also pray the same, that God
may glorify His Word in us, which is exposed to danger and shame by our
dispersion. And Satan rejoices with his own that we are so separated.
Greet all of us, especially your Käthe. Pommer sends you many greetings,
also my Käthe. Christ be with you and with us, Amen. On Monday after the
birth of Christ 1528 \[30 Dec. 1527\].

The Schwärmer books are not yet seen here, so you will be doing the
right thing if you send them back to us. Martin Luther.

**No. 11 66.**

(Wittenberg.) December 31, 1527.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Of the visitation; of Luther\'s writings Wider die Sacramentirer und die
Wiedertäufer 2c.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum*, Ns. 26, fol. us. Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 366ir ; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 252 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 168. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1083.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> bishop of the church at Zwickau, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace to your Lord! I hope that the visitation of ours will
soon be handed over to the printer, after which Christ will give his
blessing that it may be beneficial to many, amen. Pray for me, man in
Christ, as you do, that I may be strong in faith against Satan and his
servants. I am writing against the sacramentalists for the second and
last time, and likewise against the Anabaptists for the first time.
Satan rages in an unbelievable way, realizing that he has only little
time. Christ tread him under our feet in a short time, amen.

There is nothing new here, only that it is said that the Turk returns to
Hungary with a very big armor. May the Lord scatter the nations that
love to war \[Ps. 68,31\], Amen. Our Pomeranus sends you his best
regards, also my Käthe. Fare well in Christ with all our people. On the
day before the circumcision in 1528 \[Dec. 31, 1527\].

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1167.**

(Wittenberg.) December 31, 1527.

**To Jakob Probst in Bremen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2237.

**No. 1168.**

(December 1527. ?)

**Concerns about both shapes.**

The weak in faith could still be given the Sacrament under One Form for
a while, but the stubborn could not.

In M. J. E. Kappen\'s small Nachlese (Leipzig 1727), Vol. I, pp. 27-30,
undivided from Spalatin\'s papers in the documents left by Heinrich von
Einsiedel. Spalatin wrote in his own hand from the three quarto sheets
that are not by Luther\'s hand: \"1527. von einerley Gestalt den
schwachen zureichenn D. M. Luther.\" This concern was then incorporated
into the instruction of the visitators to the pastors of 1528. It is
especially printed in De Wette-Seidemann, Vol. VI, p. 87. The variants
are irrelevant.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1653, § 49 from penultimate paragraph to
Col. 1655, § 50 incl.

**No. 1169.**

(Wittenberg.) (End 1527.)

**To Paul Speratus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 274 f.

**No. 1170.**

(Wittenberg.) (1527?)

**To Chancellor Brück, jointly with Jonas and Bugenhagen.**

Request for the transfer of the bricks from the wall and the windows of
the Kreuzkirchlein to the Kastenherren for the construction of the
hospital. 1)

The original is at Dresden in *Cod. Seidel.* Printed by De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 415 (without date and year) and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. L (with the arbitrarily placed year 1541).

Dear Lord Chancellor! The lords of the castles have asked us for
intercession that they may have the bricks that are on the wall around
the Holy Cross church, because they are

1\) Since the construction of a hospital was already envisaged in 1527
(see No. 1120), this letter, which the Erlangen edition places in 1541,
can already belong to that year.

**1058**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1170. 1171. 1172.

**1059**

otherwise cannot get bricks for the hospital; because such bricks cannot
be laid any better, we ask, E. A., to be conducive to this. Hiemit GOtt
befohlen, Amen. Martin Luther.

J. Jonas.

They also ask for the windows of the same church, which would otherwise
perish and be knocked out and stolen, and would be necessary and useful
for the hospital.

> Joannes Bugenhagen. Pomer.

**No. 1171.**

(Wittenberg.)January 1. January 1528.

**To Gerhard Wilskamp in Herford.**

Luther gives thanks for the comfort given to him in his temptations.

Handwritten in Gotha, *cod*. 451 and *cod*. 185. Printed in Schütze,
vol. II, p. 84; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 254 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VI, p. 173.

Grace and peace! I received, my dear Gerhard, your last letter of
consolation with great joy and gratitude; Christ reward you for this
service. It is true that this challenge is by far the most severe, and
it is also not unknown to me from my youth, but I did not expect it to
increase so much now. However, Christ has triumphed so far, but he keeps
me upright by a very thin thread 1). I commend myself to your and the
brothers\' prayers. I have made others well and cannot make myself well.
Praise be to my Christ, even in the midst of despair, death and
blasphemy, who gives that we may see one another in that kingdom of his.
But in the meantime we are sure that what we build is in his word and
work, but in this we are not justified, rather we are useless servants,
only that this is our glory, that we have nevertheless also lived
according to Christ in the world and have forgotten our former very evil
life; it only remains that Christ is our life and our righteousness (oh,
how difficult and unknown to the flesh!), always hidden in God \[Col. 3,
3\]. I rejoice that I now (like you

1\) Instead of *facto* we have assumed *filo* according to No. 1162.

understand Peter that the same sufferings that befall the brethren in
the world are upon us, but these sufferings are very bitter now at the
end of the world. Greet our Montanus and all the brothers. On the day of
circumcision \[Jan. 1\] 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1172.**

Nordhausen. January 2, 1528. 2)

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

This letter crossed with Luther\'s letters of Dec. 29 and 30, 1527.
Jonas hoped to return to Wittenberg soon. He regrets the dispute between
Melanchthon and Agricola. Judgment on Oekolampad and comrades. He
congratulates Luther on the birth of his daughter. About the illness of
D. Meienburg. Jonas sends a gift for Hans Luther.

The original is in the Hamburg City Library. Printed in Kolde\'s
*Analecta*, p. 94; in Kawerau, Jonasbriefe, vol. I, p. 112 and in Erl.
Briefw. Vol. VI, p. 175 (with the incorrectly resolved date: \"January
3\").

To the exceedingly high man, D. Martin Luther, the apostle of JEsu
Christ, his exceedingly dear father.

Salvation and grace in Christ our Lord! I envy this letter of mine, my
most dear father in the Lord, who will be granted to reach you sooner
than I myself. For I had firmly resolved to finally put an end to my
long desire \[for you\] and to see you within eight days, but very
necessary business held me back, since I was already prepared for the
journey, and delayed me, which you will hear verbally, but they will no
longer hold me back and delay me. I will say valet to all that this
whole loveliness of my. Fatherland 3) can contain or encompass, so that
I can see you again and talk to you.

2\) The time of this letter is (according to the Erl. Briefw.): \"*5^ta^
post Circumcisionis* M. D. XXVII.\" In this all are eternal that the
year 1527 is a spelling mistake of Luther. In contrast, the indistinct
number of the date is read differently. Kolde reads: 2^ta^ \" and
resolves it by *secunda the* == 2nd Jan. Kawerau reads: and likewise
completes *the,* because if one wanted to grasp it after usual way as
\...\...\...i, that is Tuesday after New Year, then one would arrive at
the 7th January; Jonas however answered this letter already on the 6th
January. Apart from the unusualness of *the* addition of the, the
syllable \"*ta*\" would hardly have been chosen as designation of the
final syllable of *secunda* and *tertia.* The Erl. Briefw. will be
right.

3\) Nordhausen.

**1060** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1172. **1061**

hear of that fatherland of which the author (ille) speaks so confidently
and gloriously in the letter to the Hebrews. I see how great a
difference it is when the Lord grants someone to associate with godly
people and when one has to live among the ungodly. I learn that not only
the teaching and the sermons, but also the conversations are different
with those who earnestly expect the goods to come than with those who
live in the day. But these, dearest father, are my inconsistencies with
you. I suffer here, although the Lord has humbled me only in bodily
goods, yes, not even in all bodily goods, but only in the possessions of
this place, the pride and ungodliness of Satan: but what is such a small
piece of the cross against the knowledge of Christ and the Son of God,
against the inexhaustible goods of God, which God the Lord and our
Father according to the riches of His glory \[Eph. 3, 16\] has lavishly
and mercifully poured out on me, a completely ungrateful sinner? How
often do I see that most of those who have much fortune and riches are
blinded, do not know God at all, are not moved by anything in the
Scriptures, do not care about what alone is something, alone worthy to
be esteemed! I am ashamed of my weakness and ingratitude, and begin to
confess with the Psalm \[Ps. 73, 22.\], \"I am a fool before thee, O
LORD, and know nothing, more foolish than a beast and cattle without
understanding.\" But still, soon after, the carnal mind returns, that,
forgetting the red sea, the outstretched and exalted arm, forgetting the
great miracles of God, I murmur against the most benevolent Father. But
what do I bring these trifles before you, compared to which I suffer
nothing, since you are much more severely afflicted? but the Lord will
comfort us all by his grace. The quarrel between Philip and Eisleben has
grieved me greatly, which I knew would certainly be very burdensome to
you, and that this too would be added to your exceedingly heavy
afflictions, which we, your disciples, should have lessened, but not
increased, according to the words of Paul \[Col. 2, 5.\] : I rejoice
because in my absence I see and hear your order, your love, your harmony
2c. But as nothing else, out of this trouble, which is truly great in
its ends, comes to us the benefit of seeing that Satan is not satisfied
unless he commits the very worst, unless the damage he has done is the
highest, most exaggerated and greatest, since he dares to do it,

while we watch to sow discord among those who were most closely united
and held together. You seem to me, dearest father, to write about this
matter rather as you wish than as you think it should be written; that
this little tragedy was contemptible and trivial, that you did not think
it worth writing to me. But nevertheless I hear that Eisleben\'s writing
and censuring verdict was spread far and wide and reached many hands,
even to the court of Duke George, before it was given to Philip. Here
you could see those rejoicing who want to be called enemies of this
doctrine and be taken for it. As much as it is possible according to
your reputation, I beg you, demand of Eisleben that he write nothing in
this matter, since you have seen it before. If I had remained at
Wittenberg, I could hardly have thought and imagined that so many eyes
of the enemy were directed at us, and that Satan was lying so vigilantly
in wait against us. But more of this orally. I only wanted to remind
you, dear father, after my love for Agricola and after my reverence for
Philip, that you should be careful of Satan, who is up to great things.
But truly, there the pig teaches the Minewa!

There is an extraordinary silence about the Sacramentarians in this
church in Nordhausen. Even the poison of the Anabaptists has not yet
come here. The council in Erfurt has warned the council here in
Nordhausen about this matter by letter. As for the quibbles of the
Sacramentarians and so many wagonloads full of trivial things, none of
them, with the exception of Oecolampad (for I have already read some of
their stuff), seems to me to be seriously concerned about his own
conscience, and none seems to me to have seriously believed and
considered those simple passages of Scripture, and which they themselves
consider easy \[Heb. 11:6\], that: \"he who would come to GOD must
believe, 1. that GOD is, and 2.^1)^ that He will be a rewarder of those
who seek Him.\" And as Peter \[1 Ep. 1, 8.\] says, \"Whom ye have not
seen, and yet love,\" and John \[1 John 4, 20.\], \"He that loveth not
his brother whom he beholdeth, how can he love GOD whom he beholdeth
not?\" For if they had first firmly decided in themselves what belongs
to the beginning, namely, that God is in truth and looks upon us in
truth, rather if the Spirit of Christ had firmly established it in them,
then they would not so reflect before God and in such great such things
of God as these.

1\) The \"2.\" is crossed out again in the original.

**1062** Letters from the year

. No. 1172. 1173. **1063**

If you are a man, you will not so easily despise everything that comes
from others. More about this at another time. .

I am very happy that a little daughter has been born to you, and that
you write that you want me to hurry to you at least for a walk: there
has never been a month that I have stayed here without thinking of
mounting a horse to go to you, but every month the stone has thrown me
down and kept me bound. Only this last month I have had such peace that
I hope to be freed forever by the mighty hand of the Lord. I am very
well and, God willing, I will be with you in 14 days or three weeks at
the most.

I have greeted our common host, Mr. Michael Meienburg, 1). He
appreciates your so kindly announced greeting very much. But he is now
very ill, with I don\'t know what part of his intestines protruding from
the back; he thinks it is quite the same illness you suffered from three
years ago. You will recognize the severe complaints of the sufferer from
the enclosed letter. He therefore sent this messenger at his own
expense. He sends a description of his illness, which he kindly asks to
be shown to the physician, Doctor Esch, so that he may write here
through this messenger the indicated remedies, which he has used on you;
and if you also have experience as to what has eased your pain, what has
contributed most to the expulsion of this illness, then I ask you to
communicate it to me, so that I can pass it on to him. For he alone has
rendered the best service to the cause of the Gospel, and his enemies
would like him to be dead by now. Whatever Doctor Esch will demand, you
shall say good for it, for he will gladly give what is right. But why do
I ask this of you in so many words, since you were born to love? I only
wanted to remind you that the messenger should not return without a note
for the medicines and all the circumstances of the illness (for that is
the main reason why he was sent). I am extremely pleased that your son
Johannes is well, cheerful and lively, that he runs back and forth,
chats childishly and is the delight of his parents. For this first of
January, I am sending him a silver Johannes, so that he will have a
small gift from Jonas, meanwhile also a kind of testimony of my highest
love for him and his father. I am pleased that Margaretha Mochin

1\) See Luther\'s letter in St. Louis, Vol. X VII, annex, No. 4.

has recovered. Farewell in Christ, dear father, and pray for us that we
may now have a happy return to you, for I will prepare for the journey.
Greet your wife, the woman in childbirth, and the little daughter, whom
I will see presently and be of service to them there in all things. My
wife greets you and says thank you for the fatherly and exceedingly
Christian remembrance. 2) Again, farewell, our heart, best father.
Nordhausen, Thursday after the Circumcision 1527 \[2 Jan. 1528\].

My son sends his regards to your daughter, his future bride. Yours, J.
Jonas.

**No. 1173.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. Jan. 1528.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther asks that the people of Zerbst finally be satisfied that
Pfeffinger, whom they had only accepted on probation until Invocavit
(March 1), could not come to them.

The original is in the Rathsarchiv at Zerbst (dated \"1527\" due to a
typographical error by Luther). Printed by Sintenis, Denkschrift, p. 34;
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 175 (without correction of the
date) and by De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 89.

> To the honorable and wise gentlemen, mayor and council of Zerbst, my
> favorable gentlemen and good friends.

Grace and peace. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! I recently wrote to E.
W. how he could not leave Johann Pfeffinger in Sonnenwalde and keep him,
if he would get along with you. I had hoped that E. W. would be
satisfied with this, because God prevents it without our doing and
knowledge, which prevents human relationships several times, and no one
can continue to associate or keep an agreement, unless God wants it.
Since it is not lacking in him nor in us, nor is it in our power, I ask
again that E. W. be satisfied with it; for I, with a good conscience,
continue to drive him white, and indeed, because I heard that he would
be accepted on probation with you until Invocavit, I was all the easier
for it, and hoped that it would not be necessary with you for such a
short time, and let me, as I also let myself still be, be the more
content with it.

2\) Luther had written a special letter to Jonah\'s wife. See St. Louis
edition, vol. XVII, annex, no. 4. at the end.

**1064** Letters from the year

. No. 1173. 1174. **1065**

His, his people\'s so great cause and need, especially because they do
not want to let him stay there, as he is now also obliged to stay for
the sake of such fortuitous things. Hereby commanded by God, Amen.
Friday after Circumcisionis \[January 3\] 1528. Martinus Luther.

(Inserted note.)

But so that you may see how the people of Sonnenwalde write to me with
earnestness together with their overlord, I am sending the letter that
they sent to me the other time, which you will probably send to me
again.

**No. 1174.**

Torgau. January 3, 1528.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector asks Luthern to enforce the \"instruction\" for the
visitation drafted by Spalatin and to report his concerns and changes to
it in writing.

The concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji,* fol. 50a. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 126 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 179.

Our greeting before. Venerable and highly learned, dear devotee! Next to
other scholars of the Holy Scriptures, we had required you to come to
Torgau, 1) to further consider the instruction that should be followed
in our principality by pastors, preachers and pastoral caretakers, as
was done by you and the others who were required by us, which also
pleased us graciously, and at that time it was agreed that you would
make a preface that should stand on a narrative; You should then also
diligently review the same, and whatever you find that needs to be
changed again, or that needs to be done to it or from it, you should do
so in the most appropriate manner. As we do not want to conceal from you
that Magister Spalatinus has formally rewritten with his own hand the
above-mentioned instruction and sent it to us, which we send to you
herewith. And it is our gracious request to you, that you do the above
according to your good-willed request, still once take it in hand and
consider it most diligently, as you know how to do by the grace of God,
and improve and change what seems good to you. And especially consider
whether it should be good that the sub

1\) On Nov. 26 and the following days. Compare No. 1147.

\(2\) for the reception of the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, which shall be done by you next to the other articles, with
distinction as to the strong, the weak and the impudent (3) for the sake
of the pastors and preachers, or it would be better to leave them out
and to report them to the pastors and preachers in the visitation, \[so
that they\], if the matter should ever arise, would have to act
accordingly, as far as the degrees of friendship and mogship are
concerned. For it has fallen to us that if the same article were to be
added to the others and put into print, it might give the opponents of
Hohenish cause to hold all the more firmly to it, so that those who in
our principality marry closer, 4) than in ecclesiastical rights, to
which the imperial rights are subordinate and escape, or their children,
produced in such marital states, would not be granted and follow
inheritances. The people, if they were to do so outside of our lands,
would also suffer other hardships because of it. Since we also consider
that, in the present world, the common man is not particularly
interested in this, after he can proceed to more convenient marriages
outside of the same degrees, we want to put this into your further
consideration, whether such retraction and shortening of the degrees
should be brought into the affected report or not, to give notice
thereof to the pastors through the visitators, to report to the people
of the liberty, and again of the burden and disadvantage that would
stand upon it and might result to them, whether thereby those, who are
not noticeably or especially interested in it, 5) might slacken such
marriages in friendship below the fifth degree. But if you consider
this, it would be useful or good to put this in the report and to
express it, because in imperial law it is foreseen that one should not
take, have or marry his brother\'s wife or two sisters, even after each
other, so you want to move whether marriage with such persons is to be
avoided according to imperial law or not. So you will also find several
more articles in the trades that Spalatinus has placed in further
concern, which you will also find in passing.

2\) This is the concern No. 1168.

3\) \"Frechen\" is put by us instead of: \"Reichen\", because in the
concerning place not of \"Reichen\" but of \"Halsstarrigen\" is spoken.

4\) \"closer\" put by us instead of: \"more\". In the following: \"to
which the\" instead of: \"to which the\".

5\) Here we have erased \"itself\" - \"slacken\" == refrain.

**1066**

Letters from the year 1528. no. 1174.

**1067**

will be. ^1)^ If you send us the trades, you will be informed how the
report is to be printed and produced. All this we have not willed you to
do in our gracious opinion, and we are inclined to you with grace and
good. Date Torgau, Friday after *Circumcisionis Domini* \[3 Jan\] 1528.

**Supplement I.**

The original is in the Weimar Archives, 3i, fol. 50a, 5. 1528. 3.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 125 (with the note that this commemorative
note, probably written as early as December 1527, was sent to Luther by
the Saxon chancellery, at any rate with Spalatin\'s reservations
\[Supplement II\]) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 181.

**Memorial note for Doctor Martinus Luther, to be sent in addition to
the lessons.**

To put in mind to the clan and mogschaft where the Lord Chancellor
Doctor Brück would have found more forbidden degrees in imperial rights.

Item, whether it would be appropriate to let up, to take two sisters one
after the other.

Item, that one sends the Doctori Martins the whole teaching of Christian
doctrine and ceremonies with the request to oversee and spread it
everywhere 2c.

Item, to remind Doctor Martinus to put aside the argument of the
adversaries and others who say and think that because we are redeemed by
Christ from divine laws, we should rather be exempt from imperial rights
and not be bound by them, before in these cases, so that one also has to
judge oneself the more wisely from them.

Item to remind Doctor Martinus to indicate the *locos* how in Scripture
*contritio, poenitentia, cognitio peccati, mortificatio* are used for
One Thing.

Item, the case with leprosy and other protracted diseases in the marital
status and the like well to eliminate, because the same cases occur a
lot.

**Supplement II.**

**Spalatin\'s concerns with Luther\'s marginal notes.**

From the original enclosed with the letter of the Elector, printed by
Burkhardt, p. 128 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 182.

In the Scriptures there is no cause to

Marriage to divorce, because the adultery, \[*placet*. (red)\] as then
indicates the Christ himself

1\) In Annex II.

Matthew 5 \[v. 22\] and 19 \[v. 9\]. But before the divorce, all
diligence should be made to reconcile and make up. For it is not proper
for a wife to put away an adulterer, nor for a husband to put away his
wife on account of adultery, without the knowledge of the church, that
is, of those whom the church has commanded.

It is not proper for a woman who has left her husband for the sake of
adultery to marry another husband in any way, unless the divorce takes
place before the church, that is, before the pastors.

And if one spouse departs from the other, in this case nothing should be
decided thoughtlessly, but the person who has departed should be
diligently sought to bring him or her to justice.

The innocent person shall not be allowed to marry in other ways, unless
the person who has left has been previously requested, promised and
required by the authorities.

In the event that a wife is afflicted with French disease or leprosy,
the husband is not entitled to take another wife, because the disease is
not a sufficient reason to divorce the marriage.

The unkindness and cruelty is also not enough cause to divorce spouses,
because one must suffer and tolerate the other.

*placet*. (roth)

*placet*. (roth)

A. ^2)^

todt.

*placet*.

> If a man marries one of them and, regardless of this, takes another
> and marries the other, he shall keep the first and not the other. For
> because he has betrothed himself in marriage to the first, he shall
> keep his vows. And because he has given his body to the first, he
> cannot give it to another; therefore the other has been betrayed.

B. *omittatur*.

2\) The letters A, B, C refer to the relevant sections in Luther\'s
Bedenken No. 1175.

**1068**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1174.

**1069**

If a man brings down a virgin, love demands that he take her in
marriage. He shall also be faithfully admonished and kept to do so. But
if he will not take her in marriage, he shall give her a convenient and
due dowry. For this penalty also stands in divine law Exodi at 22 \[v.
16\], \[and if the parents or friendship of the prostitute do not oppose
and do not refuse to give him the prostitute, he must keep her as a
wife, as Deut. 22, 29.\> stands,\] and although the law Mosi does not
bind us, yet love \[and equity\] demands that one act in this way.

Even if a man takes a wife without the will of his parents, it is right
for him to keep her. For although the parents have a right to the
children, as God commanded in Exodus 22 \[v. 17\] and Deuteronomy 22
\[v. 28 f.\] 1). \[commanded\] to give him the wife whom he indicated to
them, as it is written in the Book of Judges on the 14th \[v. 2\], and
to Rebekah parents, mother and brother \[gave her when she was\] 2)
sought to Isaac by his father Abraham\'s servant for his conjugal wife;
yet to Rebekah friendship spoke, as it is written in Genesis on the 24th
\[v. 57\], \"Let us call the harlot\" 2c.

But now, because the wicked hear that the parents have the right to the
children, they go to, abuse the same right and become tyrants from it.
Again, because the children hear that they are both allowed to do so by
imperial and papal law, they also abuse it and despise the parents,
which is not good for either part and yet happens many times.

Therefore, in such a case, two ways would have to be taken: First, the
gospel. Namely, that the children humble themselves against the parents
and by themselves or through

*placet*. (roth)

The \[ \] are from Luther\'s hand, (black)

C.

1\) In the editions: \"5th\" \[v. 6th\].

2\) Added by us.

ask some persons to allow the pledge, which they made against their
will,^3)^ , if a child would have a desire for the person, and the
person would be honest. If the father wants to act according to the
gospel, he is obliged to listen to his child\'s request; if the father
does not want to grant it, the child is not obliged to do anything
against the father\'s tyranny.

Secondly, if the gospel does not help, the father must be informed that
because he does not want to grant his honest request to his child, who
has a desire, will, love and good opinion of the betrothed person, and
does not consider his child\'s happiness and need, and kindly and
paternally impose the execution of the marriage vows, he should adhere
to the imperial rights. For since the parents despise the gospel, they
should not enjoy the gospel either, but keep to the imperial right.
Right hold.

For what is in accordance with imperial law is due to a prince as
secular authority. For what is in accordance with imperial law is due to
a prince, as secular authority, to pronounce and recognize.

The pastors and preachers have to indicate this on the basis of God\'s
word. For even if secular authorities would do nothing more about it at
the humble, submissive request of the children, the children of the
parents shall suffer and tolerate tyranny and unkindness.

Of clanships and mogships.

Although in the law Mosi the all dead. degree, it is not forbidden for a
man to take his brother\'s or sister\'s daughter in marriage, as
Leviticus well points out in chapter 18, and the examples of the holy
archfathers Abraham and Nahor confirm, both of whom took their
brother\'s daughters, namely Abraham took Sarah and Nahor took Milcah
(Genesis 1:16).

11, 20.), as Doctor Martinus Luther had also done previously in writings

3\) \"gethan\" put by us instead of: \"zethun\".

**1070** Letters from the year

. No. 1174. 1175. **1071**

1\) for the sake of most of those who at that time had to buy such
degrees from the pope for money and yet had no good conscience. But
since we intend to give common instruction on how the pastors should act
and teach in this matter, we consider it best that we keep to the
imperial laws. Not that\" we thereby condemn those, who perhaps until
now would have bought such freedom from the pope or, according to the
law of Mosi, would have taken it from their sister or brother daughter,
but that we should henceforth surrender ourselves to live in harmony
with the imperial rights and also forgive that, according to the law of
Mosi, we would have right and power before God, to serve and love those,
who at the same time live with us under imperial rights.

Which kinship and mogschaft \[Todt.\] according to ability and order
prevent the marriage.

Also in such a way, if persons in such forbidden degrees about
prohibition of touched rights take to the marriage, also such marriage
is unbundled, that the woman is not called a wife and the man is not
called a husband.

First, the persons \[Todt.\] related to each other in the ascending and
descending line are forbidden to marry in inünituni through and through.
\[Todt.\]

Secondly, brother and sister may not marry; neither may one take his
brother\'s or sister\'s daughter or grandson. Likewise, it is forbidden
to marry one\'s father\'s, grandfather\'s, mother\'s, or grandmother\'s
sister.

From Mogschaft.

First, no one may take his death. First, no man shall take his son\'s
wife or stepdaughter, mother-in-law or stepmother.

1\) Of the Babylonian Captivity, St. Louis ed. vol. XIX, 98; in the
Sermon on Conjugal Life, ibid, vol. X, 605, s 15; ibid, vol. Ill, 210, §
32 2c.

*Hoc manebit.*

A man may also not take the daughter of his abandoned wife, that is, the
one divorced from him, whom she has begotten from another man.

It is also not due to anyone, his Todt.

son\'s or father\'s, though not yet fleshly known of him, take to be
publicly known by him.

for the sake of good manners and respectability.

No wedding shall be performed unless, as was the custom in ancient
times, it is publicly announced in the church. Also, the priest shall
not solemnize the wedding and shall not give the bride and groom
together, unless he has asked before the friendship whether anyone has
an objection.

**No. 1175.**

(Wittenberg.) (After January 3, 1528.)

**Concerns to the Elector Johann zu Sachsen.**

This is the answer to the letter of the Elector of January 3, No. 1174.
This concern is found, by Luther\'s own hand, in the Weimar archives;
printed from it in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 258 and (according to De
Wette) in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 53, p. 417, as well as in no other
edition. Because the first two paragraphs were included almost entirely
in the teaching of the visitators, De Wette has given the locations of
this writing. This has been misunderstood by the Erlanger Ausgabe and
taken as proof of the locations of our thought in the editions; likewise
the Erlanger Briefwechsel, which gives vol. VI, p. 187: \"Erl. 53, 417
2c. and den daselbst angeführten Orten.\"

[Where the article of either form is to be omitted, it should be
commemorated]{.underline} in [this or that way.]{.underline}

And after the holy Gospel (praise to God) has come to day, in which we
are clearly testified that both forms of the Sacrament are to be
administered and taken by all Christians according to the institution
and command of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that it is not for any man to
change such divine institution, for no man\'s last will is to be
changed, as Paul writes to the Galatians, much less is God\'s own last
will to be changed: accordingly we have instructed the pastors and
preachers to teach such doctrine.

**1072** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1175. **1073**

to teach the gospel of both forms to everyone, be he strong, weak or
stiff-necked, and in no way to approve the one form, but to punish it as
unjust and against the appointment and last will of our Savior and Lord
JESUS CHRIST, so that the teaching of it may be carried out freely and
purely in public.

Since no one can be forced to believe, nor can his unbelief be enforced
by commandment or force, since God does not want any forced service, and
wants to have only voluntary servants, people are of so many different
minds and abilities, 1) that it has been and still is impossible for us
to determine certain measures or persons to whom such two forms should
be given or refused according to the teachings of Christ: Therefore,
even though we may easily teach the doctrine purely and freely as given
by Christ Himself, yet the custom and practice of such doctrine is not
to be put into certain measure or persons, considered that by such old
and common custom of your form the people have been hard caught, and now
almost and hardly doubt. And so we must leave the day its twelve hours,
and command the things to God, 2) but in such a way that such should be
reserved and commanded to the *Visitatoribus,* that they be recognized
by them according to the skill and occasion of each parish, according to
the place or the people, give the parish priests in particular verbal
instruction or a written list of which parish priests are to be refused
both forms or tolerated and given one form, so that the doctrine remains
pure and free, and yet no one is urged to do anything against his
conscience, or the sacrament is taken from him, who has had the right to
it, against his right.

*Haec vel similia dicentur; ex his etiam de- . mantur vel addantur,
prout Dei gratia visum fuerit*. \[This or the like may be said; from it
may also be taken away or added, as seems good by God\'s grace\].

1\) This passage is better given in the Lessons of the Visitators, St.
Louis Edition, Vol. X, 1652.

2\) All the foregoing up to this point is recorded almost word for word
in the \"Lessons of the Visitators\" and can be found there in the St.
Louis edition, vol. X, l652, §48 from \]. 3 to Col. 1653, 8 49 the first
three paragraphs.

From the clans.

Although in the law Most the degree is not forbidden, if someone takes
his brother\'s or sister\'s daughter in marriage, as the *Levit*. at the
eighteenth chapter well points out and the examples of the holy arch
fathers Abraham and Nahor confirm, who both took their brother Haran\'s
daughters, namely Abraham the Sara, and Nahor the Milca, *Genes*. on the
eleventh, as Doctor Martinus Luther has also previously indicated in
writings, mostly for the sake of those who at that time had to buy such
degrees from the pope for money and yet had no good conscience 3) nor
Scriptural testimony or reason for themselves, so we also see that
Christ has not abrogated such things in the Gospel, but rather confirms
them when he says: \"What God has joined together, let no man put
asunder\"; therefore we did not know how to condemn those who had bought
such freedom from the pope or had taken the daughter of their sister or
brother according to the law of Moses.

But since the custom of such freedom has been abolished by papal laws,
and its law has come into tremendous use throughout the world, and is
being enforced, so that the consciences are quite hard-pressed, it is
also evident that marriage is a widespread matter, and people marry each
other especially on the borders, We have found that people, in some
cases cleverly, do some of the impertinence that they afterwards regret,
that they use more of the liberty out of sheer conceit without any need,
that they sometimes cause nothing but trouble, and that there are many
other things that we have experienced daily; Such causes and the like
have prevented us from having any certain measure, way or persons to
vote, for we cannot put a rope on the weak conscience, nor set a measure
for the people of foreign rule to be free, or prevent them from being
free. Therefore, we must separate doctrine and custom, let the doctrine
go, but reserve the custom to the *Visitatoribus,* that they give the
pastors and preachers verbal instruction or a written record, how they
keep themselves.

3\) The preceding is found almost verbatim in Spalatin\'s previous
concern, No. 1174.

**1074**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1175.

**\' 1075**

shall recognize and find the opportunity in such custom, according to
the cities, places, people and persons, and shall seek and use advice
and assistance in this respect from Our Lord the Elector as the ordinary
secular authority, because some of the marriage matters are also subject
to secular and worldly rights. H., the Elector, as an ordinary secular
authority, because the matrimonial matters are partly also subject to
secular and worldly rights. ^1)^

*Hic similiter addatur, mutetur, dematur, quod visum fuerit.* \[Here,
what seems to be good may be added, changed, demolished in the same
way\].

[On the case in matrimonial matters with red A marked]{.underline}

It should be considered whether such a piece should be left outside, and
especially because leprosy separates people from the community according
to Moses\' laws and according to all the country\'s customs, and perhaps
a case could arise that it would be impossible for one to remain without
a wife, again the people are also evil, easily seeking causes to leave
and avoid the sick women: Whether such should also be ordered especially
to the parish priests by the *visitators*, after which they would
recognize the opportunity of the persons and things, which are truly
diverse and impossible to put into a law\', as I often experienced.
Christians know well how to keep to this, as is stated in the lessons;
but how does it go with the others?

[Recorded in the case with 6.]{.underline}

Whether it would not be suitable that such a thing would be declared,
than that it would be understood only by the woman, who would also be
asleep about the betrothal; because that father and mother should not
have the power to change a bad betrothal, seems to me to give too much
room to the wanton children, because in the law Mosi God Himself has set
that child vows, also done by God, are in the power of the parents,
[Num]{.underline}. XXX. But where the secret betrothal will occur, by
the means indicated above, this will also be well advised, and may be
left outside.

That in the note 2) is considered how the opponents are to be
embarrassed their argument, so

1\) \"are\" put by us instead of: \"is\".

2\) This is Supplement I to the previous number.

saying that because we are redeemed from God\'s laws through Christ, we
should also be much more free from imperial laws than in these cases:
this is bad above by the means indicated, 3) because we do not want to
follow imperial laws in this 2c. Otherwise, in 4) the teaching is also
sufficiently provided, how we are free and not free from all other laws,
namely, according to the body subject to all laws, according to the
conscience subject to no law, as the preachers will learn this from the
Postilion and other books.

Likewise, that one should indicate the looos where in Scripture
*contritio, poenitentio, cognitio peccati etc*. is a thing. It is not
necessary, because the *Visitatores do* not write a disputation, but an
instruction, and show what they should search and teach in the
Scriptures. There they will find it themselves. Otherwise, one would
have to write a large book about it and give the quarrelsome cause to
dispute and be clever. There is enough of it in the lessons.

The note 5) from the enthusiasts is not highly necessary, because
nevertheless without that probably my gn. H. may do; but she does not
stand badly in it.

[From the case with reddish B. recorded.]{.underline}

It is worth considering whether such a piece should be transfigured
further, for we know what such a case has also given the pope to worry
about, namely, if someone had become engaged to one and married another,
especially as the first betrothal is secret, and yet could not break off
nor depart from the other. Here one thinks that he breaks the marriage
with the other, as often as he sleeps on her, and some want to despair,
as I have often experienced the misery. In this I am uncertain, for it
seems to me to be a hard thing that souls press so hard. It is true that
Scripture also confirms with examples that the first is the right woman,
as *Deut*. XXII. *sponsa* uxor is called and Rachel also remained the
right wife, although Lea was slept by Jacob 2c. afterwards, and Mary is
called Joseph\'s wife,

> 3\) That is: set right, ordered.
>
> 4\) \"inn\" == in, not \"them\" as De Wette resolves it. 5) This seems
> to be a lost supplement.

**1076** Letters from the year

No. 1175. 1176. **1077**

> since it was trusted, *Matth.* and *Luc*. II. But because the law
> dealt freely with wives, as Michal was given first to David, then to
> Adriel 1) and Merob, Saul\'s daughter, was betrothed first to David
> and then to another, I wonder if the law is wise enough for Mosi, or
> if the subsequent marriage should not destroy the first betrothal, as
> often happens in other marriages involving life and property, that a
> betrothal is destroyed by accidental things. I am writing this because
> it is especially difficult for me to leave consciences in desolation
> or doubt, unless bright, clear sayings force us to do so. Our pastor
> keeps it as it says in the lessons above, and I am satisfied that they
> conclude without me. But my conscience is not yet sure 2c. One should
> also reserve this for the *visitatoribus*, because it is dangerous to
> go out in such cases and put laws under the heap 2c.

**No. 1176.**

(Wittenberg.) January 5, 1528.

**Luther and Bugenhagen to Spalatin.**

Advice on how the von Einsiedel should behave towards Duke George for
the sake of their conscience: they should not chase away their parish
prince, even on the Duke\'s orders, but they should suffer if he were to
be chased away.

This letter is found in manuscript in Simler\'s collection at Zurich,
vol. 19. Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 247; in
the Jena edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 314.b; in the Altenburg, vol. IV,
p. 370 ; in the Leipzig, vol. XIX, p. 663; in Walch, vol. XXI, 223 ; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 266 ; and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.
424. We have not found the text published in the Erl. Briefw., Bd, VI,
p. 188 variants of the manuscript.

Grace and peace in Christ. Worthy dear master and priest! At your
request in the matter of von Einsiedel, this is recently our
understanding. Because Duke Georg wants to consider himself the
sovereign and overlord of Gnanstein, he must be allowed to rule, not
only rule, but also tyrannize, as St. Peter teaches, even to suffer
blows from unruly lords. For he uses his power over souls that he is not
right. God will judge this; they must suffer it.

1\) Merob was given to Adriel, 1 Sam. 18, 19. but Michal to Phalti, 1
Sam. 25,44.

But the von Einsiedel shall first show themselves on the opinion: Since
they have no authority, neither from God nor from men, to judge
doctrine, soul and spiritual things, but only to rule over the body and
goods of the subjects: so they have so far let the priest do as he knows
how, and also do not yet know (as they are not spiritual, but secular
rulers), to oppose the teachers or teachers. How they would have
understood that the Holy Father would have kept the secular government
himself, and left the spiritual government to the clergy, as God has
ordered it and also wants it.

But where Duke George wants to command them to chase away the parish
priest, and to keep the people to the old custom 2c.: then they shall
not commit themselves to it, and to be *executors of* such tyranny, and
thus to be partakers of its unrighteousness, but humbly ask, H. F. G..
would overrule such a commandment and graciously signify that, although
others judge, condemn and expel persons over spiritual matters, violate
God and also papal and all rights, they could not do so against their
consciences, because divine majesty\'s order and commandment compels
them to rule only secularly and not spiritually. And the Holy Father
therefore wanted to spare their consciences, since the Holy Father could
not judge them, and not urge them to do otherwise.

If S. F. G. ever does not want to let up that S. F. G. sends a
magistrate to Gnanstein, who exequires and creates such things, they
want to grant him, as the highest feudal lord and sovereign, to do such
things: that S. F. G. (and not they, the von Einsiedel) takes on
conscience and bears what is done or happens or remains. F. G. (and not
they, the von Einsiedel) would take and bear on S. F. G.\'s conscience
what would be done or would happen or would remain.

For the people of Einsiedeln must guard their conscience in this, that
they do not help the tyrant against the Gospel, but rather yield, clear
away and let him do it. If, however, such a thing were done by Duke
Georgen, that he wanted to force them to execute such a commandment,
they would have to refuse to obey him; for they cannot do it with God,
as they know how to do it in the most gentle and humble way.

But it must be said to the subjects that

**1078**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1176 to 1179.

**1079**

Each one believes and does for himself, stand or flee, as he knows how
to answer for it. For in such matters no one is another\'s protector;
each man stands for himself against the devil, and may go to the
sacrament where each man wills.

Dear God, won\'t the mad head stop for once? If he is to be converted,
my Lord JESUS CHRIST, then convert him; if not, then soon ward him off.
Why should he so long hinder and blaspheme yours, your word and work,
amen, amen, dear Lord. Sunday after *Circumcisionis* \[Jan. 5\] of the
1528th year. Martin Luther.

> Johannes Pommer.

**No. 1177.**

Wittenberg. January 6, 1528.

**To Christoph Jörger at Tolleth.**

Luther tells him that Stiefel is now in Wittenberg and encourages him to
hold fast to the Gospel.

Printed by Raupach, Evang. Oesterreich, Erste Fortsetzung, p. 40; by
Moseder, Glaubensbekenntniß, p. 67; in the Quartalschrist für ältere
Litteratur und neuere Lectüre by Canzler and Meißner, III, 2, p. 31; by
De Wette, vol. III, p. 149 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 53, p. 395.
In De Wette and in the Erl. edition, this letter and the next one are
dated 1527, but it belongs to the year 1528. On Jan. I, 1527, Stiesel,
as we see from Luther\'s letter to him (No. 1049), had escaped from
Tolleth, but soon returned, and had not yet gone to Wittenberg, as De
Wette thinks. According to Leonhard Kaiser\'s letter (Jen. Ausg.
\[1556\], Bd. Ill, Bl. 447a and Bl. 4476, in this volume No. 1086),
Michael Stiefel was in Jörger\'s house on March 9, 1527. Likewise,
Luther\'s letter to Stiefel of Oct. 8, 1527 (No. 1131) shows that
Stiefel was still in Tolleth at that time; only later did he leave this
place and turn to Wittenberg when he was threatened with the death
penalty, since it was also to be expected in Tolleth that he would carry
out the general mandate of King Ferdinand issued on Aug. 20, 1527.

> To the strict and firm Christoffen Jörger zu Tollet, my favorable
> special master and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Faithful, steadfast, dear Lord and
friend! I have truly received Michel Stiefel with joy, especially
because your testimony goes so well with him. Christ will keep his word
so that you will not be deprived of it for long, but that it will return
with great fruit. But you must have patience

until the weather passes. You were right to let Mr. Michel go, because
it was not proper and you were not able to protect him. For each one
must stand and confess for himself in this case. May God grant you grace
to do so, at whatever hour you may need it. Greet in Christ your dear
spouse, whom God blesses with His praise and honor, amen. Hiemit GOtt
befohlen, Amen. Wittenberg, *Epiphaniae* Domini \[Jan. 6\] 1528.

D. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1178.**

(Wittenberg.) January 6, 1528.

**To Dorothea Jörger in Tolleth.**

Similar content to the previous letter.

From the quarterly cited in the previous number, p. 30; in De Wette,
Vol. Ill, p. 150 and in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 53, p. 395.

> To the noble and virtuous woman Dorothea Jörgerin, widow at Tollet, my
> best faithful friend in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord. Virtuous woman! I received Michael
Stiefel with joy, and especially because you bear him such good witness
that he has shown himself to be so Christian and fruitful with you, as I
am also confident of him, and God has not let this confidence come to
shame. I also thank you, together with my kith and kin, for your
faithful gift. May God Almighty graciously keep you in His holy Word, as
He began, 1) and increase you until His future. God will judge the
tyranny and send it to His praise and your salvation. Hiemit GOtt
commanded, Amen. On the day of Epiphye \[Jan. 6\] 1528.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1179.**

Wittenberg. January 6, 1528.

**To Justus Jonas in Nordhausen.**

About the state of health of Jonas, Michael Meieuburg and Luther. The
prophet Zechariah is published. Response to the letter of Jan. 2.

1\) Here we have deleted a superfluous \"and\".

**1080** Letters from the year 1528.

No. 1179. 1180.

**1081**

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, bl, 323 d (under the year 1527); in
*Frid. Hoffmanni medicina consultoria, Hall*. 1723, III, 231; in
*Kindervater, Nordhus*. *illustr.*; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 255 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 189 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1022 and
in Keil, Merkw. Lebensumstände, vol. II, p. 164.

> Mr. Justus Jonas, who is stuck in Nordhausen.

My John gives thanks for the John sent to him, 1) my dear Jonas. But I
rejoice and give thanks to Christ that he has had mercy on you and has
commanded the stone to leave you for you, and I pray that he will
maintain this work of his forever. For this I desire most especially,
that when I die, at least you, whom I leave behind me, may avenge me on
the raging Satan with his apostles. Zechariah has been published, which
I would send if I did not await your arrival in hope; then my John will
hand over his Zechariah to you. We are all well by the grace of God. You
see to it that you do not believe it, if a rumor that there is still
plague left wants to blacken us; Satan would like that, so that we would
not meet in eternity. And one even recently tried to spread in the city
itself that the plague had returned again, since three had been infested
anew; but after the lie had been discovered, mau thought that this had
been fabricated by those who rule in the absence of the persons in
authority, so that they might deter those from returning and they might
rule longer. But it is more correct that Satan sees us in this way, so
that he keeps us scattered and separated.

I am very sorry for your Michael, 2) and I am sending what Eschaeus
asked for, but he is old, then he thinks, as doctors tend to do, that it
is difficult to practice the art of healing overland, mainly because he
thinks that there are doctors with you or at least in the neighborhood
of Erfurt. My illness was such that during defecation the swollen edge
of the anus protruded in the entire circumference about the size of a
walnut, on which there was a very small

1\) See No. 1172 towards the end.

2\) Meieuburg.

The sore (*scabies*) was the size of a hemp seed; it was, of course,
very small. The softer the stool was, the more it hurt; the harder, the
less it tormented me. But if it came off mixed with blood, then there
was relief and even a kind of pleasantness and pleasure in defecation.
And the more blood there was, the more pleasure, so that during the day
I was often tempted to defecate, and when it was touched with the
finger, it itched quite pleasantly and the blood flowed. Therefore, in
my opinion, this outgoing blood should not be stopped or inhibited at
all, because it is said to be the golden vein, and it is indeed golden.
For it is said that through this blood all that is evil in the whole
body flows out, as it were through a dung gate for all diseases, and
that such people tend to live the longest, since at this point they have
enclosed both the pharmacy and all the doctors of medicine. But it \[the
blood\] stands by itself in its time, without our effort. Therefore, if
something like this is the case with him, see to it that he does not
inhibit the blood. The rest is in the note. Farewell and pray for me.
Wittenberg. Greetings to you and all yours from my Käthe and the
children. On the day of the appearance of the Lord \[Jan. 6\] 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1180.**

(Wittenberg.) January 7, 1528.

**To Margaretha Blankenseld in Berlin.**

On the matter of Wolf Hornung.

The original is in the State Archives at Marburg. Printed by Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 98; by Zimmermann in Zeitschrift für preußische
Geschichte und Landeskunde, XX, 320 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
191.

> To the honorable, virtuous women Margarethe Blanckefeldinn Zu Berlin,
> my favorable good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, virtuous woman! I have received
your answer, and although I, as a stranger, must be satisfied with it,
you must nevertheless realize that the person concerned cannot be
satisfied with it at all, and give it to me.

**1082** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1180. 1181. 1182. **1083**

Such letters cause him to think a lot, especially that the person has
now too often let him lead by the nose (as he complains), and yet never
sent an answer in writing, so that he could feel her seriousness. It is
unbelievable, my dear wife, if it were serious with her, \[that she\] 1)
should not present herself differently, at least with writings, which
she could well send secretly. Accordingly, my friendly request is that
you should mean the poor fellow\'s distress, that he should not suffer
it any longer, nor can he, and if she does not let herself be noticed
otherwise, he must do so, if 2) she were dead, or as Philip did, when
his brother Herod took Herodias from him, and provide for himself
elsewhere. Speak to her seriously, or it must become a valete. Hiemit
GOtt commanded, Amen. Tuesday after Epiphany \[7 Jan\] 1528.

You will know how to procure this letter. 3) Martin Luther.

**No. 1181.**

(Wittenberg.) January 7, 1528.

**To Catharina Hornung in Berlin.**

Luther urges her to be kinder to her husband in her letters so that he
can sense that she is serious about reconciliation.

The original is in the acts concerning Wolf Hornung in the state
archives at Marburg. Printed by Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 99, by Zimmermann
l. c.. p. 320 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 192.

> To the honorable and virtuous woman Katherina Hornungeu of Berlin, my
> favorable good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Mrs. Kätherin! I have been persuaded
by some who have been kind to you to persuade the good journeyman Wolf
Hornung, your husband, once again (as has been done several times by
others, just as in vain as now), to kindly offer himself to you and to
settle the matter in peace. But because

1\) Supplemented by Zimmermann.

2\) \"sam\" == as if.

3\) \"procure\" == to dispose of \[the next letter\], to procure it. -
The Elector Joachim, who had become aware of the correspondence with
Luther, forbade the mother to accept letters, who, out of fear, obeyed
this order and therefore had this letter as well as the next letter
returned to Luther unopened. Zimmermann 1. 6. p. 322.

you yourselves are so strange, so that after so many mocking letters you
do not write a friendly serious letter, as you certainly could, - how
can he be such a stone and block, and let all this be good, and always
consider it friendship? Accordingly, my friendly request is that you
show yourself in writing to him, as you can do, so that he may feel that
you are serious. If not, then you have to mean well that he cannot and
should not remain like that, but according to God\'s word also think his
best and keep his soul. To this I ask your right answer, or must advise
him to do what he is right and gives to God. Hiemit GOtt commanded,
Amen. Tuesday after Epiphany \[7 Jan.\] 1528.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1182.**

(Wittenberg.) January 8, 1528.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther promises the people of Zerbst to find a capable preacher in
Pfeffinger\'s place. Thanks for a gift.

The original is in the Rathsarchiv at Zerbst. Printed in Sintenis\'
Denkschrift, p. 39; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 176 f. and in
De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 90.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> dear lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! I will gladly use
my heart and our pastor\'s diligence to send you a man, if he can be
found elsewhere, to preach and preside effectively. ^4)^ For that is why
I would have gladly sent Johann Pfeffinger to preach and preside over
you, so that you would be well provided for. But because God thus
prevents and sends us, we must look for another; for I am willing and
ready to support you. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Midweek after Epiphany
\[Jan. 8\] 1528. Martin Luther.

(Inserted note.)

I thank you diligently for your gift and veneration of beer. So I will
report it to the priest.

4\) Seidemann reads: \"vorstehen\", but the Erl. Briefw. says that the
original offers: \"vorgehen\".

**1084**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1183 to 1186.

**1085**

**No. 1183.**

(Torgau.) (Before January 16, 1528.)

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector demands Luther\'s expert opinion in Mohr\'s matter of faith.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, p. 406, No.
199. 3. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 125 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,\' p.
194.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We graciously
inform you that we have recently sent away a warrior servant, Hans
Mohr 1) , who has shown us an honorable character and conduct, and that
he is famous and has been declared to be skilled and suitable for the
trade for which we intend to use him, and that he has been accepted as a
servant for the rest of his life and has been appointed to our city of
Coburg. Now we have been reported as if he, our appointed and ordained
servant, should be somewhat attached to the Zwinglian, Doctor
Carlstadt\'s and Oecolampadii\'s doctrine with the sacrament, also be
opposed to the ceremonies, as they are held in our principality, and
should also be subject to form his opinion of the same in other people
and to speak of it publicly. We have therefore written to our deputies
in Coburg and ordered them what they should say to the same Moor and
forbid him, whereupon they have now informed us by their letter what
they hold against him as for themselves and what he should give them in
reply, 2) as you will hear from the copy enclosed. And it is therefore
our gracious request that you inform us of your concerns in this matter
as to what is good for your opinion to be done in this matter, so that
we may know how to act accordingly. You do us a favor. Date.

1\) No. 1697 in the 2nd Appendix to the Tischreden, St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XXII, 1982, contains, as we see from *Bindseil\'s colloquia
Lutheri,* tom. II, p. 43 f. as well as from the next letter, Luther\'s
verdict on Hans Mohr. - Compare also Melanchthon\'s letter to Balthasar
Thüring, preacher at Coburg, of Nov. 18, 1527 (*Corp. Ref.,* vol. l, 910
f.), in which he tells him how he should behave against Mohr.

2\) According to the letter of the councilors of Monday after New
Year\'s Day \[Jan. 6\]^\*)^ 9 Mohr said: he does not intend a secret
mutiny, but that he cannot allow himself to be bound, if he is in revels
and collation and half of the things of the sacrament are spoken of by
others, that he should not confess his faith 2c. for it is ever unjust
to make of the creature in the Lord\'s bread and wine that which is the
Creator Himself, and to pity that the poor people should be so miserably
deceived in these things. (Burkhardt l. c.)

\*) Not \"January 4,\" as the Erl. Briefw. states.

**No. 1184.**

(Wittenberg.) January 16, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2095, no. 707.

**No. 1185.**

Coburg. January 20, 1528.

**Martin Landmann an. Luther.**

(Regest.)

Martin Landmann, who seems to be a tax or accounting official,
apologizes that because of his official business he could not, as he had
promised, come to Wittenberg shortly for the sake of the prisoners
(among whom will have been his adulterous wife). Therefore he asks
Luther, out of Christian love, to take care of the prisoners, his
compatriots (*proprios*). He informs that his adulterous wife had been
seduced by gifts, whose parents, bribed by the adulterer, had delivered
her to shame themselves. Therefore, he considers the still young woman
innocent, he laments for her, and if he could, he would help to free
her, and, if she would be provided with some of the adulterer\'s goods,
he would forsake his right out of love, take her back to himself and
live with her. Therefore, Luther should try to persuade the head of the
city and the great ones to accept this and to set her free. - Nothing
else is known about this matter.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, O, pag. 538, L. 3a. Printed in
Burkhardt, p. 131 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 195.

**No. 1186.**

(Wittenberg.) January 21, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Concerns about a marital case.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Registrande O, 546. Printed in
Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 28 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 197.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Duke of Saxony and
> Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! In your case concerning Hall\'s miller full of Almerode 3) I have
indeed indicated my opinion and verdict in the instruction 4) as I would
like to have it.

3\) Groß-Almerode near Kassel. (Seidemann.)

4\) In No. 1175 the case with B. is recorded.

**1086** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1186 to 1189. **1087**

> wanted to doubt in it. But I cannot thoroughly conclude against it
> that our priest holds, namely that the wife is obliged to follow the
> created husband, which right wife she also is before God by virtue of
> the first vow; the other husband is betrayed and may keep the child.
> And I am also moved, if the first vows were to be torn apart in this
> way, no marriage would remain firm and certain in the end, since each
> one, as often as it wished, would betroth itself elsewhere and leave
> the first spouse. So Hans Müller may now go home with his bride, if he
> desires her rc. ^1)^ Hiemit GOtt befoh-
>
> len, Amen. Tuesday after Fabiani \[21 Jan.\] 1528.
>
> E. C. F. G. subservient

Martinus Luther.

> **No. 1187.**

(Wittenberg.) January 24, 1528.

> **To Spalatin.**

Covering letter to the letters and concerns to be sent to von Einsiedel
by Spalatin.

Handwritten in the royal library in Berlin, Luther-Mappe III, copy by
Spalatin\'s hand, and at Gotha in *Cod.* 185. 4. Printed by Kapp,
Nachlese, vol. I, p. 97; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 120; by De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 258 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 198.

Grace and peace! The messenger of the hermitage returns to you, my dear
Spalatin, loaded with our, but God wanted, salutary and successful
advice. Solomon says \[Proverbs 27:22\]: \"If you crush the fool in the
mortar, his foolishness will not leave him\"; and \[Proverbs 29:9\]:
\"If a godly man comes to deal with a fool, he laughs or is angry, he
has no peace.\" One must pray that the Lord will enlighten him 2) if he
is worthy; but if not, that the Lord will prosper the gospel through his
tyranny until his hour comes. Muenzer\'s spirit does not stop blowing,
as we see from these monstrosities, one of which you write about Erfurt.
Christ help us poor people who suffer so many and so great attempts of
Satan, amen. January 24, 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

1\) For the further course of events, compare Luther\'s and
Bugenhagen\'s letter to the Electoral Council of March 26, 1528.

2\) the Duke George.

**No. 1188.**

(Wittenberg.) January 24, 1528.

**Luther and Bugenhagen to Heinrich von Einsiedel.**

Cover letter to the attached concern.

The original is in Berlin, Luther-Mappe III. Printed from the original
in Kapp\'s Nachlese, vol. I, p. 100; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 268; in
the Altenburg edition, vol. VIII, p. 1005; in the Leipziger, vol. XIX,
p. 662 and in the Erlanger, vol. 53, p. 426. Walch lacks this letter.

> To the strict and firm Heinrich von Einsiedeln zum Gnanstein 2c., my
> favorable lord and friend in Christo.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Faithful, steadfast, dear Lord and
friend! What we are able to do in your cause, we send you herewith. But
Christ our Lord, whose cause this is, will hear our prayer and give you
mouth and wisdom, strength and spirit, to do his will and overcome the
devil, amen. You will know better than to ask most politely and humbly,
so that the tyrant will not create cause for some contempt or arrogance.
Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Friday after *Vincentii* \[24 Jan.\] 1528.

Martinus Luther.

Johannes Bugenhagen *Pomer*.

**No. 1189.**

(Wittenberg.) (January 24, 1528.)

**Luther\'s concerns in the Einsiedel case.**

Supplement to the previous letter.

This concern is found in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p.
247.d; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 315; in the Altenburg
edition, vol. IV, p. 369; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p. 662; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 227; in Kapp\'s Nachlese, vol. I, p. 102 (from the
original); in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 269 and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 53, p. 427.

Because Duke George puts on his head, my concern is, he acts like
*diabolus incarnatus,* until one goes right and clear under his eyes,
does not cease to ask the von Einsiedel conscience 2c. Therefore, there
is little advice against violence; as much as I can, I show.

**1088**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1189.

**1089**

First of all, that they will take a life and limb for themselves and
decide that they do not want to grant or accept any of the things that
Duke George puts out for them, and especially not the absolution 1). And
next, because it is God\'s business and concerns the soul, that they
cheerfully call upon God for counsel and help, and not doubt that He
will hear and help.

Secondly, to make their reply, it would be good that the apology they
made on five pieces, as recorded in the 10th and 11th sheet, be taken
again and crossed out in fine words, to the same extent: the von
Einsiedel would have provided themselves humbly, H.F.G. would have
sufficiently heard their innocence from such reply, when H.F.G. himself
found on the same that they are without reason and cause to indicate to
H.F.G.; and also hoped to stand against Imperial Majesty himself with
it, as in which mandate alone assault is forbidden 2c. and no assault is
found here in the five pieces. Majesty himself with this, as in which
mandate alone the offence is forbidden 2c., and here in the five pieces
no offence is found. Therefore they still hoped that H. F. G. should
leave them at it, and not yet go higher than Imperial Majesty\'s mandate
demands. Majesty\'s mandate demands.

Thirdly, if they did not find any physical violation, they would not be
able to confess their disobedience with a good conscience and have it
absolved: since God himself would know well to think that one cannot sin
with a good conscience if there is no sin; for God would be mocked by it
if one sought forgiveness in his sacrament if one has no sin or
confesses it.

Thirdly, that they humbly ask the Lord to leave their conscience and
person free and uncoerced. For they should graciously request that faith
be free and uncoerced, or else it is completely contrary to God, and
both he who compels and he who allows himself to be compelled sin. For
they both mock God, because the heart is not there with the glow of a
free conscience.

It would undoubtedly do S. F. G. itself no favors where a foreign prince
wanted to force S. F. G. subjects into his

1\) Namely, \"from the bishop, as the highest prelate. See the
introduction to No. 1161.

Make them listen. Now, however, conscience and faith alone are subject
to God, and are not to be subject to any power on earth or in heaven:
the S. F. G. must consider that the von Einsiedel not only for the sake
of their souls, but also for the sake of the S. F. G. , as they want to
reach out and take hold of the eternal God\'s kingdom and power; for
they would complain of both their own and other people\'s sins before
God, because they have acted against His divine commandment by letting
other people rule in His kingdom and conscience. And although the
conscience of Einsiedeln would be wrong and erroneous, yet St. Paul has
forbidden Rom. 14 \[22\] to do and act against such conscience.
Therefore, they humbly request that H.F.G. graciously accept their
humble request, for they, with body and soul, as true, faithful
subjects, are due to H.F.G., as true, proper superiors, always gladly
obedient 2c. And S. F. G. wanted to be moved that S. F. G. would not be
helped by forcing the von Einsiedel to act against their conscience, and
thus to great sin and eternal damnation of their souls, since Paul also
condemns those Röln. 14 \[23\], who act against their wrong and false
conscience.

Fourthly, they would like to include this, because the full Einsiedel
are probably feudatories of two princes; so they know neither before the
world nor before God to answer for that they should surrender and join
the one part so completely. For since the persons would be entangled,
they would then also have to do in the other principality according to
the will of H.F.G., which would then also be in secular foreign
sovereignty. How to do this (for I do not understand myself highly in
this), that one may well show him how S. F. G. is half the part, and not
the whole lord over the von Einsiedel person, therefore they can give
their person in this as little without the other lord\'s knowledge and
will completely, as in other services, Frohnen 2c.

They asked for it, and hoped comfortingly that H. F. G. would not force
them there, so that they would gain disfavor with the other part, or
even do too much to the same rule. And since it is certain that H.
George will not be able to resist the seven

**1090** Letters from your year 1528. no. 1189. 1190. **1091**

Villages 1) Fiefs alone are subject, which nevertheless also belong to
the Elector, so it is in no way to remain silent, but to show that they
have no right or right to connect themselves with them without the
knowledge and will of the Elector.

Fifthly, because H.F.G. does not boast of seeking his own benefit, but
the blessedness of Einsiedeln, that one should give thanks for it, and
indicate, and ask, that H.F.G. would also graciously confirm such. But
to press against the conscience is not to press to blessedness, but to
hell, Rom. 14 \[22. 23\].

Sixth, now that he does not want to give way, and wants to insist on the
meager answer, they may tell once more, as a surplus, how they have been
found out against the imperial majesty, without any offence. Majesty\'s
Mandate, and make sure, that H. F. G. would not prevent himself from
forcing the hearts and from inquiring, which is due to God alone, but
would punish only the offences, as far as his temporal authority
reaches.

If this does not help, my advice is that they appeal to the law, be it
to the court or to 2) the emperor, just as Paul Act. XXV. appealed to
the emperor in such a same matter. For they do not do this against the
gospel, since it is right; for they do not argue about good, but about
God\'s kingdom, namely whether Duke George has the right and power to
rule the consciences and God\'s kingdom.

And so or in such a way: because S. F. G. does not seek benefit nor
good, but the von Einsiedel blessedness and justice, and they in turn
also do not quarrel with nm good, but also seek their conscience and
blessedness, and such humble action does not satisfy S. F. G., nor does
it seem enough, in turn they also do not find that Imperial Majesty the
Emperor of Austria is not satisfied. Majesty. Majesty\'s prohibition and
mandate to drive his subjects against their consciences and to search
their hearts, and thus so far Imperial Majesty has not been able to do
so. Majesty. If they have hitherto found themselves obedient to Imperial
Majesty\'s commands, they do not wish to be judges in such matters
themselves, but to return to the law or to Imperial Majesty. Maj. again,
and to the rights of the

1\) The seven villages, which the Einsiedel had to fief jointly from
Duke Georg and the Elector, were: Roda, Langelenben, Einsiedel,
Erfurtschloß, Dietresdorf, Kempte and Reichenhain. Kapp l. c. S. 251.

2\) Kapp : \"for\" instead of the one we have put: \"on\". The latter is
also offered by the Wittenberg and Jena editions, which have a slightly
different order in this sentence.

and His Imperial Majesty. Majesty. His Imperial Majesty\'s decision and
judgment. However, they humbly request that H.F.G. not cause or require
them to do so, because it is disgraceful, nor is it praiseworthy for
H.F.G. that subjects must first engage in action with their sovereignty,
since they are to seek justice and have protection.

Where it would therefore come into the right, I hoped it should go into
the long chest 3) as it also happened with Paulo (and I would like to
see it), so that others, who might also have been attacked, would have
an example and tax on it against the devil, just as Count Albrecht of
Mansfeld also did before the bishop of Magdeburg.

If the appellate court cannot advise them on the appointment of priests,
they can let go of whatever they want, but they cannot approve or help
to appoint papist priests. If the tyrant does it by force, they cannot
agree to it; for they should not and may not resist him. But God will
hear the common prayer one day.

But if they had to sell the goods, that they 4) give a humble and
merciful answer to the last, and come with kindness to the tyrant, so:
that, because their conscience complains to follow S. F. G.\'s urge and
commandment, they want to beware not only of their own sin, but also, so
that they do not come into S. F. G.\'s sin, of foreign sin, and command
God the things; thank S. F. G. for all mercy 2c., and still ask that
H.F.G. would heed their humility and distress of conscience, and
graciously refrain from H.F.G.\'s disfavor.

That is all I know how to advise.

\' Martinus Luther. 5)

**No. 1 190.**

(Wittenberg.) Jan. 27, 1528.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2233, annex, no. 6.

3\) De Wette reads \"Thren\" with the note: \"Ausg. Thruen.\" The
Wittenbergers and the Jenaers read: \"Druen\" with the marginal gloss:
\"Kasten\". The meaning is: to be put on the back burner.

4\) Kapp: \"in\" instead of: \"sa\".

5\) Kapp is missing the signature.

**1092**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1191. 1192. 1193.

**1093**

**No. 1191.**

Torgau. Jan. 27, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Meaning of a marriage case. From the teaching of the visitators.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 366 d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 264
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 201. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1084.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus, my dear Nicolaus, my brother in the
Lord! According to my judgment, the girl about whom you ask for advice,
if she absolutely refuses to marry the one to whom her father has
promised her, can marry the former one to whom she herself has promised
it, if her parents consent. However, the parents must consent for the
good of the daughter, nor can they force her with a good conscience,
although they can do so according to strict law, because rights must
give way to love. The \[visitation\] order is at birth; I hope that it
will bear fruit through Christ, which we must all promote through
prayers. Doctor Pommer greets you. Pray for us and be well in Christ.
Torgau, Monday after Paul\'s conversion \[27 Jan.\] 1528.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1192.**

(Wittenberg.) January 31, 1528.

**Luther and Bugenhagen to Spalatin.**

Cover letter to your next concerns for the von Einsiedel.

The letter and concerns are found in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol.
IX, p. 249; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. I V, p. 316 d; in the
Altenburg edition, vol. IV, p. 369; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p.
662; in Walch, vol. XXI, 233; in De Wette, vol. Ill p. 272 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 431.

Guad and peace in Christo. Worthy, dear Lord! We have this time the
messenger can not so hurriedly ready, because we are from Torgau also
not empty come 2c.

First, since you ask about the parish mass 2c., you know that no parish
priest can say mass with a clear conscience if there are no
communicants. Therefore, there is no further question here; either no
mass, or communicants.

On the von Einsiedel 1) friendship opinion I have listed at my opinion.
Dear, Duke George was easy to notice, because the von Einsiedel did not
answer straight at the first: Yes, yes, gracious nobleman, like the
others, but rather, they are worried, and seek advice, that they do not
believe with him, nor do they hold; therefore, it is lost to deal with
him, it wants and must be in the right.

What kind of ceremonies may be held Christianly, our visitation will
probably teach; because it is nothing to me to meet, what for a parish
priest or what to N. 2) for ceremonies may be passable, because I do not
know the place opportunity, and Duke George wants to rule there. If it
were only a matter of the German and Latin masses, \[it\] would not have
a ride. You will find more in the directories. Hiemit GOtt befehlt,
Amen. Friday after St. Paul\'s Conversion \[Jan. 31\] 1528. Martinus
Luther.

Johannes Bugenhagen Pomer.

**No. 1193.**

(Wittenberg.) (January 31, 1528.)

**Luther\'s concerns in the Einsiedel case.**

See the previous number.

I also worry that Duke George wants to have an answer expressed. That is
why I thought such an answer was in vain and lost before.

On the article of Luther\'s teaching half, they wanted to stay with the
holy Gospel: he will not have enough on it, and is in vain. I still
think, because Duke George will put on his head, it will have to come
right with him.

But to this piece of Luther\'s half, I would like to answer thus:
Because such a question is wide-ranging, the von Einsiedel cannot answer
it with certainty; for Luther teaches many things that even Duke George
himself praises, as of the sacrament against the enthusiasts, of
warriors, of worldly authority 2c. Luther himself does not want to be
Lutheran 2c., unless he teaches the holy scriptures purely.

1\) In the editions here as everywhere: \"N.\"

2\) Here, \"Gnanstein\" will probably have to be understood again.

**1094** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1193 to 1197. **1095**

Where now articles would be expressed, as from the sacrament of both
form 2c., then this article would be loose, and this matter would come
on the previous articles.

If he will not let go of the people, I know no better, as shown that
time, that they appeal to him in the right; if not, then they must come
out freely and let themselves be heard against him with the confession
of what they believe; for he will not want to have enough with dark
words. One must not deny Christ in this way. But with the appeal it will
be known enough that they believe against him 2c. That the von Einsiedel
are young people. It may well be so; where he wants to have enough of
it, much is given. They themselves would not like novelty 2c. It is good
where he wants to have enough. Whether the parish of N. may not be
appointed with a skilled man, who teaches the people well, and reports;
it is also good, it can happen.

Whether the same pastor keeps himself right 2c. in the order of the
church ceremonies, keeping masses; because without doubt there is a
difference between parish masses and purchased masses 2c. It will not do
so, to hold masses without necessity, that is, if there are no
communicants; for it is contrary to the institution of Christ.

Whether such a priest could teach common ceremonies in the villages, at
the Holy Celebration, Latin Mass 2c., and in addition: that all goes
well, unless the Masses are without communicants, and the Holy
Celebration is not held in the papal manner, to plague the saints. But
for the sake of the sacrament, they know no way, unless the same priest
could forbid the one who uses both forms in confession to seek
elsewhere. If a Christian priest wants to and can do so, let him do so;
for no one is to be forced to believe.

If there were some parishioners who had not received the sacrament
before in both forms, or who had received it completely, they would come
to the same priest and ask for one form: whether he could give it with a
clear conscience, especially because the Word of God had been carried to
the fourth year, after which the people would be. For where it would be
pure weakness, it would go; but where

otherwise, it is no good. But this, and much more, will be said in the
visitation when it ends, \[which,\] I hope, will not be long in coming.
1528. D. Martin Luther.

Ohm Date.

**Luther\'s further concerns in the Einsiedel case.**

Because the other Einsiedel acts given by Kapp do not give any clue for
a more exact dating, we also put this concern here, as all other
editions do.

D. M. L. for the fifth, *inter alia*.

If the subjects are to appoint a priest, they must not appoint an
unchristian one, but a righteous one: otherwise they would be guilty of
a sin of another, as if they had knowingly shown support and counsel.

Where the priest is not righteous, it does not help that he should act
as he knows to answer to God, because they have helped the unchristian
priest.

It is also not particularly the case if a subject goes to the churches
in haste, since ungodly preaching and ceremonies are conducted inside;
for it is recorded in the other book of Kings, in the fifth chapter \[v.
18\], that the Naaman Syrus went with his king of Syria to the temple of
Rammon 2c.

**No. 1195.**

(Wittenberg.) (First months 1528.)

**To Johann Secerius, printer in Hagenau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 164.

**No. 1196.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early February) 1528.

**To two parish priests from rebaptism.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2187 f.

**No. 1197.**

(Wittenberg.) February 5, 1528.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2239, annex, no. 11.

**\
1096**

Letters from the year 1528. no. 1198. 1199. 1200.

**1097**

**No. 1198.**

(Wittenberg.) February 5, 1528.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Luther indicates that Niclas is ready to go to Zerbst, but has so far
been held up by the bad road there.

From the original in the Zerbst city archives in Sintenis\' Denkschrift
v. 1846, p. 40; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 177 and in De
Wette - Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 91.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! From E.
E.\'s writing and the mayor\'s sent report, I do not know how to answer
otherwise than that he Niclas,^1)^ accepted by you until Easter, should
either come to you today, as he talked to me the day before yesterday;
for he has not yet gone astray, as the mayor himself will indicate to
you; for E. E.\'s sake I am inclined. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Midweek
after Purificationis Mariä \[5. Febr,\] 1528. Martinus Luther.

**No. UNS.**

(Wittenberg.) February 8, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

From Martin Cellarins and the upcoming Imperial Diet in Regensburg.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 367; in De Wette, vol. III, p. 279 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 205. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1084.

Grace and peace! I am glad that you have seen Martin Cellarius and have
now also read him, my dear Amsdorf; I knew that you would pass such a
judgment on him. Satan rages in those people that they do not think or
think anything certain, so that he may also disturb others through them.
Christ keep us. Amen. There is nothing new here, only that it is said
and believed that the Pope\'s clergy is up to strange things on the

1\) Not Niclas Pintzelt, as Seidemann thinks, because he had resigned
from his office at Zerbst, which is why the negotiations with Pfeffinger
were initiated.

2\) namely the book of *Cellarin de operibus Dei etc.*. See No. 1190.

future days at Regensburg. 3) Let us pray to the Lord for this assembly,
that he may prosper the undertakings and counsels of the good. But why
do you not visit us weak and miserable brothers from time to time? The
Lord be with you, amen. On the Saturday after the Purification \[of the
Virgin Mary\] \[8 Feb.\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1200.**

(Wittenberg.) February 10, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

From Luther\'s letter against the Anabaptists. He forgives the Dipontius
(Schlagiuhaufen?) an insult. About the filling of the pastorate in
Schletta and the improper behavior of Paul Lindenau, preacher in
Zwickau.

The original is in the Zerbst archive, Hausmannbriefe, No. 39 (with the
inscription Hausmanns: *De Diponcio. De Balthasaro Loy. De paulo
Lindenau*)). Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol.
59 b (with the wrong year 1538). Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 3670;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 280 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 206.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1085.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmaun, the
> holy bishop of the church at Zwickau, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I have published a letter against the
Anabaptist sect, my dear Nicolaus, which I believe you have seen;
perhaps more will come out at another time.

To Dipontius 4) you shall say in my name: peace and mercy. If he has
missed anything, let it be forgotten, for I too have long since
forgotten it, that I do not even remember it; why then does he doubt me
so long?

I wanted to admonish our Balthasar 5) to accept the preaching ministry
in Schleta, but he overcame me by reasons, since

3\) The Imperial Diet at Regensburg was announced for the first Sunday
in Lent, then postponed to May and finally cancelled by an imperial
edict of April 10 and did not convene until the following year at
Speier.

4\) This Dipontius is said to be Joh. Schlaginhaufen, who was Luther\'s
table companion in the years 1531 and 1532.

5\) \"Balthasar\" is not, as Seidemann assumes in De Wette, Vol. VI, p.
704, Zeiger, but, as Hausmann\'s inscription shows, Loy.

**1098** Letters from the year

. No. 1200. 1201. **1099**

he had been invented without stubbornness. For since there are people
available who are both fit and poor, why should one not be allowed or
willing to appoint one of them? Especially since this Balthasar does not
like to accept, both for his own sake and for that of his wife;
therefore, I think, one should let him go freely wherever he wants and
take another in his place.

The visitation is under the press, through which, I hope, everything
will be changed for the better.

Your preacher has a bad rumor among us, as if he despises your
reputation and, puffed up by trusting in the applause of the mob, takes
too much liberty and is insolent. I write about this both to the council
and to himself, I also write to your reverence (*tuae D\[ignatati*)).
See, therefore, that he teaches quietly and punishes the infirmities
without noise, lest, if you are negligent, we be compelled to invoke the
hand of the prince against him and his. I will take zero blame if you do
not dare to do so, and work with the prince to remove him from the city
if he does not begin to act more prudently; for what is he doing
stirring up trouble in the midst of trouble and carrying fire to fire?
This you shall read to him and say in my name, that is, sharply and
openly, and confidently you shall provoke his anger against me, and
apologize, because I do not have this from you, which I write, and I
wonder that you have kept silent so long and kept behind the mountain.
Farewell in Christ, my man venerable in Christ. Our Pomeranus sends you
his friendly greetings. Monday after Dorothea \[10 Feb.\] 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1201.**

Wittenberg. February 10, 1528.

**To Paul Lindenau, preacher in Zwickau.**

Luther exhorts him to refrain from insulting personalities and to plant
everything by which the people can be aroused, rather love and peace.

Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Fransiscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol. 26 d. Printed
in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 368d (with the name *Lindeman*); in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 281 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 208. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1087.

> His brother Paul, who is extremely dear in Christ, the zealous and
> diligent preacher of the church in Zwickau.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord! I have also asked you before, dear
Mr. Paul, by letter 1) that you should teach the word of God peacefully,
and abstain from persons and everything that tends to move the people
without benefit. Now a sad and unpleasant rumor about you shows me anew
what I would rather not have heard, and not only the rumor, but also N.
Stephan Roth through his letters; although dark, he has nevertheless
shown so much that it is enough to arouse my concern, which, as it
suspects all evils in a few evils, so also fears in all things that are
certain. In short, since you teach in this way that you seriously offend
blameless and godly men, this is a great proof that you do not walk
rightly according to the Gospel, but aim to cause either riots or mobs
for your glory. Yes, that you teach about the sacrament so coldly and
that you abstain from communion yourself for so long, who should not
rightly think that you might be planning some monstrosity?

Therefore, my dear brother, I ask you again for the sake of Christ JEsu,
that you rather calm the minds of the listeners than stir them up, and
promote love and peace between all. It is enough that Satan stirs up
unrest and riots; let us not also provide weapons for his rage, since we
should have resisted him with all our strength. You know the wild nature
of your citizens and their more than civil licentiousness, as experience
has taught so far: what need is there then to carry fire to fire? I
write this because I hope that you will receive the reminder of love
with a willing mind and not let it pass without fruit, so that we will
not be forced to invoke the prestige and power of the prince (who is
busy enough anyway) at all times and in all our affairs, which is
neither beneficial for you nor glorious.

1\) This letter from the end of March 1527 is missing. Compare

**1100** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1201. 1202. **1101**

would be full for us, even though necessity compels it. May the Lord
Jesus grant you His Spirit, so that you may do what is pleasing to Him,
Amen. Wittenberg, on the day of the Scholastica \[Feb. 10\] 1528. Martin
Luther.

**No. 1202 .**

Kiel. February 21, 1528.

**Wilhelm Pravest, preacher in Kiel, to Luther.**

Pravest writes that many annoying doctrines are imposed on Luther as
their author, but he and many orthodox Christians cannot believe that
Luther is to blame. Therefore, he asks Luther to tell him what he thinks
about the teachings he has given. About Melchior Hofmann and his
enthusiasm.

Printed by *Muhlius, dissertat. distorico-theol., p.* 147; by Joh.
Melch. Krafft, Zweifaches Zwei-Hundert- Jähriges Jubel-Gedächtniß 2c.,
Hamburg 1723, p. 446; in Krohn, Geschichte der Wiedertäufer, p. 113 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 210.

Greeting and continuing (tenor), 1) to keep what is right and to follow
diligently what is for peace. In Christ, most reverend Father! Your
admirable and unusual erudition, with which you are gifted, as many
praise you, makes you famous in all of Europe; God would that so many
annoyances had not arisen under the name of your teaching, and would
still be raised daily. Namely, under the cloak of evangelical freedom,
many careless people add many things that have been unheard of from time
immemorial, about which godly hearts are angry. Although there are many
who blame you for this, since you are certainly the originator of the
new teachings in this day and age, I cannot believe that all these
annoying things have come from you or that you approve of them, but it
is according to the common saying: When bad talk arises, the palm tree
is also accused of being crooked; 2) just as many good orthodox
believers (catholici) \[suffer this\] with me, who reverently receive
and venerate Christ (as is proper) in his Gospel, who desire a general
reformation of the doctrine of the church, 3) in which

1\) The all gifts have a punctum after *tenor.*

2\) *palma accipit ulnam*, literally: the palm tree gets an elbow.

3\) Pravest, since 1526 preacher at St. Nicolai in Kiel, placed there by
his monastery, the Augustinian monastery at Bordesholm, was one of the
natures that had the need of a reformation, but only up to a certain
point mitgingm. When he here with Luther about the riots

But that everywhere every ecclesiastical custom, and that which was
handed down by the fathers of the first orthodox church (in my opinion)
without violation of the Gospel, should be destroyed or ridiculed, is
not at all pleasing to me; as, then, there are people who remove the
baptismal font from the churches and baptize only in a common basin of
water, without observing any of the traditional ceremonies. Likewise,
there are those who speak shameful things of the reverend sacrament of
the altar, who utterly condemn the mass, of which the whole church has
made use in the Roman manner, and turn the people away from hearing it,
while the common one, which is gathered from all quarters, not keeping
them evenly, even denying faith in the life-giving sacraments of the
body and blood of Christ, and many such things, which the learned rabble
in general charge upon thee, as if they were introduced into the church
of Christ with thy consent, or according to thy doctrine 2c. Therefore,
venerable father, in order that you may advise your good name and the
common people, I have asked you from the bottom of my heart, for the
sake of Christ\'s mercy, that you may indicate what is to be done in
these matters, provided that you will not be displeased to let me know
through this young man what your opinion is about them. For I, the
unworthy one, have been called and unanimously chosen to lead the church
in Kiel at this dismal time, and have often insisted that I be released
from it, but have not been able to obtain it until now. Therefore, may
you advise me, I ask you for God\'s sake, what I should do in these
doubts. A certain man 4) has come to us, who claims to be a promoter of
the Gospel of Christ and boasts that he was ordained by God for this
purpose, and tries to persuade people that everything he says is to be
received as a law, as a Gospel, and yet the man (as he says) 5)
understands nothing of the Latin language. He

of some evangelicals, he was already inwardly alienated from the cause
of the Reformation. No sooner had he received Luther\'s answer than he
used it to uphold the Papist essence, even spreading mischievous rhymes
at Luther. (Erl. Briefw.)

4\) Melchior Hofmann, to whom King Frederick of Denmark gave permission
to preach in Holstein and gave him a position in Kiel, where he
practiced until the Flensburg Conversation on April 8, 1529.

5\) In the writing: \"That Nic. Ambsdorf is a lying nose ghost\": \"If I
were a smeared one and knew Latin and not a Korssner or Pelzer, then I
would probably have peace before you larval spirits\".

**1102**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1202. 1203. 1204. **1103**

is called Melchior, was formerly a furrier, and has taught insolently,
even in a writing of the last day, and that the world must have an end
in seven years. There would have been many other things to bring up, but
I did not want to bother you further with my unlearned letter,
especially since I hear that you are burdened with weakness of the body.
If, out of love for God, you would deign to write and instruct me, I
would accept it with thanks and repay you to the best of my ability; in
the meantime, I wish that you may be healthy in spirit and body in
Christ. Farewell; very hastily. In the city of Kiel, in the year of
salvation 1528, on the day before the feast of the chair of the Apostle
Peter \[21 Feb\], by your confrere in ChristWilhelm Pravest.

**No. 1203.**

(Wittenberg.) February 22, 1528.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther disapproves of the answer given by the Einsiedels to Duke George.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 370; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 282; in
Kapp\'s kleiner Nachlese, vol. I, p. Ill and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 212. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1090 f.

Grace and peace! Everything we have done so far in the matter of the
Einsiedels has been done in vain, my dear Spalatin. For their answer,
which was handed over to the duke by his friends, contains this, namely
that the Einsiedels want to do everything that pleases Prince George,
not what pleases God. Namely, this is what Satan wanted, since he
ordered this line, which is underlined by the tyrant with a line, to be
eradicated, and they agreed. And there can be no doubt that the tyrant
understands and believes that the hermits have completely recanted and
denied everything that they have believed until now, as in truth they
have also denied and recanted. For who can suffer that this restriction
be forbidden: \"as they hope and trust in God, that it shall be pleasing
to God and their souls\' blessedness,\" and immediately the preceding be
added: \"It shall not displease S. F. G.\"? 1) This is how a man becomes
God

1\) Einsiedel\'s answer can be found in Kapp, Vol. I, p. 136 ff. The
passage in question (p. 140) reads as follows: \"As far as the articles
of their person are concerned, however, they have not understood my
opinion.

and Duke George has what he wanted. In addition, she \[Einsiedel\]
brings the wisdom of friends and faithful advisors! Indeed, I do not
know what to advise now. Things are worse than they were before. Their
conscience is wounded and entangled, for which I am very sorry; how safe
it would have been if they had straightforwardly and openly resisted the
tyrant right from the start, while now, since they want to take a middle
road, as it were, and try to keep God\'s grace and man\'s grace on both
sides, they lose both at the same time. The matter must necessarily be
brought back to this point, so that the tyrant, after this ambiguity of
the answer has been revealed and uncovered, will realize that the
hermits do not agree with his will that they should deny or revoke the
word of Christ. How they should do this, I do not know, if they do not
want to get right with him, or testify by selling their goods that they
did not want what the tyrant believes to be able to infer from their
answer. For it is mocked, as it were, with shrewdness of his
understanding, in that he hears something other than they mean, which is
contrary to Christian simplicity and truth. This you too can negotiate
with them and think on good counsel. Fare well in Christ, amen. Saturday
before Estomihi \[Feb. 22\] 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1204.**

(Wittenberg.) February 22, 1528.

**Luther and Bugenhagen to the Lords of**

**Einsiedel.**

Same content as the previous letter.

This letter was sent with the previous one to Spalatin for further
promotion to Einsiedel. It is written by Luther, only co-signed by
Bugenhagen. The locations are given at No. 1192.

gracious Lord and the rest of us humbly and kindly requested to make
their humbly report to His Grace, and say: that with the bestowal of
divine graces they want to show themselves and keep themselves as
Christians with confessions, preaching, hearing mass, receiving the
sacraments according to Christian church ordinances in such a way and
manner [as they hope and trust in God, that it shall be pleasing to God
and blissful for them, in]{.underline} which E. F. Grace will also have
no displeasure with their humbly hope and doubtless no displeasure. F.
graces of their submissive hope and will undoubtedly have no
displeasure.\"

**1104** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1204. 1205. **1105**

Grace and peace in Christ. Strict, honorable, dear lord and friend! It
is in your answer, given to Duke George, too much done in the piece,
that the words he has underlined are to be let out by your friends. For
the answer is now just as Duke George desired, that the von Einsiedel
want to do as he pleases, as you yourselves will well notice if you
leave such words out and read the text one after the other. Now I do not
know all your opportunities to bring such things back in a good way.

For since he does not understand your answer, nor can he understand it,
except as if you wanted to do what he wants, then it must truly come out
that you believe much differently than he means. For your words give him
a different understanding than you have and want to give him. It would
still be best to get right with him, or to leave the goods. For even
though you are now at liberty to sell the goods, 2c. I do not see how
you can let the prince remain in such a delusion, as if you had revoked
and denied everything.

So it is also not a danger for you to disown your subjects if you sell
the goods or leave out the heir, even though this would drive the people
away from God\'s word; for it is not your fault, and you cannot do
anything against force, even though there is to be feared discord or
warfare between the 2) sovereigns. For we do not have to do wrong or
deny God\'s word for the sake of any good or benefit, be it of the soul
or of the body. If only your friends had not allowed the words Duke
George underlined to remain outside, there would be no need for any of
this. Is this not Satan\'s evil play, that a Christian should not say: I
hope to God that I will keep myself, that it shall be pleasing to God,
and the salvation of the soul; to whom then shall it be pleasing? Does
this not mean to publicly exclude and deny God\'s grace, and to consider
man\'s grace alone?

1\) \"the\" put by us instead of: \"the\".

2\) \"den\" put by us instead of: \"dem\", because the Churfürst was
co-ruler with Duke Georg.

Therefore, my dear sirs, make such an answer in the play be revoked,
either by a written instruction to the duke, or by the fact that you
practice the contradiction, or turn away from his authority, or what you
and your friends may find better; I know no better. May Christ our dear
Lord strengthen and counsel you to end the matter well, for this answer
has made it worse than it was before. You will find us willing to serve
you. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Saturday St. Peter\'s chair celebration
\[22 Feb.\] 1528.

Martinus Lutherus.

> Johannes Bugenhagen Pommer.

**No. 1205 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 24, 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther expresses his concerns about the future Reichstag. Of his latest
writings. He warns about two people expelled from Austria.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 369; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 283 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 214 (incorrectly dated: \"25. Febr.\").
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1088.

Grace and peace in Christ! There are monstrosities everywhere and on all
sides, my dear Wenceslaus, so that I hope, since Satan is raging, that
the day of salvation of the blessed is at the door. I wanted King
Ferdinand to be stopped in Hungary so that he could not come to the
Diet. For it is better that the Diet should be prevented than that it
should be assembled in vain, or that the plots of the bishops should be
acted upon, by which alone they always deal, and seek to fortify their
own by neglecting the affairs of the commonwealth; Christ forbid them!

I thank the Lord Lazarus for the seeds sent. By God\'s grace we are
freed from the plague. By your prayer I am more sorry for my Satan at
times. But continue and do not stop praying for all of us. I believe
that you have already received my booklet against the Anabaptists and
Leonhard Keiser\'s martyrdom. My book

3\) Spengler.

**1106** Letters from the year 1528.

No. 1205. 1206. 1207. **1107**

*Antiswermerius meus* will, if Christ gives grace, go out to the
Frankfurt fair. Greetings to Mr. Osiander and all brothers in the Lord.
Michael Stiefel reports to me that two people who were driven out of
Austria from Welsen, 1) near Linz, have fled to you, who are orthodox
Christians (*catholici) to* the face, but poisonous sacramentaries
behind their backs. Therefore, he asked that I warn you, so that if they
were still with you, you could beware of them and take careful care of
them. The grace of God be with you, amen. On the day of Matthias \[24
Feb.\] 1528. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1206 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 25, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

From the printing of the visitation articles; about the good behavior of
Paul Lindenau and Luther\'s concerns about the Reichstag.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Frasciscaneum*, Ms. 26, fol. 63. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 3696; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 287 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
217 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1090.

> To the highly venerable brother in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> faithful and sincere servant of GOD in his Gospel in the church at
> Zwickau.

Grace and peace! The edition of the Visitation has not yet been
completed, my dear Mr. Nicolaus, since the printers have delayed the
matter for lack of paper; it will be ready around Lätare. 2) That you
write so well about Mr. Paul, and at the same time he answers so
sincerely, has given me extraordinary joy. May Christ grant that with
one heart and one mouth we may glorify the Father to eternal glory,
amen.

There is nothing new with us, except for the monstrous threats of the
magistrates, in hope of the future Imperial Diet in Regensburg. You do
this by praying diligently with your congregation for the princes of
Germany, whether God will one day give them grace that they may

1\) Wels in Upper Austria, three German miles from Linz.

2\) The visitation booklet left the press on March 22.

not always come together like this with futile expenses, but finally be
concerned about peace and justice for once, as it should be. We have
seen so many kingdom days in a short time and have not perceived any
fruit, since God leaves them and us like this, and the devil with his
angels prevents everything. Fare well in the Lord, and greet Paul, your
evangelist, in the Lord, with all the brethren. The day after 3) Matthew
\[25 Feb\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1207.**

Wittenberg. February 28, 1528.

**To Heino Gottschalk, Abbot of Oldenstadt near Uelzen.**

At his request, Luther gives him advice on the question of whether a
friend of his should leave the monastery or not.

Handwritten in the royal library at Hannover. Printed in the
\"Bremisch-Verdische Bibliothek,\" III, 1119; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
284 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 215.

> To the in Christ venerable father, Mr. Heino,^4)^ Abbot of Alt-Uelzen
> \[Oldenstad\], his in Christ highly venerable superior.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord. Venerable man, highly venerable in
the Lord! I gladly received the letter of your dignity, which is short
and small, but cheerful and pleasant; it is a testimony not only to the
faith and to the love of God.

3\) We hold that *altera post* here, and everywhere where it is only at
all relevant, should be resolved by: \"the day after\" should be
resolved, not by: \"at the assembly after\". In all letters from June
1525 to April 1530, which are found in the third volume of De Wette\'s
collection of letters, altera *post* occurs, except in this place, only
twice, namely p. 326 (where De Wette wrote it as \"Monday after\",
whereas the Erl. Briefw. as: 7 \"m day after\") and p. 515, where De
Wette correctly wrote it as: \"on the day after\", the Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VII, p. 173 as \"Mondags and notes, since *Lucae* itself was a
Monday: \"whereby one must not be disturbed by the post\"! In the third
volume of De Wette, Monday is always designated by *feria secunda*,
namely p: 19. 20. 132. 170. 180. 191. 192. 195. 218. 251. 252. 281. 296.
337 and 433.

4\) The unnamed abbot, in whose name the question was put to Luther, was
Heino Gottschalk, abbot of Oldenstadt, himself, who intended to leave
the monastery. As a result of our letter, the abbot and the convent
handed over their seals and letters to the Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg,
Ernst the Confessor, on July 10, 1529, but received from him housing and
supplies in the monastery. Gottschalk did not die until 1541 at a ripe
old age.

**1108**

Letters from the year 1528. no. 1207. 1208. 1209. **110S**

the truth which is awakened by Christ in the heart of your dignities,
but also for a certain other unnamed abbot, an old man who is equally to
be revered in Christ, in whose name your dignity asks me for advice and
consolation in the question of conscience. First of all, I thank God,
our Father, through Christ, who has deigned to glorify his word also in
this corner and end of the earth, and I pray that he may complete what
he has begun according to his great mercy, most graciously and
abundantly at the same time in you and in all of us, amen. As far as the
question is concerned, I believe that this man can remain in the
monastery quite safely, even with great fruit, since the situation is
such that he is not forced to attend the ungodly masses or to do any
other work contrary to the faith, and he is also free to serve the
brothers who either want to leave or to remain, He may serve them in
Christ, either by reading the Scriptures with the brethren, or by
praying the *horas canonicas* himself (only that which is impure, apart
from the Psalms and the Scriptures and the Collects, must be omitted),
and by partaking of the Lord\'s Supper. For what harm could monastic
life do where freedom of the spirit reigns? Paul has decided that
Christians can eat with an unbeliever \[1 Cor. 10, 27.), 1 Cor. 8, even
if he himself should eat things sacrificed to idols, his conscience is
free, at least his. Finally, I would not advise such old men to leave
your monastery, first of all, because outside they might be a burden to
others, and hardly people would be found who would care for them as they
are worth and need, since now love has grown cold in many; in the
monastery, however, they are not a burden to anyone, nor do they need
the care of others, and secondly, they can benefit many others for their
salvation, which they might, yes, certainly not be able to do outside.
Therefore, you will exhort the worthy man to stay where he is and do
what he does in freedom of spirit, for in this way he will be of much
use not to himself but to the brethren, then also in the world, and also
serve Christ in all things in the most proper way, and desire and expect
his coming with a happy and sure conscience. For I too have a

We have lived like this for a long time, and would have lived like this
even longer and until today, if the brothers and the conditions of the
monastery had suffered. The grace of Christ be with you all, and pray
for us and the whole Church of God. Wittenberg, penultimate February
\[28 Feb\] 1528.

Your dignity servant

Martin Luther.

**No. 12 08.**

Wittenberg. March 3, 1528.

**To Johann Rühel.**

See St. Louis ed. vol. X, 2214.

**No. 1209.**

Wittenberg. March 2, 1528.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

Luther asks him to send some things for someone. About the remarriage of
his brother-in-law Ignatius; about Agricola\'s journey to the Imperial
Diet; about the death of Agricola\'s father.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzeb*. Printed in the time

schrift für hist. Theol. 1872, 351 and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VI,
p.218f.

> To his brother in Christ, Johann Agricola, the extremely faithful
> educator 1) of the youth at Eisleben.

Grace and peace in the Lord! The daughter of Morsinus has asked, my dear
Agricola, that you either send her little Saxons, I don\'t know which
ones she says are with you, here, or, because there is a rumor that you
will come here, bring them here with you. She also asked the same with
regard to the wages. Ignatius takes that widow, after I have so
diligently opposed her in vain before. He goes his way, but not with my
pleasure nor favor, even with my displeasure for quite just cause. It
would be advisable for you to attend the Diet at Regensburg with our
prince; but since we expect you to be here, I will speak to you
verbally, and if necessary, I will give counsel publicly (*in medium*).
Your father may

1\) *poetae* == poets. Otherwise Luther uses the expression:
*formatori,* but here jokingly *poetae* instead of == formator,

**1110** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1209. 1210. 1211. **1111**

live with your Father in Heaven. Greet your Elsa with the children.
Greet all of us and be well in the Lord and pray also for me.
Wittenberg, the second of March 1528, Martin Luther.

**No. 1210.**

(Wittenberg.) March 6, 1528.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Jáchymov.**

Luther invites him to stay with him for the time being until he is
otherwise provided for; there is nothing to be hoped for in Ferdinand\'s
lands.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 85; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 288 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 219.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Dearest Cordatus, I have already learned
that you have returned from Austria and that you are staying in Jáchymov
in hope and on the promise of your Queen 1). Furthermore, I had the
assumption that it would never happen that you would be called back by
the queen. Therefore, if it is burdensome or inconvenient for you to
stay there, I would like you not to hesitate, but either to hurry to me,
or to go wherever it pleases you. For if the queen should ever wish to
call you again, she could just as well find you with us as in
Joachimsthal. With us you can (as I believe) certainly have better and
more pleasant company than there with those who are not your equals. Of
course, if the occasion demanded it, I would not turn back to the
promise of the queen, and nevertheless ask you to enter the service of
Christ in the meantime. Therefore, it shall be your choice, you can come
to us with the little sister, your wife, until Christ has provided
otherwise. The bishops and the sacristans, who have been made happy,
bold and secure by Ferdinand\'s mandate, will, I expect, hardly allow
evangelists to arise anew in his realms.

1\) The widowed Queen Mary of Hungary had offered Cordatus the prospect
of employment in Hungary, and thereupon Cordatus had gone back from
Liegnitz in Silesia (see No. 1036) to Austria, but could not stay there
because of the mandate of King Ferdinand of August 20, 1527, and went to
Joachimsthal. From here, probably in response to this letter, he
traveled via Nuremberg and Jena, where Melanchthon was still at the end
of March, to Wittenberg.

men. What should I therefore advise you to let yourself be held back by
a hope that is not necessary and in fact futile? I spoke kindly with the
brother\'s widow and asked her to call on my help if she needed it. The
plague has ceased here by the grace of Christ, now in its third month. I
believe that you have read my letter against the Anabaptists. I hope
that through it some can be preserved and restored, if Christ gives
grace. Other things will be communicated to you by our Georg Rörer, the
extremely dear and faithful servant of Christ. May the Lord be with you
with his grace and with his spirit, amen. On the 6th day of March 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1211.**

(Wittenberg.) March 7, 1528.

**To Leonhard Beier in Guben . ^2)^**

Luther invited him to come to him if he was expelled. (However, he
remained in Guben until 1532.)

Handwritten at Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Gud*. 214, fol. 20. Printed by
Schütze, vol. II, p. 86; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 289 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 221.

Grace and peace in Christ! When Satan rages, my dear Leonhard, he does
that which is according to his! When Satan rages, he does what is
according to his office and name, for Scripture reminds us again and
again that one must expect such things from him. But you be a strong
man, pray and fight against him in spirit and in word. He is mighty in
us, who rules in us, praise and glory be to God. Now if he should drive
you out from there, an inn will be open for you with us, as much as
Christ has given. For there are already several strangers staying with
us from all sides, who have been driven out of Ferdinand\'s kingdoms,
and who at least follow the poor Christ in poverty and suffer. I commend
myself to your prayers and to those of yours. Fare well in the Lord.
March 7, 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

2\) Beier was not, as De Wette assumes in the introduction to this
letter, in Austria, but a preacher in Guben in Lower Lusatia (see No.
902 and No. 915), which belonged as a Bohemian fief to Churbrandenburg.
Therefore, Ferdinand\'s mandate against the Reformation could also
extend here.

**1112**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1212. 1213. 1214.

**1113**

**No. 12 12.**

Wittenberg. March 7, 1528.

**To Gabriel Zwilling in Torgau.**

From the acceptance of the Gospel in Venice and in Brunswick/ From the
disputation in Bern, and more.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 371 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 289
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 222. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1092.

> To Mr. Gabriel Didymus, pastor at Torgau.

Grace and peace! With joy I hear what you write about Venice, my dear
Gabriel, that they have received the word of God; thanks and praise be
to God. And you may not be moved by the spoons (*cochearia*) in Torgau,
I have certainly heard and believe that there are more fireplaces in
Venice than there are spoons even in Erfurt, since many houses have 10,
20, 30 and more fireplaces. Again I inform you that Brunswick has also
received the word, and the council together with your people has written
and requested our Pomeranian; but it has been refused to them, perhaps
they will ask for another. Let Christ increase his glory. Again, in
Halle, one was struck with sudden death on Ash Wednesday\^ the chaplain
of the nuns, because he said about the sacrament offered to the Knight
of Selwitz 1) under both forms: \"Pocket God\" was offered to him. But
even so the angry and blasphemous people are not moved. The disputation
at Bern 2) in Switzerland has ended; nothing has been accomplished
except that the mass has been said, and the children on the gaffes are
singing that they are freed from the baked bread. Zwingli has been led
there and back by a thousand men as a triumphant and glorious emperor,
whose end, ruin and disgrace will come in a short time; let us only pray
diligently. To Sebastian Kammermeister you may say my greeting, and that
I have received what he has sent.

1\) Probably Friedemann von Selmenitz, son of Mrs. Felicitas von
Selmenitz, who received the sacrament under both forms before his death.
In a letter of Sept. 18 to Wolfgang von Anhalt, the name Selbitz is
written.

2\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1616, no. 19.

Fare well with all of yours and greet the chaplains, and they may give
orders that the books they want be demanded from me. Wittenberg, on the
Saturday after Invocavit \[March 7\] 1528.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1213 .**

(Wittenberg.) March 10, 1528.

**To an unnamed person of nobility/\'**

This concern is found handwritten in Cod. Jen. V; in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod.
Aug.* 11. 10, fol. 200 b (without date, with the inscription: *Casus
matrimonialis*. To Baltzer Joppel, organist at Dresden) and in *Cod.
Aug.*

20\. 2, lob 151 (with the superscription: *Casus de virgine vitiata*;
with the date). Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p.
284 b; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 383b; in the Altenburg
edition, vol. IV, p. 456; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 439 and
(duplicate) in the Supplement, p. 50; in Walch, vol. X, 967 and
(duplicate) vol. XXI, 241; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 290 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 439 and (duplicate) vol. 64, p. 286. -
Hereafter find the information in the St. Louis ed, Vol. X, Einl., Col.
91, l to be completed and corrected.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 814.

**No 1214.**

Wittenberg. March 10, 1528.

**To Spalatin.**

About the settlement of the dispute between Mühlpfort, mayor of Zwickau,
and Paul Lindenau, preacher there.

The Latin text of this letter is missing. A Germanized copy (according
to Spalatin\'s inscription) is found in the Weimar Archives, Ji, fol. 53
a, 17. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 49 ; in Walch, vol. XXI,
239; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 292 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53,
p. 440 f. - Burkhardt, p. 132, informs the following about the situation
from the Acts: According to a message that reached the Elector, Lindenau
had aroused a great deal of displeasure in Zwickau through his sermons.
In particular, he had taken sides on the pulpit for a man named
Hebenstreit (who had strangely changed from preaching to baking) and
against the fellow masters of the same, attacked them harshly as well as
the mayor Mühlpfort, and let fall unseemly words about the family
relationships of the latter, namely because of the engagement of the son
with a rich burgher\'s daughter. When now

3\) Already Seidemann correctly noted in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 630, note
1: \"That this letter cannot be to Joppel is clear from the form of
address: Gestrenger, vester. It is to one of nobility.\"

**1114** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1214. 1215. 1216\^ **1115**

Linden\"\", the council was prompted to determine the behavior of the
preacher, while Luther and Melanchthon had already been active in
settling the matter by letter, then by dispatching Friedrich Myconius
from Gotha to Zwickau. This did not work in the long run. The preacher
continued to drag all kinds of municipal circumstances into the area of
his sermons in order to insult the mayor. Luther intervened once again.
Even that did not help, because the sermon on Thursday before Shrovetide
(Feb. 20) was again full of invective. So the Elector ordered Daniel von
Feilitzsch, Amtmann zu Vvigtsberg und Plauen, and Spalatin to be
examined in Zwickau on Friday after Reminiscere (March 13), the day
mentioned in the beginning of the letter. The commissioners did not find
the preacher; he had gone to Wittenberg. The investigation showed that
two parties in the city were in hard opposition to each other, and that
it was not an easy thing for Mühlpfort to dismiss the preacher; they
were not yet beyond the MUnzian direction, which was expressed here in
opposition to the council. Luther\'s letter shows that extreme care was
taken in this matter. Finally, the visitators removed the preacher and
appointed Link from Nuremberg to take his place.

Grace and peace in Christ! The pastor of Zwickau, Mr. Niclas Hausmann,
together with his preacher, Mr. Paul Liudauer, my Spalatin, have come to
Wittenberg; on the way, however, they say that they have come to know
that a day 1) has been set on which the matter between Paul and
Mühlpforten is to be settled, for which deal you, as they say, are also
required to be a commander. Now I take it for granted, because this
matter is quite diabolical, and both parts are very bitter, and neither
part does not have the means to accuse and excuse the other, it should
be best that they are both interrogated in secret before someone,
whether perhaps the devil might be quenched by secret and peculiar
means. For if a public interrogation should take place by order of my
most gracious lord, the common people will be aroused as if to a
spectacle, and the opponents will arm themselves and prepare to adorn
themselves and destroy each other, so that there will be much more evil
misfortune and evil to fear than ever before, for the devil is the
devil, and seeks strangely and everywhere the cause of great evil. For
this reason, I have asked you, with whatever caution it may seem to you

1\) Burkhardt reports: \"Friday after Reminiscere\" (March 13), the Erl.
Briefw. says, probably by mistake: \"before Reminiscere\" (March 6).

before that\", so that no public investigation of this evil takes place,
before they have tried themselves beforehand in the presence of their
pastor with secret and special conversation, whether they might again
become friends and get along in this form; because from a public
interrogation, perhaps one of them would have to be disgraced and give
way, which might not happen to either of them without great turmoil. I
will keep Paul here for a few days, so that I may make him more
courteous and capable of future unity, if Christ wills and favors it,
amen. Fare well in the Lord. Given at Wittenberg, the 10th of March,
Tuesday after Reminiscere, *Anno Domini* 1528.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1215 .**

(Wittenberg.) March 14, 1528.

**To Wilhelm Pravest, preacher at Kiel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2234, annex, no. 7.

**No. 1216.**

(Wittenberg.) March 14, 1528.

**To Dorothea Jörger in Tolleth.**

It was not necessary to send money to Michael Stiefel, although he
himself had asked for it; Luther wanted to provide for him.

Printed in von Hormayr\'s Taschenbuchs 1845, p. 188; in the Erlanger
Ausg., vol. 56, p. XIX and by De Wette, vol. VI, p. 92.

> To the noble, virtuous woman Dorothea Jörgerin zu Tollet, my favorable
> wives in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! Honorable, virtuous woman! I should write to
you a great deal, as Msgr. Michael often admonishes me to do, because he
remembers you often and in the very best way; yet I hope it is not
necessary to master your conscience much with more words, because he
does and can do this better and with more knowledge than I do. But there
is one thing I must not leave out. I realize that he has written to you
about money or taxes, which disturbs me for him, since he may well have
from me what is necessary to him, what is not.

**1116** Letters from the year 1528.

No. 1216 to 1219.

**1117**

I have ordered him to demand. He is still grateful to me, so that I must
give him what he needs. Therefore it is not necessary, dear wife, that
you send him something. Give my regards to both of your dear sons and
all of your family. May Christ strengthen and keep you all in pure,
right, constant faith, amen. Saturday after Reminiscere \[March 14\]
1528. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1217.**

Borna. March 18, 1528.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Luther reports that he has arrived in Borna with Pommer and Jonas, and
asks that he be excused to the prince because of the journey slowed by
bad road.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in Cod.
Jen. a. fol. 256. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 372; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 295 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Vl, p. 228. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1094.

> To his extremely dear brother, Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ.

Grace and peace! At this hour I came to Borna, my dear Spalatin, almost
stiff with cold and hunger (to say nothing of other things). Dear God!
How many exceedingly bad roads we have had, yet against all hope we have
made progress, crawling more than traveling these entire two days, even
though we had certainly resolved to have dinner with you today.

I am writing this so that you will excuse me to the prince as soon as
you have seen this. For I did not receive the letter calling me^1)^
until Monday night, and we hurried as much as possible, but because of
the difficulty of the way, the wind and the cold, we could not go any
further. Tomorrow, God willing, we will have breakfast with you. Pommer
and Jonas are with me as traveling companions, so that I would not be
alone. Fare well in the Lord. At Borna, at four o\'clock, still without
having eaten, 1528, Wednesday after Oculi \[March 18\].

Martin Luther.

1\) namely to Altenburg, because of Einsiedel\'s Handel.

**No. 1218.**

Torgau. March 23, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

On the matter of the preacher Paul Lindenau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
42. Printed in Aurifaber, Vol. II, p. 372; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 295
and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 229. German in Walch, Vol. XXI,
1094 f.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> faithful and completely sincere bishop of Zwickau.

Grace and peace! I have pursued Paul\'s cause as diligently as I could,
because I have found 2) that they are very bitter. And I hope that this
will happen, that they will judge more mildly, especially if Paul
henceforth (as we have admonished him) proceeds more moderately. For I
have insisted that if he had to be dismissed at all, it would not be
good for him to be dismissed with such great disgrace, but that one
should also take the preaching ministry into consideration and let him
go with honor or even with his consent. Now it is up to you, first of
all, to move the man to act moderately, then, as you have begun, not to
leave him with your testimony. For by your testimony (you being a
pastor) my action and the whole matter are greatly supported, so that he
may not be driven out with shame without your judgment and consent, but
may at least be borne until he is either regarded as improved in the
unanimous judgment of all, or voluntarily resigns his position with
honor. Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. Torgau, Monday after
Lätare \[March 23\] 1528. Martin Luther.

**No. 1219.**

Wittenberg. March 26, 1528.

**Luther and Bugenhagen to the Electoral Council of Torgau.**

Decision in the marriage case of Hans Müller of Groß-Almerode in Hesse
that the wife is to be restored to her husband Hans Ehwald in Eisenach.

2\) *inveni* is given by Walch: \"as I come\".

**1118** Letters from the year

1528th mo. 1219, 1220. **1119**

The original in Luther\'s hand (Bugenhagen only signed) in the Weimar
Archives, Reg. Printed in Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 29 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p.229.

> To the Respectable, Esteemed, Esteemed and Esteemed, My Lord the
> Elector of Saxony at Torgau. Herr des Churfürsten zu Sachsen Räthen zu
> Torgau, my favorable lords.

Grace and peace in Christ. Respectable, highly esteemed, strict, firm,
dear gentlemen! We have read the affairs of Margarethen, a woman of
Eisenach, and take care that they be returned to her husband Hans
Ehwald, a citizen of Eisenach, in the most beneficial way, regardless of
what has been advised or done by us or anyone else up to now. For we are
not to defend injustice, but confess that we do so. We would have
thought, however, that the matter would have been established in
Eisenach by witnesses and good reason.

For myself, Martinus, I have taught up to now, and I would still like to
keep it, where I could put it into practice, that the *clandestina
conjugia* should not be valid, and the other, following ones, which
happen publicly, should be preferred to the same, unless a *casus
aequitatis* would come. But now I cannot make such a thing the law of
the land, as a single person, I have allowed myself to take this and
talk it out (although unsatiated), that *clandestina conjugia* should
hold and be valid before God, as E. A. and G. also indicate and the
papal laws teach.

Accordingly, we must (however reluctantly) report the imprisoned
consciences so that they should always consider the first *conjugia* as
valid before God, regardless of whether they are forced in public law to
the other marriage, as the pope also teaches that a man should suffer
the excommunication and avoid the country with the created before he
should stay with the other against his conscience. Such injustice
(before my eyes) I must let go until the *clandestina* 6on)uZiu be
forbidden and nullified. Accordingly, it is and shall not be against us,
where such cases would occur again, that E. A. and strict judges,
according to the *foro judiciali,* judge and pass judgment differently
than we, who must judge against the forum *judiciale* according to the
*foro conscientiae,* and where the two judgments go against each other.

that according to the Pabst\'s doctrine, the person avoids the country
and thus both *judiciis* suffice, the *judiciali* and *conscientiae,*
with the escape *et cessione loci tanquum mortuus poIiticus*. If the
woman in Eisenach would touch her conscience again, as if she had
nevertheless pledged marriage to Halls Müller in Hesse 2c., then we
pronounce her, according to the pope, to the same, and let her go, the
*forum judiciale, fuga*, into foreign lands. But the safest thing would
be my first and first doctrine, that *clandestina* should be nothing, as
they are certainly nothing with the uncaptured and free consciences. But
where are these, because the papacy is not thus torn down in such and
such a way? Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. At Wittenberg, Thursday after
*Annunciationis Mariae* \[March 26\] 1528. Martinus Luther.

Joannes Bugenhagen Pomer.

**No. 1220.**

(Torgau.) March 28, 1528.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Rath to peace in Pack\'s cause.

This concern is found in the Wittenberg edition (1559), vol. XII, p. 217
(wrong 216); in the Jena edition (1568), vol. VII, p. 276; in the
Altenburg edition, vol. VII, p. 300; in the Leipzig, vol. XXI, p. 299;
in Walch, vol. X, 644; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 1 and
(duplicate) vol. 55, p. 264; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 319 and
(duplicate) vol., V, p. 247; in the Eisleben edition (as from 1526),
vol. I, p. 274b and in the St. Louiser edition, vol. X, 548. In all,
these editions as concerns of the counter-defense from 1539, with the
exception of De Wette, vol. Ill and Erlanger, vol. 54, where it is
datirt: \"May? 1528.\" Hereafter, the introduction to the 10th vol. of
the St. Louiser Ausg, Col. 61 f., is to be corrected. - After Luther had
returned from his journey to Altenburg (No. 1217) via Torgau to
Wittenberg on March 24, he was summoned again to Torgau by a hurried
messenger on March 26, where he left on the 27th in order to participate
in the oral discussions about the information given by the Landgrave
concerning the revelations delivered by Pack and to give an expert
opinion on the behavior of the Elector. This Luther did through our
letter. The date is clear from the beginning: \"after yesterday\'s
order\", since he already traveled back to Wittenberg on the 28th, after
he had written this concern. - About Pack\'s alliance see St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, introduction, p. 17 ff; ibid. vol. XVI, 373 ff\" No.
829 fß the documents.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 548.

**1120** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1221. 1222. 1223. **1121**

**No. 1221.**

1526 or later.

**Consider\" what the Elector of Saxony wants to do to the Catholic
bishops.**

We have placed this concern here, as well as the Erl. Briefw., because
De Wette and the Erlangen edition relate it to Pack\'s matter.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 362, no. 827.

**No. 1222.**

(Wittenberg.) March 28, 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther sends several copies of his great Confession of the Lord\'s
Supper; this is to be his last writing against the Sacramentarians, and
he reports the flight of Electress Elisabeth of Brandenburg, the wife of
Joachim I.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, BI.374b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 296
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 233. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1098.

Grace and peace! I have given Johann Hofmann 1) copies against the
sacramentaries 2) to be distributed among you. May the Lord grant that
they bear fruit among many. For I have decided to let go of these people
who speak void things, and have put an end to writing against them,
because I see that there is such a great ignorance of logic among them
that it is impossible, even if they were naturally wrong, that they can
be instructed or brought to the actual point (*metam*) of refutation.
For there can be neither teaching nor disputation without dialectics, at
least not without the natural one, in which Zwingli is so unlearned that
he can be compared to a donkey.

With us there is nothing new, except that it is said that the bishops
snort wars and murder, and that fool at Meissen, as is his way, is
inflamed with threats. 3) In the sermon, you call the people to prayers
that Christ may crush Satan, for he roars,

1\) See No. 1144.

2\) The Great Confession of the Lord\'s Supper, St. Louis edition, vol.
XX, 894.

3\) This is a suggestion from Pack\'s revelations.

like a raging and hungry lion, after our blood. The margravine 4)
escaped from Berlin to our prince with the help of her brother, the king
of Denmark, because the margrave had decided (as mau says) to have her
walled up because of the sacrament under both forms. Pray for our
prince, \"the pious man and hearty man is well afflicted\"; he is worthy
of our prayers. Fare well with your children and your wife. March 28,
1528.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1223.**

Wittenberg. April 1, 1528.

**To Felicitas von Selmenitz in Halle.**

Luther asked her whether she should leave Halle, but he advised her to
stay for the time being and wait to see if the Cardinal would come and
take action against her.

Printed in the \"Unschuldige Nachrichten\" 1752, p. 13; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 297 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 442.

> To the honorable, virtuous woman Felicitas von Selmenitz, 5) widow of
> Halle, my dear friend in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord and Savior. Honorable, virtuous
woman! I have heard your request. Christ will be with you and will not
leave you. But that you ask me whether you should flee or stay, I
consider that you are free to flee with a clear conscience, because you
have received such leave from your authorities.

4\) The Electress Elisabeth of Brandenburg, sister of the exiled King of
Denmark, Christian II, fled because her husband Joachim I threatened her
with severe imprisonment after she had secretly taken communion under
both guises at Easter 1527 if she did not convert from her heresy by
Easter 1528. In the night from March 23 to 24 she fled from Berlin, and
on March 26 she arrived in Torgau during the night. The Elector took her
under his protection and initially ordered her to stay in the nunnery at
Prettin near Dommitzsch. She remained in Saxony until August 1545.

5\) Frau von Selmenitz, daughter of the knight Hans Mönch and widow of
the electoral captain Wolf von Selmenitz, who was murdered in Halle in
1519. She moved l 527 to Wittenberg, but left it because of the plague
and went to Halle. The Cardinal suggested that she leave her confession
or go away from Halle. She complained about this to Luther and received
this answer.

**1122** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1223 to 1227. **1123**

I would rather see that you delay a while longer until you learn more
certain news about whether the Cardinal is coming or not, so that one
does not think that you want to flee before the time and without cause;
but I place it all in your favor. May God Almighty strengthen you, and
all brothers and sisters in Halle, according to His divine will. At
Wittenberg, Wednesday, April 1, 1528, Martin Luther.

**No. 1224.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. April 1528.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

If Captain Hans Metzsch could not be at the visitation, Benedict Pauli
might be appointed.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 251; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 351 b; in the Altenburg edition, vol. IV, p.
411; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 554; in Walch, vol. XXI, 243;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 298 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p.
442.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! What
E. F. G. wrote to our Captain Hails Metsch concerning the visitation, I
have also heard through his reports. And it is true that E. F. G. means
it very well. But to indicate my humble opinion, methinks truly, because
our Captain shall not be present, that it will be necessary for Mr.
Benedict Pauli to be present, 1) besides those indicated. There are many
monasteries present, and in sum, it looks on us and our doings friends
and enemies, more than on others, that I would have thought it best that
both Hans Metzsch, Captain, and all of us would have remained present,
as it began.

Accordingly, my humble request is that E. F. G. would graciously
consider how such a change and perseverance of the person in this work
can be troublesome and dangerous enough, and yet, as E. F. G. himself
indicate, the work hardly suffers. For I am willing and obliged to serve
F. F. G.. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Wednesday after Judica \[April 1\]
An. 1528.

E. F. G. submissive D. Mart. Luther.

1\) Both, Metzsch and Pauli, became members of the visitation taking
place in autumn 1528, namely for the Churkreis.

**No. 1225.**

Torgau. April 7, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

From the matter of the preacher Paul Lindenau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum*, Ms. 26, fol. 16 b and in the Gymnasialbibliothek
at Altenburg. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 372; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 298 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Vl, p. 235. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1095.

> For the attention of Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at
> Zwickau.

Grace and peace in Christ! The cause and affair of your Paul is being
pursued so fiercely at court, my dear Nicolaus, that it seems advisable
to me, because you will let him go free at a good opportunity. This has
increased the suspicion that ours, Christian 2) and the town clerk,
claim that Panlus has poorly defended his cause before them, and almost
justified the Mühlpfort. Therefore, it is safest, in order to prevent
other things, that Paul be dismissed and go to Wittenberg for a time (as
it were to me), for I fear that something exceedingly harsh might be
done by the court against your citizens. Of other things at another
time; this in haste and among a great deal of business. Torgau, Tuesday
after Palmarum \[April 7\] 1528. Martin Luther.

**No. 1226.**

**Wittenberg. April 9, 1528.**

**To Joseph Levin Metzsch in Milan.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 814. - There, line 8, read: \"angry boys
who do wrong.

**No. 1227.**

(Wittenberg.) April 11, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

About the visitation and trade of Paul Lindenau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in the
*Franciscaneum* at Zerbst, Ms. 26, fol. 25 b. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 374; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 301 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 237. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1097.

2\) D. Christian Baier, professor and mayor of Wittenberg.

**1124** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1227. 1228. **1125**

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> bishop of the church at Zwickau, his superior.

Grace and peace! I do not understand anything about the formula, which,
as you write, you saw with the Knight of Planitz, my dear husband; by
the way, I have insisted enough and still insist that the visitation
proceed and be carried out in earnest, and I hope that it will be put
into action immediately after Easter. There is no end to the complaining
about Paul and the accusations, of which I recently wrote you enough
from Torgau. They cry out that their windows have been broken twice with
stones, even after our last agreement, so that no other remedy is to be
seen than that he, as I have written, leave the place and the
disturbance. Finally, I ask that you pray to the Lord for me, the poor,
as I do for you. May the grace of God be with you, amen. On the Saturday
before Easter \[April 11\] 1528. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 122 8.**

Cassel. April 11, 1528.

Philip of Hesse\'s response from Luther\'s expert opinion.

This is the answer to Luther\'s concern addressed to Chancellor Brück in
Pack\'s case, No. 1220.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 452, fol. 162, with the inscription: \"H.
Landgraff Philipps zu Hessen schrifft auff D.Luthers Bedenken in der
Packischen Sache, von dem Landgraffen eigenhändig aufgesetzt, so aber in
der Canzlei abgeschrieben und ihm seine Hand wieder zugestellet worden,
wie außen darausf registrirt, und habe es der von Dolczigk am Osterabend
am Osterabend empfangen, 1528, d. 11. April.\" Printed in Kolde,
*Analecta* p. 100; Burkhardt, in the journal

für kirchliche Wissenschaft und Lehre, 1882, p. 587 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 238.

I have heard Luther\'s advice, and I like it in the beginning. But I
note so much that Doctor Martinus does not report the trade
sufficiently, after he writes that it is not yet verified (vorgewißt)
and unproven. On the point is necessary to report the trade that I have
read and seen it, and also hope, God does not want, to bring the
original to my hands. ^1)^ From

1\) See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, Introduction, p.19a.

For this reason, Doctor Martinus can conclude that the matter is
certain; also for the reason: what would I want to do against him, who
is my closest friend on account of my sister and his daughter, if I did
not know the certain truth? For I must publicly confess that he has
helped me much more than the Elector. 3) But I am moved by this: God\'s
word, that I would not like to see it suppressed, because through their
actions it would not only be suppressed, but also suppressed, and all
pious people would be hanged, drowned, chased away, their own taken
away, the books taken away, the preachers executed, and what shall I say
much? They desecrated women and children, restored idolatry and the
preaching of devils, spoliated the castes of the poor, desecrated
virgins and women.

Now comes the article, where the question arises, whether one should
allow oneself to be overdrawn, or whether one, if we could, \[should\]
perish such by God\'s help? Now Doctor Martinus has argued that one has
the right and the duty to protect one\'s subjects, as he then has. But I
ask Martinus\' kind opinion whether it is better that we let the house
burn and extinguish it, or whether it is better to prevent the fire from
burning? Secondly, I ask: if a child wants to fall into the fire or
water of its mother, whether the mother should work so long,^4)^ until
the child falls into the fire, or whether she should keep it from
falling into it? Now I think that Martinus will easily be too modest,
and perhaps he will laugh at this question that I am asking. But if he
considers what may follow from it, the ruin of country and people, soul
and body, then he will undoubtedly be right about the matter.

Thirdly, I say: \"Since it is certain that the authorities owe it to
their subjects to protect them from unlawful violence, and also that one
brother owes it to another to help him when he is in need, so that his
life may be at stake, I now ask whether I should protect my subjects
dead or alive, ver-

2\) \"to draw out\" == to take out. - The Landgrave\'s sister was
married to Duke George\'s eldest son, Johann; George\'s daughter,
Christine, was Philip\'s wife.

3\) This refers to the overthrow of the regent Boyneburg, the
reinstatement of Philip\'s mother, Anna, into guardianship and
liberation from Saxon guardianship (1514), as well as the declaration of
majority by the emperor (1518) of the landgrave, who was only 14 years
old, all of which Duke George supported.

4\) \"beiten\" == wait. The copyist seems not to have known this word
and therefore to have omitted the same several times, as Kolde
indicates. - Erl. Briefw.: \"beden\".

**1126** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1228. **1127**

hunted or unhunted? If I were to protect them dead, my protecting them
would not help at all. So it must follow irrefutably that I protect them
because they live, as I hold that Martinus confesses. Now it is ever
publicly true that this alliance of theirs is able to deliver
(uberlibbern) the preachers along with others in an unprotected matter
and to restore all devil worship, or if not, to drive it out of the
lands and people. If we are to stick to God\'s word, as I am inclined to
do, whether it concerns body or goods. If we are to remain true to the
word of God, as I am inclined to do, it will affect life and property.
If we are to remain true to the word of God, then we are sure of our
protection; and if, when we are persuaded, people are strangled, women
and virgins are violated, and the poor are destroyed, then our
protection is too long overdue; for if I see someone who wants to
strangle my brother, it is better for me to prevent him from being
strangled than to have him strangled, and then to help him if it does
not help him. But once again a similar thing: I wanted to punish someone
so that he would go to the whorehouse, and yet I left the whorehouse
standing and did not break it down. From all this it is easy to judge
that one is guilty of harm. Another similarity: if someone wanted to
attack me in the streets, and I knew it for sure, should I fight until
he threw the merchant down or strangled him, or should I do so and
defend myself, and if I caught him, should I not punish him, because he
would have wanted that? should I let him do it? No, I shall. There is
also this: if we wait until they convict us, they will take our people,
who are serving us now, into their hands, so we will not be able to get
any people. And in addition, our people will become despondent,^1)^ so
we all do not have a firm place. This is how the air is now, so that it
can be done with God\'s help, which would be impossible after this; they
will also have a different regard, so that we will not be able to take
their suggestions into account, but God may well send it. Now I know
well that Martinus will say to this: it is reason and human suggestions;
which is also partly true, but he must nevertheless also confess that
God has given us reason and reflection, so that we should also use them
for our subjects. For if we were not to use human arguments, which are
not against God, in temporal matters, what would we then be allowed to
do in the collegia? for much reason is taught in them, since God\'s Word
is not within. Thus his, Luther\'s, advice is not at all without reason
and worldly wisdom. But he will meet me: one should forgive God.

trust. That is rightly said; why not? I certainly believe that God knows
who trusts in him. Therefore there is no great boasting about it,
otherwise we might deceive ourselves. But it is also written, \"Thou
shalt not tempt thy Lord God. But do we not tempt Him when God shows us
such great mercy that we become aware of their temptations, and then do
we not want to remember that we are corrupting our subjects, if we could
well prevent it by God\'s grace? We must confess that God nevertheless
accomplishes many things through instruments that He could otherwise
accomplish, but He will not. He could have let Goliath die by his
almighty will, but still David had to do it with a sling; the same with
Gideon. I must not remind Martinum of this; if he looks at his own
books, he will probably find this. We should work and give the care to
God. To all this it may be said: it is no sooner time to attack us than
it is time to protect us; so I answer: if we are sure that they want to
kill and strangle our subjects and brothers, as we are, then we owe it
to God, nature and all rights, to prevent harm to body and goods of our
subjects and to protect the pious, as Paul saws Rom. 13, 4., likewise
John \[1 John 3,16.\]: \"We should lay down our lives for the
brethren.\" Brotherly love can do the same, for I would like someone to
protect me from harm and misfortune and to prevent my harm, so I should
do it again, and in that case I am obligated to protect my brother from
the wicked and to help him, even if it means life and property. But let
it not be said that this would become a princely rebellion; that cannot
be and never will be said with reason. Nor do I hope that Martinus will
judge me in such a way, unheeding my words of caution, after Christ\'s
words and Paul\'s words in his epistles. But I will gladly forgive his
word. But in order that it may be seen that it cannot be called
sedition, it takes the form: \"We do it not out of lust, but out of dire
need; if God has commanded us the sword to protect the pious, we desire
nothing else, if they would let us have peace and refrain from their
evil deeds, and faithfully assure us that we will be safe from being
struck in the jaws in the future. So we desire no more, as our
established alliance at Weimar 2) with

2\) The alliance established in Weimar on March 9, 1528, to protect
against the attacks of the Catholic princes.

1\) So Kolde. Erl. Briefw.: \"verjagt\".

**1128** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1228. **1129**

brings with it. We do not desire their property for this purpose, nor do
we desire their subjects. Our covenant at Weimar also provides that we
shall be gracious and friendly to our subjects. In addition, we are also
to report our dealings to the Emperor. Maj. that we shall report our
dealings and offer all obedience to Her Majesty. From this it is clear
that our mind is not inclined to rebellion, but to all obedience. It is
also our opinion to make a public announcement and to complain about
their authority; thus we do not hold back anyone\'s interest, 1) as well
as obedience, as far as body and goods are concerned. Therefore we would
have been spared the riot; 2) even if we did not like to be Christians,
much more responsibility would be needed. But one brother must give
credit to the other. From all of the above, it is good to judge that our
minds, which God knows best, cannot be deceived. And therefore I
conclude: if we have power to resist if they attack us, we also have
power, if we know that they have it in their will and cannot avoid it,
even if they have vowed and sworn oaths to God to resist and avert their
violence in this, and not to fight until it is right for them. For we
are just as guilty of forfeiting the death stroke, if it has not
happened, as we are guilty of punishing the death stroke. So it is
against all law and order that they want to judge people without being
heard, which should not happen to a murderer. But if we do not have the
power to punish death and the destruction of our subjects, and to
prevent the spreading of the word, we do not have the right, much less
the power, to defend ourselves when we are attacked and persuaded. That
Martinus also says that the Elector is not obliged to keep this
covenant, I must forgive him, as one who would gladly be a Christian.
But in the eyes of the world it would be ill-spoken, even though it is
right for Christians to do so. But that he believes that the alliance
should be against God, and that one owes more obedience to God than to
men, that must gladly happen. But the best of all is that it is not
against God. But I think that if Martinus had first read the covenant
and agreement and had heard my mind, he would have

1\) As, for example, Duke George did with the Thuringian monastery fiefs
belonging to Hesse and Chursaxony.

2\) Namely in Luther\'s concern. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 553, §
11. - The meaning of what follows here is: If I did not want to be a
Christian, I would have better illuminated you, Luther, 2c.

have not judged in such a way. However, he has now to judge from these
causes that \[it\] is not against God, and he shall freely provide for
it, that I so unwillingly want to do against God, as much as he gives me
grace, as he does.

I have long since thought of a way, although I am concerned that it
would cause a great delay and expense, and besides, I am concerned about
what they now promise, that none of them will be held, because they have
forgotten their previous oath. I do not need to know how the assurance
is to be made and who the guarantors should be. But that would be my
foolish concern, although I would not have it advised that one write
beforehand to the king, likewise to his confederates, to each in
particular, how their alliance would be experienced; Since such an
alliance would be contrary to God, law, nature and all equity, and since
it is also due to us from God, law and nature to protect our subjects
for such violence, and also not to let us be forced from God\'s word,
our request to them would be that they want to come to a place, which
could be named for them, in time, and to finally come to terms with us
for the sake of the matter, to promise to refrain from such actions, to
refrain from any more, to let everyone preach the gospel freely, and to
reimburse us for our expenses, in which they have led us against reason,
to write such things down for us with present messengers, and to report
them to them: If they do not do this, we would be caused to protect our
subjects, friends and brothers from such unjust violence; we would not
have wanted to leave this undisclosed to them for the sake of our honor.

We are to trust God freely and yet do our part, as God says to Joshua
\[Josh. 1:7,9\]: \"Be a strong man and be confident, I will help you. In
the same way a husbandman sows, plows and reaps, and puts all human
thought and labor into it, trusting in God that He will prosper. As it
is also said that prayer is hindered by such preoccupation, I think it
is easy to report. If this exists, which 3) we owe out of divine rights
and brotherly love, prayer cannot be hindered, since the greatest prayer
is to say: \"Lord, your will be done! I know best that we have become
aware of the trade. Therefore, if God sends us

3\) Erl. Briefw.: \"that\".

**1130** Letters from the year

. . No. 1228. 1229. **1131**

If we have the means to do this, we should not dismiss them out of hand.
Christ could have jumped out to the temple \[Matth. 4, 6\], but he went
down the stairs. And therefore, if by the ways, as touched above, it is
acted, it is without doubt not against God. Date Cassel, Saturday after
Palmarum \[April 11\].

**No. 1229 .**

(Wittenberg.) April 12, 1528.

**Luther and Bugenhagen to Stephan Roth in Zwickau.**

Luther\'s advice and rebuke about Roth\'s marital discord.

Manuscript in the Rathsschulbibliothek in Zwickau, vol. XXXIV (Roth\'s
own copy); in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Aug.* 20, 2, toi. 115 and *Cod. Gud.*
214, fol. 221b; in an old copy owned by pastor Nebel in Gerau; in
Hamburg, *Cod.* 1, fol. 36 and *Cod.* 46, 4°, 31. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 373; b\" *Jo. Frid. Meyer, de Cath. Lutheri conjuge,* p. 52;
in Weller, Altes und Neues aus allen Theilen der. Geschichte, vol. II,
p. 645; in *Wolff, Conspect*. *supellect. epist., p.* 3; in *Ericeus,
Sylvula,* v.236; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 302 and again (with better
text) vol. VI, p. 93, and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 245 (according to
Roth\'s manuscript). German in the Wittenberg ed. (156\'9), vol. IX, p.
271 b; in the Jena (1566), vol. I V, p. 355b; in Erasmus Sarcerius, Vom
heil. Ehestand, 1556, p. 297; in the Altenburger, vol. IV, p. 414; in
the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p.438; in Walch, vol. X, 872 and in the St.
Louiser edition, vol. X, 734. - Although this letter is already included
in our edition in a translation according to De Wette vol. Ill, we
provide a new one, since the text of Roth\'s hand is at our disposal.

Grace and peace in Christ together with authority over your wife! Your
mistress and mistress has not yet come to me, my dear Stephen; 1) this
her disobedience to

1\) Stephan Roth, born in Zwickau in 1492, went to Leipzig in 1512,
where he earned his master\'s degree in late 1516 or early 1517. At
Easter 1517 he became a school rector in Zwickau, and at Easter 1520 a
school rector in Joachimsthal. In the winter semester of 1523, he
registered in Wittenberg and remained there until 1528, when he was
elected town clerk in Zwickau. In Wittenberg, he was active as a writer,
translating Luther\'s writings (see St. Louis Edition, Vol. IV, 204,
note) and collecting the summer and festival sections of the Church
Postil (see Luther\'s and Roth\'s Prefaces to the Church Postil, St.
Louis Edition, Vol. XI, Col. XLVIII ff.). In 1524, he had married Ursula
Krüger, a sister-in-law of the printer Georg Rhau, in Wittenberg, who
now refused to follow her husband to Zwickau because she allegedly could
not tolerate the air and water. At the beginning of May, she \"fell ill
and promised Bugenhagen that she would follow her husband when she
regained her health. According to

I dislike you very much. Then I begin to be a little angry with you,
too, that you have made a tyranny out of the Christian servitude in
which you are supposed to be of use to her by the too great leniency of
your mind and have strengthened her in it so far that it now seems to be
your fault, too, that she dares to do all these things against you.
Certainly, when you noticed that the donkey became wanton from the
fodder, that is, that your wife became unruly because of your indulgence
and willfulness, you should have been careful that you also obeyed God
more than your wife, so that you would not allow the authority of the
husband, which is God\'s honor, as Paul teaches \[1 Cor. 11:7.\], to be
despised and trampled underfoot by her. For it is enough that this honor
of God expresses itself to such an extent that it takes on the form of a
servant \[Phil. 2, 7.Therefore see to it that you are a man, and bear
the weakness of your wife in such a way that you do not foster and
cultivate wickedness, and while you are too much of a servant, dishonor
the honor of God that is in you by a very pernicious example. But it is
easy to distinguish whether it is weakness or wickedness. Weakness is to
be borne, wickedness is to be subdued. Weakness brings with it a
willingness to learn and listen at least once in twelve hours;
wickedness has a stubbornness in resisting and persisting. But where it
realizes that wickedness is regarded by you as weakness, what is it to
wonder if it becomes exceedingly wicked? And now, through your fault,
you open a window for Satan in the wretched little vessel, so that he
mocks and irritates you according to his liking and torments you in
every way. You are a man of understanding, and the Lord will grant that
you understand what I am saying; at the same time you will realize how
gladly I would like it from my heart that you and she should be advised.

After various attempts at mediation, especially on the part of Rörer, we
meet her again at her husband\'s on June 21. This marital discord also
brought Lindenau to the pulpit. The marriage seems to have been
permanently unhappy due to the obstinacy and imperiousness of the wife,
of which there is still a testimony from the year 1543. She died in
November 1544 and Roth remarried in January 1546.

**1132** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1229. 1230. 1231. **1133**

and the devil be resisted. Fare well in Christ. On Easter Day \[April
12\], Anno 1528, Martin Luther,

Johann Bugenhagen Pommer. ^1)^

**No. 1230 .**

Wittenberg. April 12, 1528.

**To Spalatin.**

Ueber die Sache des Paul Lindenau und ein HimmelsZeichen.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A, No. 198 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 218. Printed in
Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 373 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 303 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 247. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1096.

> To his brother in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the faithful and loud
> servant of Christ at the word of God at Altenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! In the matter of Mühlpfort I have acted with
words and writings, my dear Spalatin, so that I hope Paul will be
dismissed from there, since I see no other remedy left. The one who
hands you this letter is our, rather Christ- godly and sincere brother,
whom you know, M. Georg, 2) Diaconus of our church. If you do not know
our news (which I do not believe), he will tell it to you. I do not
interpret your three moons, for I am not a prophet, only that I suspect
the moon is an image of the lower political things, and signifies some
princes or rather peoples and lesser people\'s discord, towards evening,
when they appeared. May Christ hear my prayer and grant that the people
of the bishops fall away from their tyrants, and may happen to the
bishops without murder what happened to the Roman Pontiff with murder,
amen. Pommer and my Käthe greet you very much, at the same time also
your rib and your whole house, together with M. Eberhard and his family,
to whom I still owe a small gift, as soon as I will be able to find
something, because I am now too poor to send anything. . Pray also for
us against Satan, and be at ease in Christ. On the day of the Passover
(*phasae*) of the Lord \[April 12\] 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

1\) Bugenhagen\'s signature is found only in Roth\'s copy.

2\) Rörer.

**No. 1231.**

(Torgau.) (Around April 16, 1528.)

**Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s concerns in Pack\'s case.**

For the answer to the Landgrave\'s letter (No. 1228)^3)^ they again
advise peace.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, fol. 29. Handwritten
in *Cod. Goth*. 452, fol. 161. Printed in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 316 and
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 450.

As much as our office demands, it behooves us to do nothing else in such
matters, but to faithfully and diligently ask God, the Father, for
counsel and grace, that such a thing may work out to His divine praise
and honor and to our blessedness and gracious peace, as we have done
until now, still do, and will do again by God\'s grace.

But because we are now also drawn to this by our Lord, we owe obedience
and service to S. C. F. G.. H., and we owe obedience and service to H.
C. F. G., and therefore, out of God\'s commandment and order, must also
strengthen our conscience in this matter: so we hold that in no way is
the attack to be made from this side, but above all seek peace and means
to reconcile the matters. For there is God\'s word in the fifth book of
Moses, which gives peace as the first thing to be offered, even to the
rejected enemies, condemned by God to death before they should be
attacked with the sword. Thus also the 67th Psalm says: \"God scatters
the nations that want to war\", and Christ says Matth. 7: \"Blessed are
the peaceful, for they will be called children of God\". Without doubt
they will be wretched and unhappy, and also the children of the devil,
who have a desire for war and strife. No, \"blessed are the meek, for
they shall inherit the earth. For defiance and insistence will not keep
it, because God does not give happiness or mercy to the impatient and
war-mongering 2c. It was said of St. Josiah. He was slain because he
went against Pharaoh the king and made war on him.

3\) Because of this letter of the Landgrave, the Elector summoned the
theologians again to Torgau, where they stayed from mid-April to the
21st. Here this concern came about, to which the Elector enclosed a
reassuring letter on April 16, in which he assured that he would keep
the agreement.

**1134**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1231. 1232. 1233.

**1135**

It is also contrary to all secular rights, which are confirmed by God
and in Scripture, to attack or punish someone without interrogating,
accusing and answering him. As the governor *Porcius Festus Act*. 25.
says: \"It is not the Roman way/that a man is handed over to death
before he has his accusers present, and receives space to answer the
charge.\" Just as God Himself, *Gen.* 3, did not attack Adam, nor punish
him, until He first called him and demanded, \"Adam, where are you?\"
But if it were asked whether murder should be resisted before it
happens, or when it has happened, so that it might well be resisted that
it should not happen, we answer: The defense and punishment are two
different things and not one thing. You shall defend yourself with
proper means, counsel and justice, as you are able, so that no murder
takes place; but you shall not attack and punish, unless the deed is
done or is done publicly, otherwise you would do against the saying of
Christ: \"He who takes the sword shall perish by the sword. No, you
shall execute justice legally.

Our conscience compels us to counsel and humbly report this, for we are
comfortingly concerned that Satan is tempting us with this challenge,
whether he might make of us new and worse coins and whistlers. It is an
infallible thing for a conscience before God to give counsel and help
for bloodshed, when one is not certain that God has sanctioned or
permitted it 2c. Now one can be certain that God means to ward off war
or rebellion and to protect the subjects. But to start war and to attack
others one cannot be sure that \[it\] pleases God, but rather it is
certain that

he does not like 2c.

Our humble opinion, however, would be this, although I am neither
knowledgeable nor understanding of the ways of the world and the court,
that one should let pious princes and lords deal with him, and think of
ways and means to peace and treaty, as the S. C. F. G. may well know
better than we may indicate.

1\) Heinrich Pfeifer, formerly a monk, Münzer\'s comrade in Mulhouse,
with whom he was also beheaded.

If the princes of the confederation let themselves be heard that they
wanted to comply with their alliance, and not desist from it and not
have peace, then we consider such a thing as a cancelled feud and as if
they were in public work 2c.; then it is time to defend and protect
ourselves 2c.

But where they would deny such alliance or fail to answer correctly with
circumlocutory words, so that one would know which way to turn in yes or
no to them, that they then with assurance and vouching 2c. avert and
wipe out such suspicions, for which they have given such excellent and
strong cause.

For the sake of the expenses, we consider that, although the princes of
the confederation are obliged to reimburse them, it seems as if they
want to force themselves on them and do not mean peace if they press
hard for it. We let such things be ordered to the rulers of the
theidings and the princes of the divorce, because peace is sought on our
side. Let us read from St. Ezekiel that he took the holy gold in the
temple and gave it away to the ruler of the temple for the sake of
peace. He took the holy gold in the temple and gave it away to the king
of Assyria, which was otherwise forbidden to be taken 2c.

**No. 1232.**

(Altenburg.) April 26, 1528.

**To the Christians of Halle.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2218.

**No. 1233.**

Wittenberg. (April or May) 1528.

**To Eoban Hesse in Nuremberg.**

Luther thanks him for a funeral poem sent to Albrecht Dürer, who had
died on April 6, 1528, and for his friendly evangelical sentiments.

Printed in *Helii Eobani Hessi, poetae excellentias. et Amicorum ipsius,
Epistolarum familiarium Libri XII*.. At the end: *Marpurgi, Apud
Christianum Egenolphum Hadamarium, Anno 1543. mense Martio., pag* 268
(editor Joh. Draco); in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 306 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 255.

> Martin Luther sends his greetings to Esban Hesse.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have already received the second letter
from you.

**1136Letters from the year**

1538\. no. 1233. 1234. **1137**

at the same time with the funeral poem 1) on Dürer, you have preceded me
before I answered the first one, which I certainly did not expect. For I
had set him before my eyes, in order to answer immediately with the
first messenger that presented itself. It is certainly blessed to bear
grief over Dürer, the worthy man; but it comes to you. But it is up to
you to wish him happiness, since Christ has taken him away so well
equipped and with a blessed end from these extremely turbulent times,
which will perhaps become even more turbulent, so that he, who was
worthy of seeing nothing but the best, would not be forced to see the
worst. Therefore, may he rest in peace with his fathers, amen.

Then I thank you for your love, which almost every single piece in both
letters breathes, rather breathes out and glows with it. Not that I am
worthy of your great praise or love, but because I gladly suffer to be
made proud by the testimony and favor of good men against Satan and his
servants, who continue to suck me and ruin me without end, so that I can
also boast that I walk in Paul\'s ways, namely, through honor and shame,
through good rumors and evil rumors \[2 Cor. 6:8\], and that I am a good
smell of Christ, to some a smell of death unto death, to others a smell
of life unto life \[2 Cor. 2:15 ff\]. . Blessed be my Lord Jesus Christ,
who willed that I should be such, not that I should be worthy of hope,
but that he should save many through me from these harmful spirits.
Since I see that this wish of mine, which I sigh for hourly, is
fulfilled, I consider myself happy, and that I have received abundant
fruit and reward for my work, since I know that I live for others and
serve them. I therefore wish myself happiness, not for your praise,
which you (as it is wont to happen) pour out out of all too great favor,
but for the truth, to which you bear witness through this simplicity of
all too great affection and ardor, and most simply confess Christ.

1\) The letter that Hesse sent with the *Epicedion in funere Alberti
Dureri has been lost.* It must have been written on the same day that he
sent the poem to Joh. Lang in Erfurt, namely April 30.

For what could I hear more sweetly than that you and your like stand
unharmed against the devil in the well-founded and clear knowledge of
Christ? while meanwhile so many fall away, whom we hoped would be our
pillars, but whom we now suffer as worse enemies than even the Turk is.
I therefore pray the Lord Jesus to crown you with His blessings, so that
you may remain perfect and blameless with us until the coming of His
glory.

There is nothing new here that we could send to your great trading
center, since Nuremberg is almost the eye and ear of Germany, which sees
and hears all things that may never reach us. Greetings to your
extremely dear Hind with her dear little deer. The blessing of the Lord
be upon you. We bless you in the name of the Lord, Amen. Wittenberg,
1528. Mart. Luther.

**No. 123 4.**

Weimar. May 1, 1523.

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt.**

Luther complained that no one had come from Erfurt to Weimar to visit
him.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 373; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 308 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 257. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1099.

Grace and peace! The old man whom you recommended to me, my dear Justus
Menius, I took in, and paid him all the honor I could, for I liked his
speeches and his manners as soon as I talked with him. By the way, we
expected that some of your visitors would come to us, and we also wonder
what business or danger might have interfered, since nothing could have
interfered, neither length nor breadth nor depth, since the sky and the
sun were quite clear. I will pardon this omission of yours, if you will
just once give an account and cancel this great offense against
friendship, love and politeness. Erfurt is Erfurt, Erfurt will be
Erfurt, Erfurt is Erfurt ge

**1138** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1234 to 1237. **1139**

being. For what else can I think or say? Give my best regards to the
brothers, especially to your Eve and \[your sons\] Abel and Seth. Ask
also the Lord for me, and fight (as you do) with us against Satan, who
thinks of such great evils and troubles as the world cannot contain,
that Christ may protect his kingdom for his glory and our blessedness,
who is strong and merciful with you, amen. Given at Weimar, on the days
of Philippi and Jacobi \[May 1\] 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1235.**

Weimar. May 1, 1528. 1)

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

Luther had expected a long visit to Weimar, but he heard that the latter
was plagued by all kinds of cunning plots and unworthiness. He
admonishes him to watch and pray against the ravages of Satan. -
Otherwise, this letter contains several dark points for us.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 308d; in De Wette, vol. II, p. 332 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. IV, p. 138. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 844.
Everywhere with the year 1523. This is improved in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VI, p. 258.

Grace and peace! You have become free of your wife, 2) my dear Lang, I
do not know whether to wish you luck or to express my condolences, that
is how things stand in these quite confused and troubled times. I had
hoped that you would visit us, who were in such close proximity, but I
hear that you are troubled by the cunning plots and unworthiness of this
thunderclap of yours 3). But every destiny

1\) The editions place this letter in the year 1523, but this cannot be
correct because Lang married the widow of the white tanner Heinrich
Mattern only in 1524, not in 1522, as Erhard, Ueberlief. I, 59, states.
Luther\'s complaint, which he expresses here as in the previous letter,
that no one from Erfurt had visited him in such close proximity, leads
to the year 1528 (see Erl. Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 258).

2\) Is it certain that this happened [by death]{.underline} or is it
about other circumstances? We would like to assume the latter, and then
refer \"the thunderclap\" to the unexpected occurrence of the same.
Luther\'s warning to be careful with regard to \"polygamy\" could also
be aimed in this direction. On Oct. 28, 1529, Luther greets the little
son Längs together with his mother.

3\) De Wette points *fulminis to the* anger and malice of the enemies of
the Gospel; Walch translates: \"of your banishing ray\" and notes:
\"cannot be weather\".

must be overcome by carrying, God will also put an end to these things.
^4)^ Christ be with you, and you will pray diligently for us. For Satan
rages and is intent on more things than God Himself could accomplish so
suddenly, so we must watch and pray. Fare well, and see that you are
careful and wise with regard to polygamy (xxxx xxx xxxxxxxxxx). At
Weimar, on the days of Philippi and Jacobi \[May 1\] 1528. 5) Martin
Luther.

**No. 1236 .**

**(Wittenberg.) (Between May 6 and 12, 1528.)**

**Luther\'s, Melanchthon\'s, and Bugenhagen\'s misgivings concerning
Pack\'s alliance.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 387, no. 834.

**No.1237.**

(Wittenberg.) May 9, 1528.

**To Wilhelm Pravest in Kiel.**

Luther punishes him for his hypocritical and deceitful behavior, that
he, an enemy of the Gospel, has pretended to be a lover of it (compare
No. 1202), and abuses Luther\'s friendly letter.

Printed in *Jo. Henr. Muhlii dissertat. hist. theol.,* p. 148 (from the
original); in Krohn, Gesch. der Wiedertäufer, p. 120; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 121; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 308 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 260. German bdi Walch, vol. XXI, 1103.

> To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Pravest, pastor in Kiel, his, if it
> can happen, great friend.

Mercy and peace! What did you expect to gain, my dear husband, by
pretending to me with good words that you were such a great lover of
truth? I have, of course, in deaf simplicity, believing your serpentine
flatteries, deigned to command you the gospel, but, as I see, I have
commanded a sheep to a wolf. But do not be mistaken; a lie does not last
long, but is soon put to shame by the truth. Therefore refrain from
showing my letter around and reinforcing your nonsense against me. For
your

4\) *Virg. Aen*., lib. V, v. 710 and lib. I, v. 199.

5\) 1528 set by us instead of 1523 in the editions.

**1140** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1237. 1238. **1141**

My conscience knows that you have obtained the letter from me in an
unworthy manner and with deceitful words, and that I would not have
written like this to an enemy of the Gospel if I had not been deceived,
which I have already testified with yours, and if you do not desist, I
will publicly announce your unworthiness to the whole world. It may be
that I did not want Melchior 1) to be stormy, but I believed you to be a
calm and pure teacher of the Word, so that I was much less willing to
incite and encourage you, who rage and rage against the ministers of the
Word (even if they are somewhat too restless), but rather to admonish
and restrain you, if I had known that you were an enemy. I am indeed
surprised that it can amuse you frivolous papists to pursue your cause
with deceit and lies. Rather, finally, be ashamed that you can do
nothing but deceive and lie in your cause, as if the light will not also
dispel the darkness. There you have what this admonition of mine is
intended for; so, if you are wise, desist from this kind of
mischievousness against us, which you will not succeed in, and let the
word of God take its course. 2) I have seen your poisonous rhymes
written against me, but if you continue, they will fall back on your
head. Be well and repent. On Saturday after Jubilate \[May 9\] 1528.

> With his own hand Martin Luther.

**No. 123 8.**

Wittenberg. May 9, 1528.

**To Paul Heuge, 3) Mayor of Kiel.**

Luther writes him this presentable letter to expose Pravest.

Printed in *Henr. Muhilii dissert. histor. theol.*, p. 148; in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 50; in Walch, vol. XXI,

1\) Hofmann.

2\) After the clearance by this letter, Pravest withdrew to his
Bordesholm monastery, and became a full papist again.

3\) Schift der Name bei Walch, Bd. XXI, 1101 und im Erl. Briefw., vol.
VI, p. 261, with De Wette and in the Erlangen edition: \"Harze\". Krafft
has: \"Pawel Heugen\".

244 and again in High German idiä. Col. 1101; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
310 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 446. Also, according to the
alleged original in Krafft, Zweifaches Jubelgedächtniß, p. 447.

> Dem ehrsamen und vorsichtigen Paul Heuge, Bürgemeister, thom Kiel,
> minem G. Fr., grace and friendship in Christo.

Honorable, wise sir and friend. Jk hebbe vorlängst an juen Parher thom
Kiel einen Breef geschreveu, dat ist wahr; But I did not know otherwise,
because he would be the highest friend of the gospel, and I am glad to
know, where he sent his letter to me, about the most alderfriar-like
invitation, which he asked and asked of me, When I was told about the
other ones by you, because I had heard that the gospel was going up in
Kiele, I was concerned that there would be strikers and enthusiasts as
in other orders, and prevented the fruit of the gospel, which I wanted
to come to, and knew that Nemande was more powerful than Parherr
Sülvest, whom I respected more than Melchior Hoffmann, welkere mi ok
duchte ein weinich tho schwynde fahren, eft he it allich wol 4) gude
meende, weute men schall io und müde hierinne suverlich faren, 5) und
nicht polteren, und de Lüte mit Stille und Frede gelerde werden.
According to this, my early prayer to you, where the parrher is a
sincere man, is that he is true to the gospel, and my writing is more
drycht slrägt\^, his Dingh wedder uns tho stärken, dat jie darlegen
dessen Breef lögen \[show\], und mi entschuldigen willen 6) alse de ik
van dem Parrherr schändlich bedragen. Not differently geweten hebbe,
denn alse were he de beste unse Fründe, denn he gaff mi wohl so vele
guder Wort, wo ik dennhe hyrmede^7)^ demsulven Parrher okschrive. God\'s
grace is with you all, biddet before us ok. To Wittenbergh, Sonnabendes
na Jubilate \[May 9\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

4\) Instead of: \"allich wol\", Krafft reads: \"allyehwol\". In Walch\'s
High German translation: \"gleich gut\".

5\) That is: because one should and must drive neatly in this. Instead
of this Walch offers: \"because one should also drive cleanly with
you\".

6\) So Krafft certainly right. In the editions: \"will\", \"ji
willen\" - you will.

7\) Krafft: \"hyr mede\" (== hiemit), in the editions: \"hor mede\". -
Immediately following Walch has resolved \"demsulven\" (== the same) by:
\"an den saubern\".

**1142**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1239. 1240. 1241.

**1143**

**No. 1239.**

Wittenberg. May 9, 1528.

**To Conrad Wulf, citizen of Kiel.**

Luther told Conrad Wulf, who had reported Pravest\'s behavior to him,
that he had written a harsh letter to Pravest, of which he hoped that he
would not praise it as much as the first one. The preachers should be
exhorted to teach quietly and not stormily.

Printed in Krafst, Zweifaches Jubelgedächtniß, p. 448; in Krohn,
Geschichte der Wiedertäufer, p. 119 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 261
f. in Lower Saxon. Walch, vol. XXI, 1102, also gives this letter in a
new High German translation. In De Wette and in the Erlangen edition,
this Brie is missing.

> To the honorable and wise Conrad Wulffen, citizen of Kiel, my
> favorable friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable good friend! I have written a hard
letter to your (jwen == juen) pastor for the sake of his lies, so that
he has deceived me, that I truly did not know nor understand otherwise,
because he was one of the best friends of the gospel \[one\] so good
words he gave me. Now I hear, and have read his rhymes and poems against
me, I see well how he sought and meant me with falsehood. Since I am now
well assured that he will not carry around and praise this other letter
of mine as he does with the first one, my friendly request to you (Jw)
is that you help excuse me and, where he will praise the first letter
1), announce that he will also praise the other one, so that it will be
seen what kind of man he is, and publicly point out to him and everyone
by my handwriting. Besides, exhort your preachers also, 2) that they
teach the gospel neatly and with quietness, not with rumbling, breaking,
and tempests, for in time even that which is unrighteous will fall,
where the hearts are well and truly taught and instructed beforehand.
Christ our Lord be with you all, amen. At Wittenberg, on the Saturday
after Jubilate \[May 9\] 1528.

*Martinus Luther, manu propria.*

1\) No. 1215.

2\) In Krafft and ini Erl. Briefw.: \"Predhtur\", either read out or a
misprint instead: Predhker.

**No. 1240.**

(Wittenberg.) May 12, 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2236, annex, no. 9.

**No. 1241.**

(Wittenberg.) May 12, 1528.

**To Friedrich Pistorius, Abbot at Nuremberg.**

Luther expresses his joy about the commemorative coin that the Nuremberg
council had minted in honor of the abbot, but even more about his right
position on the sacramental matter.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 376k; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 312
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 264. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1105.

> To the Lord Friedrich, St. Aegidiens Vorsteher zu Nürnberg, the
> servant of Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your silver image is pleasant to me,
venerable man, so that I now possess you in truth twofold, although as
an absent one, namely the image of the soul through letters, that of the
body through this piece of silver. But I rejoice even more that you are
so firm and certain in the matter of the Sacrament against the raging
pestilences of the Sacramentists, for I also believe that I have done
enough in this matter before God, so that those who err err without my
fault, although I do not hope that those people will be moved in the
least by such great reasons for proof, since they abhor the light and
love only their darkness to the point of nonsense. But Christ comforts
me abundantly, that he condescends to free at least some from this
plague and to preserve them, so that I do not regret the work, however
superfluous and ridiculed it may be by those. For who can shut Satan\'s
mouth that he should not at least talk where he cannot talk? Pray with
your own for us, my dear man, for Satan is raging in the world, who, not
content with destroying souls, is not satisfied.

3\) The commemorative coin was minted to honor the abbot\'s multiple
merits. On the obverse of the same is *the bust of the abbot in profile
with the inscription: Frider. Fig. S. Aegidi. Anno. Etatis.* XLII. The
reverse shows the coat of arms of the Aegidien Abbey with the
superscription: *Si Deus pro nobis quis contra nos. Ro*. VIII.

**1144**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1241. 1242. 1243.

**1145**

hastens to destroy the bodies and us as well, and to make everything
desolate. God have mercy on us, Amen. Tuesday after Cantate \[May 12\]
1528. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1242.**

(Torgau.) (May 15, 1528.)

**Luther and Melanchthon to the Elector John of Saxony.**

Peace Council in Pack\'s cause.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, fol. 29. O (in
Melanchthon\'s hand, co-signed by Luther). Printed in the Leipzig
Supplement, p. 51, no. 68; in Walch, vol. XXI, 250; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 334, dated: \"Im Junius 1528,\" and likewise in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 54, p. 13. - About the given time determination, the Erl.
Briefw. essentially says the following: Since in this letter an embassy
to the Imperial Regiment at Speier and King Ferdinand is requested, and
the mandate issued as a result of this legation is dated May 20, our
letter must have been written before this date. Furthermore, it
presupposes the personal presence of the theologians with the Elector.
They were probably summoned to Torgau on May 14, where the Elector was
preparing to leave for Weimar on May 15. In Torgau, they drew up our
report on the 15th, and it was sent to the Elector, who had left in the
meantime. On the same day, they returned to Wittenberg.

> To My Most Gracious Lord, Duke Johann, Elector 2c. To S. C. F. G.
> himself own hand.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Although we are sure that E. C. F. G. will know how to handle the
matters that now come up, we cannot refrain from asking and encouraging
E. C. F. G. out of our just and guilty concern for E. C. F. G., we must
not refrain from humbly begging and admonishing E. C. F. G., because we
will be moving from house to house today, 1) and immediately leave
behind us a reminder that E. C. F. G. is attacking us every hour with a
great deal of business, and that Satan is also cunningly seeking us, so
that we will reluctantly, or ever so slowly, pursue and accept peace.

First, because God presents us with such good means and causes to keep
the peace that C.F.G. will not fail to do so;

1\) This passage shows that the theologians left on the day of the
writing of this report, which is also called a \"memo\" in the following
document.

For thus says St. Paul 2 Cor. 6: Dear brethren, I beseech you not to
accept the grace of God in vain 2c., and to send the most favorable
message both to the imperial regiment and King Ferdinando, to preserve
and increase the glimpse.

On the other hand, that M. G. Lord, the landgrave, be stopped, that S.
F. G. does not hurry too much and does not negate such divine means 2)
and scatter, as one is wont to fish before the sea.

Thirdly, not to insist so hard on the food and to seek it carefully,
because it is better to lose so much money than to incur so great an
expense annually. How would one do otherwise, if so much damage would
have come by fire or water or other accident, as happened in the beastly
riot 2c.? May Christ, our Lord, enlighten and strengthen the heart of
C.F.G. to do His will, amen.

E. C. F. G. subservient

> Martinus Luther.
>
> Philip Melanchthon.

**No. 1243.**

(Torgau.) (May 15, 1528.)

**Luther and Melanchthon to Duke John Frederick of Saxony.**

In the same matter as the previous letter.

The original as in the previous number, but by Luther\'s hand. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 53, no. 69; in Walch, vol. XXI, 251; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 335, dated: \"Im Junius 1528\", and also in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 14. For the date, see the previous number.

> To the illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord Johann Friedrich, Duke of
> Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious
> Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! We
have asked E. F. G. Lord and Father, our most gracious Lord, Duke
Johanns, Churfürst 2c., submissive opinion, and sent a memorial 3) that
S. C. F. G. wanted with

2\) \"verseuche\" will probably be as much as: verjage, verseche.

3\) The pre-giving document. Here it is said that it was \"sent\" to
him.

**1146**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1243. 1244. 1245.

**1147**

We ask you to accept and help us to keep the peace and good means that
God offers us. Therefore, we also humbly request that you also accept
such knocks of our God and help us to comply with His divine will,
although we hope that Your Holiness will know how to do so without our
admonition. However, since we know that Satan creeps around us as St.
Peter speaks, and cannot stand that one has or seeks peace, we must
worry that he would now also bring so much business before us, or
hinder, that such knocking on God\'s door would be neglected and
abandoned. Therefore, we consider it best, 2) first, that a message be
dispatched in the most expedient manner both to the Regiment of Imperial
Majesty and to the King. Majesty, and to the Royal Majesty at Behemoth,
so that obedience would have to be felt, and glimpses would be given to
us, but displeasure would be driven to the rebellious princes. On the
other hand, that the Landgrave be restrained so that H.F.G. does not
destroy such means and fugues for peace, and that for the sake of God,
who presents us with such beautiful means and does not want to have them
despised. Thirdly, not to demand the food so sharply; for God has more
than the food, and can bring it in again, if one follows His divine
admonition and means, 3) and does not despise them. Christ, our Lord,
tread Satan under E. F. G.\'s feet soon, amen.

> E. F. G. Martin. Luther. Philippus Melanchthon.

**No. 12 44.**

Wittenberg, May 15, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

About the filling of a parish position.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
45. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum, Ms. 26,* fol. 26.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 377; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 312 f.
and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 267. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1106.

1\) The original should read \"our\".

2\) The following is the same as the \"Dentzettel\" of the previous
number.

3\) This is really what the original says instead of: \"follow\".

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> Bishop of the Church at Zwickau, his extremely dear brother.

Grace and peace in the Lord! The pastor in Schlettau, Mr. Balthasar,^4)^
has decided to leave his parish for the sake of his studies and has done
so in my and Pomeranus\' presence, which we approved of and praised, and
he asked that the bearer of this letter, Johann Bock (*Caprum*), be
recommended to you, whom he wishes to follow in his place in the same
parish, so that you may deign to help and assist him. We also bear
witness to his request and hope that he will do everything for the sake
of Christ. May the Lord Jesus be with you, dear brother in the Lord.
Wittenberg, Friday after Cantate \[May 15\] 1528Martin Luther.

**No. 12 45.**

(Wittenberg.) (May 16 or 17, 1528.)

**Luther and Melanchthon to the Elector**

**John of Saxony.**

On the arrival of a mandate from the imperial regiment at Speier, which
commands peace to all estates, Luther and Melanchthon earnestly exhort
to peace, and propose that an envoy be sent to the imperial regiment to
report the obedience of the Elector and the Landgrave, and to sue the
federal princes.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, fol. 29. Printed in
the Leipzig Supplement, p. 51, No.67; in Walch, vol. XXI, 247; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p.332 and in the Erl. This letter, as is evident from
its beginning, is written one day after the arrival of the imperial
mandate, which is already mentioned in a letter of Melanchthon to the
Elector (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. 1,979) on May 18. The mandate cannot have
arrived before May 15, for in that case it would have become known to
the theologians already when they were present in Torgau. Therefore,
only May 16 and 17 remain for our letter. The 16th is the more probable
day, because the theologians in No. 1248 already answer a letter of the
Elector written to them for this reason.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Elector 2c, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen,
> our most gracious Lord. In S. C. F. G. own hand.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious Lord! We have experienced
how as

4\) Loy.

**1148**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1245.

**1149**

yesterday a mandate from the regiment in kaiserl. Majesty. In it peace
is offered to all the states of the empire, which we are not a little
pleased about, as we hope of our small understanding, it should be a
beautiful, good cause to find the peace that we seek and desire. And it
seems to us that God hears our prayer and will graciously be with us,
for he truly greets us kindly, where we can answer him and receive him
well; for such a cause, which comes to us from himself, we should have
sought far and wide.

> And whether it may or may not be that the princes of the Confederation
> would have issued such a mandate themselves; nevertheless, it is not
> the less a good approach to act with them or against them in the
> regiment for peace 2c.
>
> Therefore, it is our humble concern (although E. C. F. G., according
> to high princely understanding, does not need our advice) that such an
> imperial mandate should not be despised:
>
> First, so that God Himself, who graciously shows Himself to be at
> peace, will not be despised in it.
>
> On the other hand, such a mandate has ever come from our duly
> appointed authority of God, to which obedience is owed, especially
> because there is nothing evil, but only good and peace commanded, and
> not ours or theirs, but the common good of the realm is sought and
> offered to us. 2c. For we fear that, if such a mandate were to be
> disregarded or thrown to the winds, the princes of the Confederation
> would thereby make a great pretence and bring disgrace, and on our
> part cause the greatest disgrace in the eyes of all the world, as
> those who offered themselves for peace, and to be subjects of Imperial
> Majesty. Majesty\'s subjects, and are insulted over such obedience by
> the disobedient, as rebels against Imperial Majesty. Majesty, and
> would be punished by *crimen laesae majestatis* on us.

bring

> In addition, they would of course continue to act with the said
> regiment, and they would obtain a respect, and then our part\'s cause
> would come to the point that it would keep no good conscience before
> God, no right before the kingdom, no glimpse before the world, which
> should be quite terrible and cruel.

And we fear that Satan has greater things in mind than we think, for he
does not want to attack the gospel piecemeal, but, just as Haman wanted
to wipe out the entire Jewish race, he also wants to turn the whole of
Germany around and thus wipe out the gospel. It is not for nothing that
he is so diligent about us, fights and fights back, that we are hard and
industrious, even lazy and unwilling to seek and accept the peace that
God gives us and offers us.

E. C. F. G. will undoubtedly think for themselves what an unfortunate
thing it should be, if all things had been well thought out and
arranged, if so much bloodshed had been committed against conscience and
imperial majesty without need. Majesty had been committed.

And, since God is for, if it should be carried out and executed in such
an evil conscience and disobedience, it should be eternally lamentable
to us that we would then have to and would be forced to speak against
E.C.F.G., as our most beloved Lord, by whom we have been so fatherly and
warmly nourished, protected and showered with excellent great benefits
and graces, speak and testify to this, as I have conditioned Martinus
before C. F. G. at Altenburg, that we must avoid C. F. G.\'s land and
commit ourselves for the sake of the Gospel, lest all such disgrace fall
on that same innocent word of God with a good appearance. What could
happen to our hearts more and more, than that we would have to be
separated from such a father and patron, and perhaps many other fine
people with us. The devil certainly has such and even greater misery in
mind, which God now graciously tries to prevent, with such a cause,
which one would perhaps later like to pay for with a land, and will then
be nowhere to be had.

So we cannot think how our part should not be considered with all
fairness in the eyes of the world, as those who prefer war to peace,
bloodshed to good governance; which suspicion we, as those who have and
praise God\'s word, should let be filled from us much further than all
other princes who do not have God\'s word 2c. Therefore our submissive
concern would be,

**1150**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1245. 1246. 1247.

**1151**

that one sent a stately message 1) to the Regimeut, which there
indicated E. C. F.G. and M. G. Mr. Landgrave\'s obedience, and deplored
the covenant princes, and other 2c., as E. C. F. G. probably know how to
do such better than we can advise.

> E. C. F. G. subservient Mart. Luther. Philippus Melanchthon.

**No. 1246.**

Wittenberg. May 16, 1528.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

A letter of recommendation with a postscript, written at a banquet.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 215. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 377 b; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 313 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Vl, p. 269. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1107.

> To your godly and fair man, Magister Georg Spalatin, Bishop of
> Altenburg, his brother who is exceedingly dear in Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I commend this Melchior Frischholz to you,
my dear Spalatin. He received your letter extremely harshly, which you
recently wrote to him, in which you accused him of having left an
affliction behind him in Altenburg and seeking the preaching ministry by
wandering about. I have excused you as much as I could and pardoned the
weakness of man; you will also (I ask) bear the weakness of man. For you
know that poverty is already suspicious in and of itself and has a
desperate pusillanimity; it takes everything harder than it really is,
for so it always thinks that it is despised and neglected. Therefore, we
must have more compassion here and close our eyes so that they are not
brought to despair. You are a wise man and have dealt with many people;
you will do what is good. Be well with your rib, for which I pray that
through Christ\'s blessing it may become a mother of children to you.

1\) The Elector delivered Joh. von Planitz and Christoph von Taubenheim
to King Ferdinand, who arrived in Prague on May 24.

are quite the same, Amen. Wittenberg, im Luftigen und Luftschen Hause,
2) May 16, 1528.

It, greets you D. Pommer, who will soon leave for Brunswick, and asks
that prayers be said for him 2c.

The fighter against the stone, Jonas the righteous (*Jonas Justus*),
greets you and asks that prayers be said for him so that he may have a
happy victory.

Caspar Creutzinger greets you and asks that you pray for him, that his
hopes may be fulfilled, that is, if you do not understand it, that Duke
George 3) may be converted to Christ or be trampled by Christ.

Greetings from Johann Mantel, who was recently deprived of a son on the
same day that Pommer lost his older son Michael,^4)^ while the younger
one, Michael, had gone ahead half a month before, and he asks that he be
prayed for, that he may have many sons for One, amen.

Greetings to you from my Eve, who is healthy and cheerful with all these
who are together at the banquet, and asks that she be prayed for, that
while her children remain well, she may bear and give birth to the third
fruit 5) healthilyMartin Luther.

**No. 1247.**

Kemberg. May 17, 1528.

**Carlstadt au Krautwald and Schwenkfeld in Liegnitz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2074, no. 700. 6).

2\) *in domo Aerea et Aetherea*. There is no doubt that this refers to
the house of the printer Luft. Nevertheless, the note of the Erl.
Briefw.: \"beim Buchdrucker (*aerea*) Joh, Luft (*aetherea*)\" seems
questionable to us, because we think that *aerea* should be read as four
syllables because of the consonance with *aetherea*.

3\) Cruciger was a native of Leipzig, and Duke Georg was his former
sovereign. Since April 13, he had returned from Magdeburg to take up the
preaching ministry at the castle church and a theological professorship
in Wittenberg.

4\) Both children died on April 26. The younger son of Bugenhagen was
born in Luther\'s house.

5\) The opinion that Luther\'s wife was pregnant was erroneous, because
Luther\'s third child was not born until May 4, 1529.

6\) Sieve the locations of this writing. Misleadingly, the Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 271: \"Gedruckt: Luthers Werke *ed. Jen*. 1546 \[\[should
read: 1556\]. T. IV. f. 381 b\", which leads to the assumption,

**1152** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1248. 1249. **1153**

**No. 1248.**

(Wittenberg.) May 18, 1528.

**Luther and Melanchthon to the Elector John of Saxony.**

They express their joy at the peaceful intentions of the Elector.

The original in Luther\'s hand is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, p.
6. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 51, No. 65; in Walch, vol. XXI,
245; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 322 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 4.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! We have received E. C. F. G. letter humbly and with joy, 1) we
sincerely hope that Christ, our Lord, has heard our prayer and will hear
it perfectly for the best, as we have done up to now and still do daily,
praying with all diligence and endeavoring to pray that God, the Father
of peace and consolation, will not only present good means for peace (as
we have heard), but also give will and purpose to accept such means, and
in all ways to flee and avoid war, and to seek peace, as He also
commands through His beloved Apostle, *quae paecis sunt, sectamini*:
Pursue peace, and God will be at peace with you; and again Rom. 12: \"As
much as is in you, keep peace with everyone.\" For without this there
will be enough strife, and war will be too much. One must not paint the
devil over the door, nor ask him to be one\'s godfather. May the
merciful God grant E. C. F. G. grace and strength to love and do His
will, Amen. Monday after *Vocem Jucunditatis*, May 18, 1528.

E. C. F. G.

> subservient Martinus Luther. Philippus Melanchthon.

it is the *Latin* edition, but this letter is in Latin in the *German*
editions. The other locations are not given in the Erl. Briefw. does not
indicate.

1\) What is \"heard\" will be in any case the news that the emperor has
issued the mandate to the estates to keep peace.

**No. 1249.**

Wittenberg. May 18, 1528.

**Luther and Melanchthon to Duke John Frederick of Saxony in Cassel.**

They praise him for his peace efforts and wish him happy progress of the
same.

The original in Luther\'s hand is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, p.
6. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 51, No. 66; in Walch, vol. XXI,
246; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 323 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 5.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, 2) Highborn Prince, gracious Lord!
^3)^We have learned how Your Grace has set out to promote peace and the
prevention of war with our gracious Lord, the Landgrave, which we are
highly pleased about, and we pray that God will grant Your Grace grace
and good fortune, so that such means and causes of peace may be more
valid than rutting and causes of war. Although we know that young
princes are fierce not to suffer such evil wiles and great causes, God
has promised great mercy to those who seek peace and do not tolerate
evil wiles, as He says: \"Blessed are the drunkards, for they shall
inherit the earth.\" War gains not much, but loses much, and ventures
all; but gentleness loses nothing, ventures little, and gains all.
Therefore he says Ps. 33 \[Ps. 34, 15. 13.\]: \"Avoid evil and do good,
seek peace and pursue it\", \"and you will have good days\". Christ
grant E.^4)^ F. G. to seek peace earnestly, for the time of wars, that
one cannot defend oneself, will bring enough that one may well accept
peace where one can. At Wittenberg, Monday after *Vocem Jucunditatis*,
May 18, 1528.

E. F. G.

understated

> Martin Luther. Philip Melanchthon.

2\) In De Wette and in the Erl. Edition wrong: \"Durchlauchtigster\",
because this is the title of the Churfürst. Walch: \"Durchl.

3i namely to Cassel. Anark von Wildenfels was attached to him as a
councilor.

4\) In the editions erroneously: \"E. K. F. G.\" instead of: \"E. F.
G.\".

**1154**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1250. 1251. 1252.

**1155**

**No. 1250.**

(Wittenberg.) May 21, 1528.

**To Margrave George of Brandenburg.**

Luther sends Johann Rorer and Georg Heiderer as Lutheran preachers, and
recommends Adam Weis at Crailsheim.

The original is in the district archive at Nuremberg, Ansbacher
Rel.-Acten, XI, 21. Printed in J. P. Reinhard\'s Beitr. zur Historie des
Frankenlandes, Th. I, p. 133; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 324; in Erl.
Ausg., vol. 54, p. 6; in Lang, Neuere Gesch. des Fürstenthums Bayreuth.
1801. 1,17 f. and Kolde in Zeitschr. für Kgsch. XIII, 320 (after the
original).

> To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Georgen, Margrave of
> Brandenburg, Duke of Pomerania, Stettin 2c., my gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious
lord! Here comes the pious man Er Johann Rorer: how glad I am that F. G.
has called such a man to himself again; also ask God from the bottom of
my heart to mercifully strengthen and maintain F. G. in his gracious
knowledge and devotion, to do and promote his will and holy word, as he
has then begun to move F. G., and we should all ask and hope that his
mercy will blessedly complete in F. G. such begun work of his grace. F.
G., amen.

And as E. F. G. has written to me through Mr. Hans von Schwarzenberg for
a preacher to Plassenburg, so I have moved and brought up this Georgen
Heyderer to accept such an office, as E. F. G. will further hear. Order
the same as the above-mentioned Johann Rörer and Adam Weis at Krailsheim
to E. F. G.; for they are fine people, worthy to be held in honor and
loyalty. The Father of all mercy grant E. F. G. his spirit abundantly to
do his divine will, Amen. On Ascension Day \[May 21\] 1528.

E. F. G. williger

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1251.**

Wittenberg. May 22, 1528.

**To Spalatin.**

Of Luther\'s occupations, among others with the translation of Isaiah.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 258. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 378; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 326 (of May 25) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 276.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1108.

> To his brother in Christ, Georg Spalatin, the servant of Christ, the
> extremely faithful bishop of Altenburg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! May it not be a burden to you that I have
delayed this messenger. Pommer has left for Brunswick, and the care of
the parish rests on me. Therefore, because I have been busy publicly and
privately, especially on this feast day, I have not been able to
complete 1) what you requested; now I am fulfilling the promise to some
extent, as much as I can.

Now we go to the prophets or rather we give birth to them in German.
First, Isaiah is carefully edited with translations and explanations, as
much as Christ gives grace. You pray for us. All of us, Jonas and
Philip, greet you. Wittenberg, the day after the Ascension 2) \[May 22\]
1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1252.**

(Wittenberg.) (May 22, 1528.) 3)

**To the Lords of Einsiedel.**

Luther resists them to sell their goods. He suggests them a form, how
they should write about the objected passage in their answer (see No.
1203 and No. 1204) to Duke George.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 250; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 318; in the Altenburg edition, vol. IV, p.
369 ff; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XIX, p. 662 ff; in Walch, vol. XXI,
225; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 276 (without day) and likewise in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 53, p. 435.

Grace and peace in Christ. Gentlemen, firm, dear gentlemen! Magister
Philipps and I do not like to see you sell your goods and would much
rather advise you to do so.

1\) This will probably refer to the preparation of the next letter,
which probably left at the same time as this letter.

2\) De Wette has taken *altera post* for *feria* 2. post (Monday after),
but then ler. 2. *post Exaudi would* have been set, which is excluded by
the words: \"on this feast day\".

3\) This time determination results from a letter of Spalatin to
Heinrich von Einsiedel of May 26 (in Kapp, Vol. I, p. 117).

**1156**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1252. 1253.

**1157**

do not do. Perhaps God would send a means with the tyrant that (it)
would be different. But we want to follow your concern with ours. But
the form that I promised M. Spalatino, methinks, should be this; or how
you will find it better, and change it.

First of all, that you indicate humbly and with the best words you
could, how you, S. F. G. obediently, would have accepted the articles
that were written 2c. But now you would have been with people many
times, you would have had to hear many more troublesome words, both from
enemies and friends, because of the underlined piece, which S. F. G.
would have had to leave outside. F. G. outside: and yet you did not then
notice so sharply that such power lay in the same piece. Because now
everyone worries and tortures your conscience with this, and you cannot
answer for it, and even feel a burden in your conscience, especially
because you are reproached as if you had clearly denied God and his word
in your conscience, and, as they say, a Turk and a Jew would not have to
suffer such a thing, let alone that anyone could suffer Christians to
hear that someone should deny God and his conscience; to which also the
more heap holds for it, that admittedly E. F. G. himself had not been of
the opinion to keep or demand such, as the words read, but had perhaps
at that time, as in the case of throwing disgraces on us, been
overzealous, but the others such E. F. G. so badly. F. G. as badly as we
do; because our consciences are troubled by this, and we also recognize
ourselves guilty of saving F. G.\'s honor and reputation, and yet know
nothing with which to do so, because the words are so clear that we are
stripping God and our consciences: we have thought to inform F. G. of
such a thing. and only to seek advice on what we should do in this
matter, so that we may not only save our conscience, but also E. F.
G.\'s praiseworthy and Christian reputation, both of which are to be
highly injured, as everyone says, and we also feel this way, and so that
we do not give the evil mouths cause to blaspheme, nor the pious cause
to be angry. Hereupon we ask that E. F. G. would again overlook the
articles and give us a gracious answer.

With such a writing, I hope, the matter shall again come into the first
season, so that you would again be free to wisely keep your conscience.

I left the Gnanstein parish 1) like this for a while until the weather
changed. How can one do otherwise? The people must be patient for a
while. Hereby commanded by God, 1528.

**No. 1253 .**

Wittenberg. May 23, 1528.

**To Friedrich Myconius in Gotha.**

On Draco\'s dispute with his preacher (cf. *Corp. Ref.,* vol. I, 980
f.).

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. A 1048, fol. 3. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 378; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 325 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 278. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1109.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother Friedrich Mecum, the
> extremely faithful bishop in Gotha.

Grace and peace in Christ! You write me very sad things, my dear
Frederick, about Draco, 2) but, as he is a human being, there is no
advice with which I could help these things. However, I have written him
a (as I think) quite harsh letter, whether I would like to do something
with it. He will write back excuses, but null ones, which, as I have
written, I do not even want to hear. I also do not see what good it will
do if the matter is brought to the court a hundred times and tackled by
the prince\'s force. He has a head; if it is not changed from heaven,
there is nothing left but for him to sing to us, \"Give, give; give,
give\" \[Isa. 28:10.\]. I think that for the time being this should be
assigned to the office of the visitators; in the meantime it must be
borne with the most impatient patience. The Lord be with you, and you
pray for me, weak and poor. Wittenberg, Saturday after the Ascension
\[May 23\] 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

1\) In the editions: \"N.\"

2\) Draco (Drach, Draconites) was a priest in Waltershausen near Gotha.

**1158** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1254. 1255. 1256. **1159**

**No. 125 4.**

Wittenberg. May 23, 1528.

**To Justus Menius in Erfurt.**

Luther promises to call him away from Erfurt at the first opportunity.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 3786; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 325
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 279. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1109 f.

Grace and peace! I write, since I am very busy, my dear Justus, with few
words. I will not refrain, indeed, at the first opportunity that
presents itself, I will call you away from this den of cruel and
exceedingly ungrateful beasts, 1) so exceedingly evil does the
abomination of this city grieve me, for what else shall I say? But I do
not despair that Christ will shortly do otherwise with his adversaries.
Meanwhile, suffer, for I suffer with you, and Christ suffers with both
of us and with all, and pray for me weak vessel. Our prince is now too
busy for anything to be done or obtained in this court. Greet the
delightfulness of your life, your wife and children, with whom I commend
you to Christ. Wittenberg, Saturday after the Ascension of the Lord
\[May 23\] 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

**No.1255.**

Wittenberg. May 26, 1528.

**To Stephan Zwels^2)^ in Geldern.**

Luther comforts him in his imprisonment, which he suffers for the sake
of the gospel.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 88; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 327 f. and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 280.

1\) Due to the Catholic reaction in Erfurt (see No. 1073), Menius\'
position had become increasingly difficult. The magistrate denied his
appointment; those who had appointed him remained silent. Therefore he
indicated to the procurators of his church that he could no longer
serve; they, too, remained silent. The magistrate\'s decision, which had
been appealed, did not come for weeks. After he had received Luther\'s
decisive consent to leave Erfurt, he went to Gotha in August and fed
himself there for the time being from his eight noble pensioners.

2\) The Erl. Briefw. assumes that this Stephan Zwels is identical with
the master of the German House at Utrecht, Stevan van Zuilen van
Nyevelt, the friend

To the highly venerable brother Stephan Zwels, the faithful and upright
prisoner of Christ in Guelders.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu, our Redeemer and Comforter! I have seen
your sentences, dearest brother Stephan, which have been shamefully
trampled on by these Cologne 3) sows, who are certainly quite unworthy
that they should see such pearls, and I wish you happiness that you have
been so enlightened by Christ\'s grace that you have recognized and
approved such things, then also become worthy that you suffer this
disgrace and such severe imprisonment for such teachings. Therefore
remember him who said \[Luc. 6:22\]: \"Blessed are you when men revile
you and reject your name as evil because of the Son of Man\" 2c. This I
write briefly and among much business, my dear brother, pitying indeed
your sufferings, but rejoicing exceedingly because of your cause so holy
and righteous. O be strong, and do not let this confidence fall; despise
the raging Satan. Christ will be stronger in you than Satan was in those
people, and we will ask the Father of mercies that he who gave you to
suffer for his beloved Son may give that he may also triumph through
you, amen, amen. Perhaps more at another time. Now be at ease in Christ,
who is with you, suffering with you, overcoming with you, reigning with
you, and making us all in His image. Wittenberg, Tuesday after Exaudi
\[May 26\] 1528. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1256 .**

Wittenberg. May 27, 1528.

**To Paul Lemberg in Liegnitz.**

Luther warns him against the doctrine of the Sacramentirans, to which he
was inclined.

Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 89; in Ehrhardt, Presbyteriologie
Schlesiens, IV, 165 ?; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 327 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 281.

Gerhard Geldenhauer, to whom he transferred the pastorate at Tiel.
Perhaps he was won to the Gospel by Geldenhaner, who had returned from
Wittenberg. His final fate is not known.

3\) The Inquisition of the Duchy of Guelders was located in Cologne.

**1160**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1256. 1257.

**1161**

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Paul, 1) formerly
> imprisoned abbot of Sagan, now freedman of Christ, rather free and
> exceedingly faithful servant.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu! With sadness I have heard, esteemed man,
that you too are in danger through the error of the Sacramentans, but I
pray to Christ that it may only be an error and a challenge, as I have
heard. Therefore, out of brotherly concern, I could not refrain from
anticipating this infection with this letter, if Christ would give grace
that you overcome this challenge. And I am not surprised that you are
challenged. For what is easier, and more lasting, and more constant,
than that we miserable people should be contested, when our adversary
walketh about as a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour? But, he
says \[1 Pet. 5, 9.), \"resist him firmly in faith.\" Therefore I
beseech thee, for Christ\'s sake, and by the sweet liberty of the
Spirit, which the new-born gospel hath given us by the ineffable grace
of Christ, I adjure thee that thou be not so willing a Galatian \[Gal.
1:6.I charge you not to be such a willing Galatian, and not to be so
soon turned away by these reckless spirits, who speak out of their heads
without, even against, the Scriptures, and, what is most grievous, speak
nothing certain, nothing constant, but utter a sound without
understanding, which (as Christ lives) they themselves neither
understand nor teach. I have seen their writings, I have heard their
words. Surely it is nothing but a heaping together and noise of
syllables, and they have not yet brought forward one iota by which they
prove what they speak, but flee and avoid the proof with diligence. For
this grievously vexes me, when one teaches and

1\) Paul Lemberg, formerly abbot in Sagan (see No. 825), since 1522,
resigned his abbacy still in 1525, because of the enmity of the older
monks and Duke Georg against him, since he worked for the Reformation.
Then he received the provostship of Grünberg, married Barbara Reckenberg
in Wittenberg in 1526, but also had to leave Grünberg, because he was
persecuted there on the requisition of Duke Georg, and went to Liegnitz
in 1527, where he became court preacher of Duke Friedrich II. He agreed
with Schwenkfeld, which is why Luther wrote this letter to. him. In 1536
he received the pastorate at Adelsdorf in Liegnitz, and lived there as
late as 1553.

not proven if you say something and do not present it. Therefore, if you
absolutely cannot win, at least postpone your judgment until you become
certain and see the proof. You know the curse of the 109. 2) Psalm,
\"for \[Ps. 5, 10.\] in their mouth is nothing certain, their inwardness
is heartache\". But this is said of these spirits with even more truth.
Christ deliver and keep thee among these thorns and scorpions with thy
Barbara 3) and Mechtilde, whom thou shalt salute in the name of us all.
Fare well and teach (*sape*) the simple and pious Christ. Wittenberg,
Wednesday after Urban \[27 May\] 1528. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 125 7.**

Wittenberg. June 6, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the expelled Johann von Ranau. Joy at the announcement
in a (missing) letter from the Elector that peace is imminent in the
Pack trade.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, fol. 108. 41. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 53; in Walch, vol. XXI, 253; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 330 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 9.

> To the most illustrious, high-born Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my
> most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Although E. C. F. G. would now remain unmolested by everyone, as I
would also like to do; but because this Johann von Ranau, a poor man who
has been driven away, also seeks and asks so piteously, I cannot refrain
from serving him with this letter to E. C. F. G. But E. C. F. G. will
graciously hear his request from the enclosed letter. Accordingly, my
humble request is that E. C. F. G., where it is necessary, because the
good man\'s delay is grave, graciously consider and listen to his
misery, as then

2\) \"109\" is with Ehrhardt in the text, there is the curse over the
blasphemers. The following words from the 5th Psalm are the motivation
of the curse.

3\) Barbara the wife, and Mechtilde the 1-1/2 year old daughter of
Lemberg.

**1162**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1257 to 1260.

**1163**

E. C. F. G. will know how to keep it here. We have also recently
received a comforting letter from E. C. F. G., in the hope that peace
will come from the authorities, for which we also ask, and eagerly await
good new news every hour. May Christ our Lord be gracious and merciful
to all the C.C.F.G.\'s undertakings and activities, together with all
those who are involved, amen. God grant it. At Wittenberg, Saturday
after Pentecost, June\] 1528. Martinus Luther.

**No. 125 8.**

(Wittenberg.) June 6, 1538.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends Sebastian Albinus as a teacher in Reichenbach.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
a*, fol. 259. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 379 b; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 331 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 283. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1111.

> To his extremely dear brother, M. Georg Spalatin, Bishop of Altenburg,
> the most sincere servant of Christ.

Grace and peace! I commend this Sebastian Albinus to you, my dear
Spalatin, so that you may show him the way to Joseph Levin Metzsch. For
I promised him that I would send a teacher to Reichenbach, and now this
Albinus is coming to see and to try whether he can attain this office.
There is nothing new with us that I could write. Pray for us, and be
well in Christ with your rib. June 6, 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1259 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 8, 1528.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1790, annex, no. 14.

**No. 1260.**

Weimar. June 9, 1528.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther, Melanchthon, and Hans Metzsch,
Captain at Wittenberg.**

He informs them of the peaceful origin of Pack\'s cause.

Printed by Burkhardt, p. 135 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 285.

Our greeting before. Venerable, dear, reverend, council and faithful! We
graciously inform you that upon our lord and uncle, Lord Ferdinand, King
of Hungary 2c. Maj. governor in the Holy Roman Empire. The two Electors
of Trier and Palatinate have acted between our dear grandfather
Landgrave Phillipsen of Hesse and ourselves on the one hand, and the
Archbishop of Mainz, likewise both bishops of Würzburg and Bamberg on
the other hand, for the sake of the alliance, and have settled the
matter by divine grace through their faithful, diligent action and
application, and by their faithful, diligent actions and efforts, that
between the two bishops of Würzburg and Bamberg and our grandfather the
Landgrave, and us, sufficient peace has been made with assurance and
counter-assurance, 1) so that it shall remain with the Speirische
Abschied, and each one, as far as the Christian faith is concerned,
shall and may keep it as he hopes to answer to God and Imperial Majesty.
Maj. to answer for it. Thus a letter has also been sent to the
Archbishop of Mainz, and we are confident that his love will not let
their part be lacking. Similarly, both Electors, Trier and Palatinate,
have kindly asked the Landgrave and us to allow their loved ones to act
in this matter against Margrave Joachim, Elector, and Duke Jörgen of
Saxony, which our grandfather, the Landgrave, and we in our part grant,
and we, for our part, grant it, and we intend that both their loved
ones, the Margrave and Duke Jörg, will also agree to it, or if not, then
so much will be obtained from them, so that neither part will have to
suffer any misfortune from the other. 2) And therefore it is our
gracious request that you and especially Doctor Martin and Philipp
Melanchthon admonish yourselves to ask God Almighty for the granting of
peace, and also to be sincerely grateful to Him for such grace and good
deeds shown. We do not want to let this go unreported to you in your
gracious opinion, and we are inclined to do you good. Date Weimar,
Tuesday after Trinity \[June 9\] 1528.

1\) The contract was concluded at Schmalkalden on June 5.

2\) Mainz, Würzburg and Bamberg had to grant war reparations; in the
case of Joachim and Georg, Philip refrained from doing so (see St. Louis
edition, vol. XIX, inset, p. 18).

**1164**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1261. 1262. 1263.

**1165**

**No. 12 61.**

(Wittenberg.) June 13, 1528.

**To Hans Honold, citizen in Augsburg.**

Luther sends him a book by Melanchthon and recommends Ludwig Agricola
for his support.

From the original in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 337 f. and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 54, p. 16.

> To the honorable and prudent Mr. Hans Honold of Augsburg, my favorable
> master and friend. .

Grace and peace in Christ. Careful, dear Lord and friend! I understand
that your heart, if God wills it, is still firm and stands in the truth.
I would have sent you my booklet, but I was told that you would have
received it otherwise. May God strengthen you and keep you in pure
faith. But in order that this messenger may not come without notice, I
hereby send you the booklet Philippi Mel. that was sent out the other
day, when I was eight, not seen with you; you will take it for your own
good. If it were not difficult for you, I would kindly ask that you keep
good Ludwig Agricola here for a year, for I had appointed him to the
preaching chair, but the unpleasant envy and disfavor have driven him
away again, although if it had not been for the war cries of
displeasure, I might have provided for him elsewhere, as I hope and wait
for how I can accommodate him. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Saturday
after Trinity \[June 13\] 1528.

> Martinus Luther.

(Below this Honold had written: 1528 den 26. Jungio empfangen von
Wittemberg.)

**No. 1262 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 13, 1528.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About the Pack Alliance.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II. Bl. 380b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 338
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 287. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1112.

Grace and peace! I hope that Christ will give peace to our prayers, my
dear Amsdorf, and the bishops of Würzburg and Bamberg have agreed with
our prince.

already made peace. We are waiting for the Mainzers\' willingness \[to
make peace\], but the Landgrave will easily force the same. Their
excuses,^1)^ as well as those of Duke George, prove nothing to me, since
it is certain that they have done, want to do and still want to do with
heart, deed, commandment and all zeal what this alliance contains in
many cases. For they persecute the gospel and want our prince dead, we
all know that. Furthermore, the papists have not boasted in vain and
have been puffed up and rejoiced, and there are many other things that
primarily accuse and convict Duke George of being guilty of this
bloodthirsty alliance or even of being the author of it. Therefore my
judgment is also that they, who are so often admonished in vain, and
will hope in vain for something themselves, if they should undertake
something anew, shall be repulsed entirely without mercy, because they
do not want to suffer peace, but thirst for blood: may they therefore
drink blood, if they so wish. Other things at another time, when I shall
have more. Farewell and pray for me, my dear Amsdorf. Wittenberg, June
13, 1528.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 12 63.**

Wittenberg. June 14, 1528.

**To the Abbot Friedrich Pistorius at Nuremberg.**

A few words about Pack\'s alliance.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 379b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 339
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 288. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1110.

> To Mr. Friedrich, head of the Aegidien Monastery in Nuremberg.

Grace and peace! Since I had nothing to write, most esteemed man, Johann
Hofmann compelled me to write nevertheless, pretending that danger
threatened him, as if he had not stopped faithfully enough, according to
his received order, that he called upon me; therefore write

1\) The letters of apology from all participants in Pack\'s alliance are
printed in the 16th volume of our edition, No. 835 to 840.

**1166** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1263 to 1266. **1167**

I will respond to his urging. For I know that these news and the rumors
of your alliance with the godless princes, which are sometimes true,
sometimes false, sometimes denied, sometimes reasserted, have long since
become something old with you. I am firmly convinced that the landgrave
is not moved without cause. Satan has intended something, but Christ,
who has mercy, tramples him underfoot. Let us only pray; the Hearer, who
commanded to pray and promised that we shall be heard, will not deceive
us. Thou art well, and pray for me. Given at Wittenberg, on the first
Sunday after Trinity \[June 14\] 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1264.**

(Wittenberg.) June 14, 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 424. There, this letter is in the
translation of Duke George, of which Luther in the writing \"Von
heimlichen und gestohlenen Briefen,\" St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 536
f., § 42, judges that in it almost nothing is well Germanized, but the
piece of the xxxxxxxxx xxxxx is not only bad,

but also \"schälklich\" 1) Germanized. Therefore we let follow here a
new translation from the Latin. - The locations of this letter are given
l. c. in the introduction.

> To the equally exceedingly good and godly man, Wenceslaus Link,
> Christ\'s minister of the Gospel at Nuremberg, his brother.

Grace and peace! You know more news than I can write. You see how great
movements this alliance of the godless princes, which they deny, has
caused. But I interpret the very cold apology of Duke George 2) almost
as a confession. But they may deny, excuse, or write poetry, I know for
certain that this alliance is not a mere nothing or a chimera, even
though it is an outrageous monstrosity. Then the whole world knows that
those with heart, deed, commandment and extremely persistent zeal have
tried and done such things and still do. For they want the gospel to be
destroyed, which no one can deny.

1\) In the St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 536, last line of the text, read
\"schälklich\" instead of: \"schädlich\".

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 382, no. 832.

new can. But what is that for you, who are undoubtedly sure of all these
things? Just know that we do not believe these godless people either,
even though we offer, desire and give peace. God will put to shame this
most foolish of fools,^3)^ who, like Moab, subdues more than he is able
\[Isa. 16:6\], and is not proud according to his strength, as he has
always done. We will pray against these murderers, and so far be
forgiven them. If they should do something again, we will only ask God,
then remind the princes that they may be destroyed without mercy, since
the insatiable bloodsuckers do not want to rest, unless they see Germany
dripping with blood.

We are now struggling to translate the Prophets into German. Dear God,
how great and arduous a work it is to force the Hebrew writers to speak
German. How they resist, since they do not want to leave their Hebrew
way and follow the German, foreign way, as if a nightingale were forced
to imitate the cuckoo, whose monotonous voice it detests, and to leave
its exceedingly dainty song. Farewell and pray for us. Sunday after
Barnabas \[June 14\] 1528.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1265.**

Wittenberg. (Before mid-June 1528.)

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1788, annex, no. 13.

**No. 1266.**

(Wittenberg.) June 15, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the surviving son of Caspar von Rotleben to help him to
study.

From the Weimar Archive in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 53, no. 71; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 253; in De Wette, vol. III, p. 34l and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 54, p. 17.

3\) The original says *confundet*, but Duke George translated
*confundat.*

**1168**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1266. 1267. 1268.

**1169**

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Honest people have asked me to write to C. C. F. G. for a boy,
Caspar von Rotleben, son of the Count of Schwarzburg. Because his father
has died, and he is going astray, remains naughty, and C. C. F. G. yet
otherwise undertook, C. C. F. G. young:: son, Duke Ernst Friederichen,
to study, that C. C. F. G. will graciously accept this boy among others,
and at the same time let him be educated, considering that he is a poor
abandoned child, and yet is capable for the studio and also otherwise:
therefore I humbly ask, E. C. F. G., to let him study. C. F. G. to
graciously bless the same boy, where E. C. F. G. wants to do so, as I am
sure that C. C. F. G. will graciously show himself in this. Hiemit GOtt
besohlen, Amen. Monday *S. Viti* \[June 15\] 1528.

C. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1267.**

Wittenberg. June 20, 1628.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for a poor student.

From your original in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108. 41, in
the Leipzig Supplement, p. 58, no. 72; in Walch, vol. XXI, 258; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 842 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.54, p. 18.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Lead
> Hay, my: most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! There is a poor fellow here in Wittenberg, M. George Premier, who
once also served in the small choir in Wittenberg, and after that
received two years from E. E. F. G. graciously:\' tax, namely twenty
guilders for the year, for the studio,

and thus recognizes and thanks himself too richly rewarded; but because
he has heard that several fiefdoms in Altenburg have been settled, and
he would like to complete his studies in law until he can use them and
support himself, he has asked me to prescribe him against E. C. F. G.,
whether E. C. F. G. would graciously consider his poverty and need, and
let a gracious tax of such feudal interest be paid for another two
years, considering that this would not burden E. C. F. G.\'s chamber as
before, and that such interest is nowhere cheaper than to be used for
poor people, and especially for those who are to study and become
skilled people, to take care of others, as it was undoubtedly
established and given in the opinion of old age. But since I know the
good journeyman almost well, and we are all of an honorable nature and
special skill, I do not know how to refuse him his request, and so I
humbly commend him to E. C. F. G., who will undoubtedly know how to keep
him graciously and mercifully, to God\'s praise and honor. Christ be
with E. C. F. G. in all the fullness of His graces, Amen. At Wittenberg,
Saturday after Viti \[June 20\] 1528.

E. E. F. G.

subservient

Mart. Luther.

**No. 1268.**

Wittenberg. June 29, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

From a nun who wishes to escape from the convent.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, hausmannbriefe, No.
46. handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, WI. 28 6.
printed by Aurifaber, vol. II. Bl. 380b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 848
and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, 294 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1113.

> To the highly venerable man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the holy bishop of
> Zwickau, his extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace in Christ! I did not want to let this messenger return to you
empty, my dear husband, but since I had nothing to write, just to devote
myself to your prayers.

**1170** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1268. 1269. 1270. **1171**

command. But (as I hope) a matter will arise in which I will need your
help one day; for a captive nun 1) has written from Freiberg, who cries
and sighs for release. She hopes to be able to escape from the convent
and the city, if there are people who will take her in on the outside
and bring her into the territory of our prince. More of this at another
time, for I do not yet know how far this city may be from the borders of
our prince. In the meantime, be well in the Lord. Wittenberg, 1528,
Peter and Paul Day \[June 29\].

Martin Luther.

**No. 1269.**

Wittenberg. June 30, 1528.

**To Prince Wolfgang of Anhalt.**

Intercede that the butcher Jakob Jochim, who had been banished by the
Zerbst City Council, be readmitted. Jochim and other master butchers of
his trade had been imprisoned for rebellion against the city council.
The others paid a fine and received their freedom, while Jochim, who had
allowed himself to get into mischief in the town hall, was only released
in exchange for a \"sworn promise\" to avoid the town of Zerbst from now
on and not to approach it for five miles. He went to Luthern and asked
him for an intercession with Prince Wolfgang, so that he would induce
the Zerbsters, his subjects, to accept him back into the city. Prince
Wolfgang therefore wrote to the Zerbst City Council and enclosed
Luther\'s letter of support, but the council gave his prince a negative
answer, saying that it was not his place to change what had been
unanimously decided. On August 4, the prince again pleaded for him, to
which the council replied: \"that we are well satisfied to honor and
please E. F. G., and we are not opposed to the fact that the same Jakob
Jochim, according to his convenience, according to his consent, where E.
F. G. has agreed to let him live. F. G. will grant him to live, not to
settle and occupy the city of Zerbst too close to E. F. G.\" 2c.

From the original in the Zerbst secret archive in Sintenis\' Denkschrift
v. 1846, p. 41; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 178 and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 94.

> To the noble Prince and Lord, Mr. Wolfgang, Prince of Anhalt, Count of
> Ascania and Lord of Bernburg 2c., my gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! This
man Jakob Jochim has asked me for a

1\) The Duchess Ursula von Münsterberg. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX,
Introduction, p. 64.

After he has been imprisoned together with several butchers in Zerbst,
and the others have all been released, and he alone (I do not know what
is due to accidental unwillingness, of which he will probably give
further instructions to E. F. G.) has been expelled from the city, not
to be touched for more than five miles, and it is difficult for the poor
man to be away from his wife and children, and to leave his food.
Therefore, my humble request to E. F. G. is that you will graciously
help the good man in his matter, so that he is not burdened too much
and, where he deserves it, is punished with a fair and sorry fine, so
that he does not have to leave his wife and children, house and farm,
and thus suffer more punishment than he forfeits. E. F. G. will
graciously comply with this. For I am willing and ready to serve E. F.
G. with submissive diligence. At Wittenberg, Tuesday after Petri and
Pauli \[June 30\] 1528.

willing Martinus Luther.

**No. 1270.**

Wittenberg. July 7, 1528.

**To Urban Rhegius in Augsburg.**

Luther testifies to his joy at Rhegius\' change of heart in the doctrine
of the Sacrament.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 163; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 345 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 296.

Grace and peace in Christ! A happier rumor has come to me than before,
2) my dear Urban. For we have been moved, both by the letters of some
and by Zwingli\'s boast, to the suspicion that we thought you were
alienated from us altogether as far as the sacramental matter is
concerned. Now something else is said about you, which hardly allows to
believe as true the former and desperate sadness about your
estrangement. But we desire it most, and Christ hear our sighs for you,
and comfort us with such glad tidings. For we

2\) Compare No. 1053, where it is reported that Rhegius was either
leaning towards Zwingli or had already fallen away.

**1172** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1270 to 1273. **1173**

have, as it were, a resurrection and a brotherly Passover, if you are
not a stranger to us, but believe with us in the One right sense.
Perhaps I write this too fearfully. I have experienced how often we tend
to be deceived, not only by bad news but also by good news. Therefore I
ask you to keep us worthy of your letters, in which you make us certain
in which spirit you live and act. Fare well in Christ. Given July 7,
1528, at Wittenberg.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1271.**

(Wittenberg.) July 8, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request that the pastor at Belzig be granted leave to go to Hamburg for
some time.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108, no. 41.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 54, no. 74; in Walch, vol. XXI,
258; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 346 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 20.

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The people of Hamburg have once again sent their message here to
Wittenberg, and after they asked the pastor of Belzig to lend a time
next to Johann Pomern, and he granted it so far that it was done with E.
C. F. G.\'s knowledge and leave. But because they found that we have not
yet asked E. C. F. G. for leave, they must go home empty, and have asked
us to request such leave from E. C. F. G. in the most favorable way
through their own messenger. Although I have not been nearly so minded,
nor have I thought to help the same priest to go there; but because he
has promised himself to them, he cannot go back, especially because he
was also suggested by us at that time: therefore, my humble request is
that E. C. F. G. would

We also graciously grant the same pastor a time to go to Hamburg,
because he knows the language and the country and is skilled in
promoting the Gospel with Johann Pomeranian. But what E. C. F. G. likes,
shall be most dear to us. Hereby commanded by God, Amen. July 8, 1528.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1272.**

Weimar. July 12, 1528.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Response to previous letter.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N, pag.* 108. 41.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 156 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 297.

Our greeting before. Venerable, dear devotee! We have received and heard
your letter, in which you indicate how the people sent from Hamburg have
visited you and asked for the preacher in Belzig 1) and since we note
from your letter that the said people sent from Hamburg have been put
off by you for the sake of the same preacher, and that he should be
accustomed to the country and language, We consent and allow him to go
to them for a time, along with Johann Pommern 2) to promote the holy
gospel and to establish the churches there, and to be used there, and we
request that you inform him of this and decree it, because the people of
Belzig have been provided with another suitable preacher and pastor. You
are doing us a favor, and in your gracious opinion, you do not want to
do this. Date Weimar, Sunday after Kiliani \[July 12\] Anno 1528.

**No. 1273.**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1532.

1\) Joh. Boldewan. Cf. no. 750.

2\) Bugenhagen came from Brunswick to Hamburg only on October 9.

**1174** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1274. 1274 a. 1275. **1175**

**No. 1274.**

Weimar. July 17, 1528.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther and Melanchthon.**

Concerning the appointment of a Lutheran preacher to Cronschwitz.

The concept is in the Weimar Archive KK, 33, No. II. 3^A^ Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 137 and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 306.

By the Grace of God John, Duke of Saxony and Elector. Our greetings
first, venerable and reverend, dear, devout and faithful! You know how
for some time there was disorder among the nuns in the convent at
Cronschwitz. ^1)^ However, you will learn how things are now everywhere
from the writings and reports that have been preserved. Since the spit,
which was previously appointed as a preacher of the ends, has turned
there outside of our knowledge and permission, our gracious request is
that you seek a learned, pious and honest man, who would serve as a
preacher in the monastery in question, according to the form and
occasion of the present life there, and send him to us with enclosed
letters along with a statement of your intentions. We will then prepare
the same and order it to be duly handled in such a twofold manner, and
also otherwise, according to your concern, if you will indicate it to
us, we will show ourselves to be duly appointed. We do not want to save
you from this and do us a gracious favor. Date Weimar, Friday after
Margaret \[July 17\] Anno 28.

**No. 1274a.**

(Wittenberg.) July 20, 1528.

**To an unnamed person.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1736.

1\) After six monks from the monastery of the Order of Preachers had
returned to Cronschwitz in the Peasants\' War, because of which they had
fled, they tried to suspect the Lutheran doctrine that had just appeared
there and to return the nuns in the convent of the virgins there to the
old faith. At the same time, because of the planned introduction of a
Lutheran preacher, disputes arose with Heinrich von Reuß d. A. and J.,
parties formed in the monastery itself, until peace was finally restored
by the appointment of Wolfgang Calixt as preacher and by a (1529, Mon.

**No. 1275.**

Wittenberg. July 20, 1528.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About the Minkwitz feud.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 384; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 361 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 307. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1113.

Grace and peace in Christ! The evil deed of Minkwitz 2) rightly
displeases us all, not only because it is committed against worldly
justice, but especially because it burdens the gospel with a great and
new hatred; for in this way we innocent people are forced to bear the
aggravations of others. May Christ grant that the end may come and that
he may not do more harm. For as the matter lies before us, the Margrave
is in greater danger than Minkwitz, for Minkwitz has armed his castle
and is ready to take up the Margrave\'s attack; but he himself has gone
elsewhere (as they say), perhaps to undertake something else in the
meantime while the Margrave is fighting. And who knows whether (ÄOtt
does not begin by this beginning to afflict the margrave because of all
his quite impudent undertakings, as so far there are many of them
without end and measure. I ask for peace, and would have advised the
Margrave anything other than war. Everyone says that Minkwitzen\'s
castle will be impregnable for the margrave if the men of war want to
defend it faithfully. There you have the news that we have. Pray for me,
a sinner, and be well in Christ. July 20, 1528, at Wittenberg.

> Martin Luther.

The monastery\'s ecclesiastical and secular (economic) affairs were
arranged according to the monastic order established on the first day
after Dionysius \[Oct. 11\]. - A concept is found, which is only
addressed to Luther. (Burkhardt.)

2\) See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1538, § 18. There, instead of: \"der
Alebus heißt\" is to be read: \"der \[Bischof\] von Lebus genannt
wird\".

3\) The city of Fürstenwalde, which Minkwitz had plundered, belonged to
Brandenburg, so the Elector gathered an army in Berlin and joined forces
with Saxony to besiege Minkwitz, who had retreated to Sonnenwalde.
Minkwitz, however, had meanwhile gone to northern Germany.

**1176** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1275a. 1276. **1177**

**No. 1275a.**

Wittenberg. July 24, 1528.

**To the Crown Prince Christian of Denmark.**

Admonition to keep Melchior Hofmann in check.

From the \"Danish Library\", Copenhagen and Leipzig 1743, 4th St., p.
152, in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 361 and again from Schumacher\'s
\"Learned Men\'s Letters to the Kings in Denmark\", 2nd Th., p. 261 as
addressed to Christian III, King of Denmark, and dated July 26, 1538, in
De Wette, Vol. V, p. 121. Quite the same in the Erlangen edition, Vol.
54, p. 29 and Vol. 55, p. 207.

> To the noble Prince and Lord, Mr. Christian, Heir to Norway, Duke of
> Schleswig, Holstein, Stormarn and the Ditmarschen, Count of
> Oldenburg-Delmeuhorst, my gracious Lord.

G. and F. in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! Although I
did not have anything special to write to E. F. G., because the present
M. Erhardt, child of the country, has gone to the fatherland, I did not
want to omit to inform E. F. G. of my subservient services. I hope,
however, that in E. F. G.\'s country it will still be quite right. F.
G.\'s lands, especially with the holy Gospel, although it cannot be
without challenge, since Satan does not sleep, and I especially wish
that Melchior Hofmann 1) will keep himself moderate; for I would well
like to suffer him to leave his preaching until he reports the matter
properly. Otherwise, that which I have heard from him and which he also
sends out in print serves no purpose at all and is vain poetry, without
which one can well know and teach what a Christian deserves, which he at
least rarely touches. Accordingly, my humble admonition that E. F. G.
should earnestly promote the unity of doctrine, and not leave too much
room to such rising spirits, is that we have enough to learn how to
believe in Christ and serve our neighbors under the cross, which pieces
we understand or respect very little (unfortunately), much less prove
with our work and life,

1\) This passage proves that the letter cannot belong to the year 1538,
because at that time Hofmann was long gone from Holstein.

and yet while other unnecessary things are speculating, there is no
benefit but rather an obstacle to the necessary teaching. Christ, our
dear Lord and Savior, enlighten, enkindle and strengthen E. F. G. to do
his pleasing will always and forever, amen. Command me herewith E. F. G.
Wittenberg, Friday after *Mariae Magdalenae* \[July 24\] 1528.

E. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1276.**

Weimar. July 25, 1528.

**The Elector John of Saxony to Luther, Hieronymus Schurs, Melanchthon,
and Benedict Pauli.**

The Elector appoints the visitators for the entire Saxon lands and
reminds Luthern to send in the reflection on the marriage cases.

Printed in Burkhardt, Luthers Briefwechsel, p. 138 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 309.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear, devout, councillors and
faithful! You are well aware of the way in which we have had a
visitation, for which you were partly ordered by us, carried out a year
ago. And although we have always been of the opinion that such a
visitation should also take place in other places of our country and
principality, you have nevertheless heard in good measure what
troublesome things have happened for some time, thereby preventing the
same. However, when we feel from daily reports, which occur to us, that
there is a great need, through the mentioned way of the visitation, to
make a further insight into the burdensome inaccuracies, which occur
more and more without interruption and in various ways, and yet we also
find, where the work is not carried out in such a way, that it is
beneficial for our whole principality, that it is beneficial for the
whole of our principality, but only one place should be visited this 2)
year, as it is not convenient nor possible for some people to be present
and wait for it without interruption, for many reasons, so we do not
want to deprive you of our gracious opinion that we have considered to
visit the same place in such a way.

2\) In the original: \"deß\".

**1178.** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1276. **1179**

so that it may be carried out in four places 1) of our principality at
the same time, namely, in our county of Saxony, together with the
following of our Saxon offices Heinichen, Düben, Eilenburg, Grimm, and
Torgau, and that it may be carried out there by you, Doctor Martin,
together with the provost of Wittenberg, Doctor Jonas, or another
doctor, Hieronymus \[Schurf\] and Hansen von Taubenheim, since we are
unable to remove our officials from their offices at this time. As we
hereby graciously request of you, and as you yourselves have previously
offered in good faith.

For 2) the other place, in our Voigtlanden, in which we want to have
drawn the office of Altenburg, and for the indicated place visitation,
we mean that Magister Spalatinus, preacher at Altenburg, and the pastor
at Zwickau together with our bailiff at Plauen, Daniel von Feilitzsch,
should be used. However, if you consider it good that another preacher
should be appointed in place of one of the two named 3) preachers,
especially since there is not the slightest impropriety and
hard-headedness found in the same place, then let us know of another one
in their place.

For the third place, in the distant place of Franconia and there it
shall be carried out by Doctor Kindt, pastor at Eisfeld, and Magister
Balthasarn, preacher at Coburg, together with one of our officials or
councilors.

The fourth place, which has not yet been visited, is our Thuringian
lands and offices, and for this reason we wanted you, Magister Philippus
Melanchthon, to let yourself be used, as we hereby graciously request of
you, so we wanted to give you Friederichen Mecum, preacher at Gotha, and
Justum Menium or someone else besides our bailiff at Wartburg or one of
our councilors. ^4)^ But because the necessity requires

1\) By decree of the Elector of September 26, the country was divided
into six visitation districts: Churkreis, Meissen I, Meissen II and
Voigtland, Thuringia on the Saale, the rest of Thuringia, the district
of Franconia.

2\) Erl. Briefw. instead of: \"vor\", probably due to a typographical
error: \"von\".

3\) Erl. Briefw.: \"known\", a typographical error.

4\) The provisions made here in this letter received several changes.
For the Churkreis, the visitators were: Luther, Hans Metzsch, Pauli and
Taubenheim; for Torgau, Eilenburg, which belonged to the district of
Meissen, and where the visitation began only on May 11, 1529: Jonas,
Sebastian von Kötteritz, Asmus von Haubitz, Pauli and Wolfgang Fues. For
the Voigtland, where the visitation began on Nov. 29, visitators were:
Spalatin, Dietrich von Starschädel, Anarg von Wilden

5\) In order that the necessity may be ordered by us and that what is
unseemly or unnecessary may be omitted, we request that you diligently
follow the above order, so that we may have a clear and bright command,
and that we know how to remember that we have previously given such an
order, as the copy of which is to be found here; 5) so that the
necessity of us is ordered, and what is unseemly or unnecessary is
omitted, then we request that you diligently review the above of our
order, and together with it, as touched upon, how and by whom, 6) and
what you find that should be omitted from the order or that should be
done in a different way, you should change and record it and let us know
your concern about it. Thus we have had it drawn what our councilors and
officials, who will be at the visitation in each place, and for the sake
of the marriage vows, are to publicly proclaim on account of our, as the
secular, authorities, whether the secret vows are to be countered
thereby and the same, as they occur much without interruption, are to be
averted; Likewise, what the preachers from the pulpits should publicly
proclaim and announce for the sake of magistracies and friendships,
degrees and clans, because it is considered good that such should not be
put into the print of the visitation order. But furthermore, you, Doctor
Martinus and Magister Philippus, know that you, together with the pastor
of Wittenberg, Johann Pommer, are obligated to make a safe report of the
marriage cases, 7) and to deliver it to us, according to which we and
our councilors and chancellery

fels and Antonius Musa of Jena. Hausmann, pastor in Zwickau, was not
among the visitators. For Franconia, where the visitation began on Nov.
16, the following were visitators: Kind, Balthasar Thüring, the preacher
at Coburg, Hans von Sternberg and the pastor of Coburg, Paul Bader. For
Thuringia, which was divided into two districts, the visitators in the
district on the Saale (Jena 2c.), where the visitation began on May 2,
1529, were: Ewald von Brandenstein, Christoph von der Planitz, Spalatin
and Musa; for the other district (Eisenach, Gotha, Weimar): Melanchthon,
Myconius, Menius, and Christoph von der Planitz. - The description given
in Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth.*, lid. II, p. 101 d deviates several times
from the list found in Burkhardt, Visitat.

5\) This \"command\" is missing.

6\) The visitation of the year 1527 had covered only three Thuringian
offices and had been broken off because of the plague and the
negotiations about the visitation book.

7\) Luther hesitated with it very much; it required again a reminder
from the Elector, which is dated August 30. Thus the matter dragged on
from January (see No. 1174) until August.

**1180** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1276. 1277. 1278. **1181**

in the matter at hand at all times. However, since we have not received
the same until now, we want you to prepare it again and also give us
your concern and good opinion on all this, as indicated, as soon as you
can deal with it. In all this you do us a gracious favor. Date Weimar,
Saturday Jacobi \[July 25\] Anno 1528.

**No. 1277.**

(Wittenberg.) July 28, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

Luther complained with bitter displeasure about the way Bucer had
distorted Luther\'s opinion in his Dialogus; of Carlstadt and of the
Minkwitz feud.

Manuscript in Dresden, Cod. SolMr, 0 351, fol. 35; in Gotha, Cod. LB 28,
fol. 33 d and in Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, p. 130. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 384d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 363 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VI, p. 312. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1114.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have known Bucer\'s unworthiness before
enough and above enough, my dear Gerbel, so that it is not to be
wondered at if he judges my sermon (which he cites) 1) against me, in
which I, following Augustine\'s opinion, spoke of the flesh of Christ,
not against, but for the Sacrament, 2) as it is known to the whole world
that we do not condemn the sayings of the Fathers, even though they (in
more than one 3) place) dispute against each other, if only they are not
forced to dispute against godliness. In short, if Zwingli had said
something like this, equity would have been ready to interpret it
suitably and rightly; because Luther said it, it is immediately
subjected to the most venomous calumnies. Let Christ afflict these
vipers and either convert them or repay them what they deserve. What
venom has he not brought about in this last dialogue^4)^ , in which

1\) namely in the title of his book, \"Luther\'s Confession of the
Lord\'s Supper\".

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 826 ff. 971 ff.

3\) Instead of *suo*, from which we could not derive a suitable sense,
we have assumed *uno.* Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2156.

4\) \"Comparison of D. Luther\'s and his counterpart\'s discussion of
the Lord\'s Supper. Dialogus, that is a friendly conversation. Quite
close to everything, so D. Luther in his last book,

he bravely passes by everything that is mine and is a mere slanderer!
Among other things, he reproaches me with the figure of speech of the
synecdoche, which I have not only not denied in this book of mine, but
which I have displayed most abundantly. Away with the vipers; Christ
preserve you (I ask this in the most constant way), who dwell among
these wild animals, vipers, lionesses, bears, almost with greater danger
than Daniel in the lion\'s den.

Christ maintains a peaceful and unanimous church here, then also the
academy that flourishes through science and studies, so that Satan\'s
belly would burst. But Carlstadt, the adder in our bosom, is indeed
trembling, but does not dare to come to light; God would that your
swarming spirits would have him as their comrade, and that we would be
free of him. All our people greet you. There is no news here, except
that the Margrave wants to wage war against a certain knight who has
invaded his land and committed robbery. Be well with your rib, amen.
July 28, 1528 Martin Luther.

**No. 1278.**

(Wittenberg.) July 31, 1528.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Invitation to the wedding of M. Georg Major with Margaretha von Mochau.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 385; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 364 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 314. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1116.

Grace and peace! We have engaged Margaretha Mochin to M. Georg, my dear
Amsdorf, and have determined that the wedding should be on the day of
St. Lawrence \[Aug. 10\]. Since we thought that this would be an
effective occasion for you to come to us, we invite you and ask that you
finally visit us and be present at this future (as I hope) happy
wedding, when

The book is called \"Confession,\" and it contains a description of how
this serves the knowledge of truth and Christian peace. At the end:
\"Printed in Strasbourg by Wolf. Bucer\'s preface to the Christian
reader is dated Strasbourg, June 21, and signed: M. Butzer.

5\) Nicolaus von Minkwitz.

**1182** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1278. 1279. 1280. **1183**

Christ gives grace. You will ask Him for us, as your soul is strong in
Him, amen. Last July 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1 279.**

Wittenberg. August 5, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther wants to write about the Turkish War and reports the death of his
daughter.

Printed by Aurifaber, Vol. II, p. 385, and in part (concerning the
death) again, as a special letter, p. 385b; by De Wette, Vol. Ill, p.
364 and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 315 f. German by Walch, Vol.
XXI, 1116.

Grace and peace! My little house thanks you for the rattle, my dear
Nicolaus, of which he boasts and rejoices extraordinarily. I have
planned to write about the Turkish War 1) but it will (I hope) not be
useless. My little daughter Elisabeth has died to me, 2) it is to be
marveled at, how a sorrowful, almost feminine heart she has left me, so
I am moved by lamentation over her; I would never have believed before
that a fatherly heart could become so soft because of children. You pray
for me to the Lord; in him you will be well. Wittenberg, 1528 August 5.

Regarding the one which was to be kidnapped by Freiberg,^3)^ nothing
happens, it has been only thoughts, therefore you can be calm.

Martin Luther.

**No. 12 80.**

Wittenberg. August 8, 1528.

**To the Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.**

In the case of Wolf Hornung.

Handwritten in the state archives at Marburg. Printed by Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 106 (dated June 21); by Zimmermann, in Zeitschrift für
preußische Geschichte 2c., XX, 328 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 315.

1\) \"Vom Krieg wider die Türken,\" St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 2108.
See also the introduction there, p. 64.

2\) She died on August 3, evening 9 o\'clock and was buried solemnly the
following day.

3\) Ursula von Münsterberg. Seidemann remarks on this,
\"Erläuterungen\": Hausmann\'s answer (current No. 1268) may have been
negative, even admonishing.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Perhaps E. C. F. G. may be surprised, my Lord, that I, a damned
heretic, dare not write to E. C. F. G., as I should reasonably think
that the elements and the stars are not particularly favorable to me at
E. C. F. G., and not without reason. But things and my conscience force
me to dare such a thing, and I would like to humbly ask E. C. F. G. to
graciously grant it to me. And first of all, God knows that I am not
fond of, but almost sorry for the mischief that E. C. F. G. is now
encountering from Nickel voll Minckwitz 2c. But, most gracious lord, I
fear that the cries from E. C. F. G. are too great in heaven, and among
others, especially that which E. C. F. G. is doing with the poor
journeyman Wolff Hornung. And it may be that I am a false prophet, God
willing, I would also be in such a case! But I worry, I say one more
thing, that Wolff Hornung is the man who brings such things to E. C. F.
G., and Nickel von Minckwitz must be the poor journeyman\'s unknowing
servant and instrument by God\'s order. Accordingly, to E. C. F. G. is
my heartfelt request, entreaty and admonition that E. C. F. G., when the
time comes, show themselves differently towards the poor journeyman, so
that this game will not be a spark by which God intends to light a fire
against E. C. F. G. For E. C. F. G.. may well mean that, although Wolff
Hornung is a poor fellow who is despised by such a powerful prince, this
is also true that, where God wants to take care of Wolff Hornung, as he
has already begun to do, a powerful prince is much less before God than
Wolff Hornung before a Elector of Brandenburg. For he often speaks in
the Scriptures that he wants to be the protection, judge and father of
the poor wretches, and when he begins to afflict the great Hansa, he
certainly reaches out in such a way that one must say that this is a
lord who does not ask for the defiance or insistence of all princes. Is
it now, most gracious lord, that God has given E. C. F. G., then the
beginning is very strong, before which E. C. F. G. may well fear and
worry. So E. C. F. G. should also be sure that we poor heretics have not
asked against E. C. F. G. so far. But where they

**1184** Breeze from the year

1528\. no. 1280. 1281. **1185**

If we do not accept such admonition, nor fear such divine attack, we
must let ourselves be despised together with our heretical God and
prayer, but we still want to be defiant, if we begin to ask against E.
C. F. G., then our prayer shall be heard, and E. C. F. G. shall be
heard, and E. C. F. G. shall be heard, and E. C. F. G. shall be heard.
C. F.G. will be the more deeply distressed, even if a sorcerer and all
sorcerers could charm all devils into a circle. ^1)^ But we would rather
E. C. F. G. would send himself in, so that we would not have to ask
against E. C. F. G., but for E. C. F. G., because we would certainly
have no joy in E. C. F. G.\'s misfortune, but great joy in its welfare.
E. C. F. G. would graciously note such a letter of mine as having been
written out of a good heart, for I cannot understand nor keep it in my
heart how it should be possible that God would suffer longer to let the
poor journeyman, cast out of wife, child, honor, house and court, live
in such misery and distress. Summa, most gracious Lord, it is too much.
Too much tears the sack, it cannot go like this, nor stand nor stay. God
must look at it. If seeing three things does not help, then hitting
three things must help! God grant that E. C. F. G. may blessedly
remember and repent, amen. At Wittenberg, on the day of Kiriaci \[8th of
August\] 2) 1528.

> E. C. F. G. willing Martinus Luther, with his own hand.

**No. 1281.**

Wittenberg. August 8, 1528.

**Wolf Hornung to the Electoral Council of Brandenburg. 3)**

Hornung sharply rebukes the behavior of the Elector and demands his
wife, as well as restitution for what he has suffered against equity.

Printed by Zimmermann, Streit Hornungs mit Joachim I., in Zeitschrift
für preußische Geschichte 2c., XX, 325 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
318.

1\) Allusion to the Elector\'s love of the so-called black arts, which
the people attributed to him (Erl. Briefw.).

2\) \"Cyriacus\" is the 8th of August. June 21, which Kolde assumes, is
the day of \"the martyrs Cyriacus and Apollonius\".

3\) There can hardly be any doubt that not Wolf Hornung but Luther is
the author of this letter, therefore we have included it and had it
printed in larger type.

Grace and peace through Christ. Strict, honorable, respectable and
highly esteemed, favorable gentlemen! I have received all the contents
of your letter to me,^4)^ . And first of all, that you indicate that I
should have sent a letter to your lord, the Elector. I should have
spared your Lord, the Elector, with my deceitful writing, and that what
I have interpreted in it for S. C. F. G., I have fabricated, and am
lying to S. C. F. G., not as a pious man: I say that I have not lied or
fabricated anything, and also know all this with sufficient proof, S. C.
F. G. also well. C. F. G. also knows it well; and whoever therefore
calls me a liar and an impious man without being convinced, is himself a
liar, not a good, pious man, be he who he will, I offer myself to honor
and justice.

On the other hand, that you show from S. C. F. G.. Order, how I should
have wickedly wanted to murder my wife, that 5) the scars on her body
should still give proof, and what of the vain words, to spoil my cause
and to adorn her cause, rattle more, I say that I have been her husband
and she my wife, whom I had powerful, just and right to punish; but, as
one says: the child can well say that she is chastised, but by what she
has deserved \[that\], she can well keep silent. It is very easy to say
how I punished her, but it is even easier to keep silent about the
reason she gave me. And since your gn. Lord and you could have kept this
piece in the pen or mouth, it would have been fine to let that one stay
in the pen, too,

4\) From July 25. - When Catharina Hornung remained without news in
January 1528 (see No. 1180, last note), she again sent a messenger to
Wittenberg to Luther and her husband, who also agreed to meet with her
at the border. But also this appointment was betrayed to the Elector, so
that nothing came of it. On March 1, she found the opportunity to send a
secret letter to her sister Barbara, the wife of Christian Döring in
Wittenberg, in which she again asked for a meeting with her husband, and
at the end commended herself to Luther and thanked him for the many good
things he had done for her poor husband. But further negotiations for a
meeting remained unsuccessful, so that Hornung finally turned to the
electoral councilors and asked them for help. In their reply, however,
they completely sided with their master: the Elector would not prevent
the woman from returning to him, and he himself was to blame for the
failure of the meetings 2c. Our letter is the reply to this.

5\) \"deß\" put by us instead of: \"that\".

**1186** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1281. **1187**

or both and step out of both feet, not limp out of one leg, otherwise
you might notice it 1) too roughly.

Thirdly, that S. C. F. G. has not confessed to me that they have done or
acted something violent or violent to me or my housewife, I say that
such, if God wills, shall become clear and bright before all the world
when I bring the matter to light; for what will one pretend with empty
words of much denial? Here I have S. C. F. G.\'s handwriting, of which I
hereby send you a copy, as I have written and sent a letter to S. C. F.
G. for a time, from which you may not only hear, but also grasp who is a
liar and an unrighteous man, and whether Your Lordship has not done
anything offensive or dishonest to my wife. But I realize that E. Ch.
Gn. 2) is not satisfied with reading and writing about it, you also want
to hear, sing and say. Well then, if the ears are so nearly itching, let
them, whether God wills it, be herded with it, and I will not turn back
to S. C. F. G.\'s urging or throbbing. For, praise God, S. C. F. G. will
not be able to do more to me than what is right. Force will not do it
all. So I still want to find people who will take care of my matter and
S. C. F. G.\'s handwriting and make use of it,^3)^ so that everyone can
see how reasonable it is for me to leave S. C. F. G. unattended in such
excellent distress of my matters. In addition, there is a living heir,
namely the son Joachim, whom S. C. F. G. has married to my wife; and S.
C. F. G. is attacking my dwelling, breaking, building, and adding one
room to another according to S. C. F. G.\'s liking. Whether this is
called in the new German language and law: \"Nothing wrong has been done
to me and my wife\", this shall not be said and heard by Margrave
Joachim or his advisors, but, if God wills it, by the sun and the stars,
by stone and wood.

1\) \"möcht\'s\" put by us instead of: \"möcht\".

2\) Here the titulature, as if the letter were addressed to the Elector
himself, is probably intentional.

3\) These expressions are taken from \"ruth\" and \"feather\" (here:
point), the raising and lowering of boards joined together; the meaning
is: to make fit, to adjust exactly.

Lastly, because S. C. F. G. confesses in other letters that they know
nothing about me, and in this letter of yours they let themselves be
persuaded that S. C. F. G. does not want to hinder me, if I can obtain
it from my wife, that she turns to me, so my friendly request to you is,
will you again urge S. C. F. G. to follow his own words and keep what
they say, namely that they do not hinder my wife, but let her turn to
me. C. F. G. again that S. C. F. G. will follow his own words and keep
what they say, namely not to hinder my wife, but let her turn to me,
especially because S. C. F. G. has no other way. C. F. G. has no other
remedy than the contract, which S. C. F. G. knows well, to what
appearance he has untruthfully brought me, which has subsequently turned
out to be so,^4)^ which I also invalidly respect and hold, can also be
proven by S. C. F. G.\'s letter. C. F. G. letter that the same is
incompetent and not flush, which would be long to strike out; but if one
ever wants to have it, then it shall be proven according to necessity
\[as\] invalid. Thus, S. C. F. G. is also obligated out of his princely
office and duty to drive woman and man together and keep them together,
and whichever part is obligated and does not want to, to punish
seriously, as otherwise all rights, also examples of all princes give
that, whether the man alone is in debt, as I have not been in debt,
whether God wills it, the woman is nevertheless also driven to him
afterwards; if not, then I will notice anew from this that S. C. F. G.
is not the only one who is in debt and does not want to be in debt. C.
F. G. not only let her princely office stand in the way of my wife, but
also once again act unjustly towards her and me, as one who hinders and
sows such a person, who is nevertheless free, and whom he should drive
to her husband. If it is not vain loose words, which you have attributed
to me in the play, from S. C. F. G.\'s command, then you will know well
to prove for me against S. C. F. G. that I get my wife, and besides that
also restitution is made to me of that, which I suffered against equity.
But if these are vain words, they will serve me to make the little song
all the greater and to prove what a liar and a knave Wolf Hornung is.
Such my

4\) In the original vow made on March 22, 1525, Hornung was forced to
add: \"that I will never, while I live, address, accept, live with, or
be with the above-named wife of my marriage, either by right or without
right, in any way for anything, but will utterly and completely
renounce, renounce, and forgive her\" 2c.

**1188** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1281 to 1285. **1189**

Nothdurft Schreiben bitten ich, wollet aufs besten vernehmen, und
denken, dass eure Bitte, dass ich schweigen sollt, nur gar unleidlich
ist zu erhören. It is not a matter of silence, because they want to put
the burden on my neck, but more of speaking and writing than it has
ever 1) been. Finally ask for your reliable answer to this. Given at
Wittenberg, on the day of Kiriaci 2) \[8 Aug.\] 1528. Wolf\'s horn.

**No. 1282.**

Kemberg. August 12, 1528.

**Andreas Carlstadt to Chancellor Brück.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2076, no. 701.

**No. 1283.**

(Wittenberg.) August 14, 1528.

**To Balthasar Thüring, pastor in Coburg.**

Luther recommends an expelled preacher to him.

Printed in *Schlegelii vita Jo. Langeri, Goth*. 1724, p. 200; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 122; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 366 and in Erl.
Briefw., Bd. Vl, p. 354. German in Walch, Bd. XXI, 1118.

Grace and peace in Christ. In Christ, highly esteemed brother Balthasar!
3) This good man, John, has been expelled, a man who is known from
Franconia^4)^ by a good testimony and a good name. Since he is called by
God into the fellowship of the preaching ministry, and he has
administered it until now, but is now without employment, he is looking
for a position to carry out this ministry. He has therefore thought of
traveling to your area to see if a position might be open for him.
Therefore, if you can assist him, you will do so in Christ. 5)

1\) In our prelims: \"him\". We assume in the original: \"jhe\".

2\) Also the spelling for \"Cyriacus\", which is the same here as in the
previous letter, points to the authorship of Luther.

3\) Balthasar Thüring (Düring) was a native of Königsberg in Franconia,
where he already appears in 1516 as vicar at St. Urbanskirche; now
pastor in Coburg; died in October 1529.

4\) So we believe to translate *ex Franconia,* not: \"ans Franken\", as
the Erl. Cellarius was from Kunstadt in Bohemia, which Luther knew well
(see No. 181).

5\) This sentence is missing in Erl. Briefw.

For it is hard and unreasonable that he who has hitherto served the word
should now leave this office and take upon himself another work. And
this I have advised him, as I am wont to advise, seeing that in time it
will come to pass that there will be almost no laborers in the harvest
of the Lord. If you cannot, send him back in the name of the Lord. The
grace of Christ be with you. August 14, 1528. Martin Luther.

**No. 1284.**

(Wittenberg.) August 15, 1528.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2256.

**No. 1285.**

(Wittenberg.) August 16, 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Several news items. Luther sends the writings against Hasenberg and
Miritianus and recommends Joh.

Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 385 b; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 365
(both dated: August 6) and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 359 f.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1117.

Grace and peace in Christ! To our Lazarus 6) I answer in this enclosed
letter, as much as God has given me, who also directs your counsel,
Amen. -

I have received the earthen vessels and give thanks; nor would it have
been necessary, since others have requested them in my name, to take
such anxious care of them, for I do not want you to be burdened by my
cause, which is not necessary.

The Duke of Brunswick was perhaps brought down by the Lord out of mercy
for us.

6\) Spengler. Meant is the previous letter, which was enclosed to this
one. From this results the time determination we have set, which
Burkhardt, p. 140, Seidemann, Erläuterungen, p. 151 and the Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 360 assume. Köstlin, Martin Luther (3.) Vol. II, p.
647 ad p. 152 thinks that 6. Augusti is read for *S. Augustini,* the 28.
August, but then the letter to Spengler would have lain still 14 days
with Luther. The dates in the \"Neue Zeitung\", St. Louis edition, Vol.
XIV, 771. 772. 775, which are given to the letters there, namely August
17, 19 and 18, do not contradict our date, since the letters are
fingirt.

**1190** Letters from the year 1528 . No. 1285. 1286. **1191**

1\) Otherwise, if he had succeeded in his plots, he would have filled
Germany with many abominations. For Satan has whimsical thoughts
everywhere. The asses of Leipzig have attacked my Käthe with the most
unruly invectives; they have been repaid, 2) as you see here before your
eyes. The Lord has taken from me the little daughter he gave me; his
name be praised always, amen.

The fact that you are asking for an addition to the publication of my
confession 3) about auricular confession, you are asking for something
that is not necessary. For if we begin to search anxiously, there will
be no measure of adding, of the keys, of the office of preaching, of
priestly marriage and many other things, so that one could demand a
short epitome of theology; but if you definitely want to add, then you
can use this note, which I send enclosed here. You write strange things
about the Turk;

1\) Henry the Younger of Brunswick set out for Italy with an army at the
beginning of 1528 to fight for the emperor against the French. He
advanced as far as the city of Lodi, which he besieged in vain. Illness
weakened his army and he had to retreat, which became very dangerous due
to the country people, who were now seeking revenge for earlier
plundering, so that Heinrich, in order to escape the danger, disguised
as a common servant, secretly escaped with 16 companions to
Graubiindten, and arrived again in Wolfenbüttel at the end of June.

2\) By the writing: \"Neue Zeitung von Leipzig und Aesops Fabel vom
Löwen und Esel\", St. Louiser Ausg., Vol. XIV, 766.

3\) Wenceslaus Link organized a separate edition of the last part of
Luther\'s great Confession of the Lord\'s Supper, St. Louis edition,
vol. XX, 1094, p 509 ff, to which he added a preface. The addition on
secret confession and absolution, which Luther prepared and, as it
seems, sent twice to Link - namely, first on July 14, St. Louiser Ausg,
Vol. X, 1537, § 17 and then with our letter - is the following, and (for
Link\'s separate edition) to be inserted St. Louiser Ausgabe, Vol. XX,
1102, before § 535: \"For this reason I think much of the secret
confession, because there God\'s word and absolution for the forgiveness
of sins is spoken secretly, and to each one in particular, and, as often
as he wishes, he may have such forgiveness or also consolation, counsel
and report therein, that it is a very dear, useful thing for souls,
useful thing for souls, provided that no one is forced out of it with
laws and commandments, but let each one be free to use it for his need,
when and where he wants, just as it is free to get advice and comfort,
report or teaching, when and where need or will demands; and that not
all sins are to be counted or reported, but which ones are most
pressing, or which ones someone wants to name, of all things, as I have
written in the prayer booklet.\"

Christ keep us, amen. I commend Johann Hofmann to you, who will receive
the Master\'s degree on our advice,^4)^ since he hopes that he will
achieve more through this larva; for one must rule the world with larvae
like children and fools. The grace of Christ be with you. On the 16th 5)
day of August 1528.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1286.**

Wittenberg. August 21, 1528.

**To the Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.**

Luther again seriously admonishes the Elector to behave properly in
Hornung\'s matter.

Handwritten at Marburg in the State Archives. Printed by Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 108; by Zimmermann in Zeitschrift für preußische
Geschichte, XX, 330 and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p. 361.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I am now writing this for the second time,^6)^ , so that no harm
or dishonor may befall me to E. C. F. G.. Accordingly, my most humble
request is that E. C. F. G. show himself towards your poor journeyman
Wolf\'s Hornung, as is right and due; if not, then I must nevertheless
show the poor journeyman, because he desires my advice, the duty of
Christian love. If Catherina, his wife, wants to be divorced from him,
she must do so presently before him, verbally. For E. E. F. G. well know
that with power of attorney or advocacy we cannot be satisfied, because
the matters E. C. F. G. himself understands with unlawful clamor, in
addition with his own handwriting, and all letters, so

4\) He received his doctorate on September 15.

5\) \"16th\" put by us instead of \"6th\" by Aurifaber and De Wette,
which is probably just a typo.

6\) Luther had not received an answer to the letter No. 1280. On the
other hand, Catharina Hornung had sent a messenger, Valentin Graff, with
a letter dated August 13 to her husband, in which she wrote that she was
inclined to get along with him and to formally divorce him. The
messenger was to continue oral negotiations in Wittenberg. Graff
reported that Catharina had sworn that she would never return, but would
divorce her husband. But Wolf demanded the oath in his presence; if it
happened in a place where they could meet without danger, he would be
satisfied. In this sense, Luther wrote the present letter, which,
however, remained unsuccessful.

**1192**

Letters from the year 1528. no. 1286..1287. 1288.

**1193**

may send her, be regarded suspicious and incompetent, as having been
provided by E. C. F. G. himself and having gone out under her name. E.
C. F. G. graciously wants to help and give me causes that I could spare
the prince\'s ears, as I was quite happy to do. But if I am to paint
whores and boys, as I must do, where I am otherwise to absolve and help
Wolf\'s horns, then E. C. F. G. should not be angry about it, as I have
now twice sufficiently suspected whether I would tear the princely hat
into its lining, so that the hair would fall about. I ask for the third
time that I may have a gracious master at E. C. F. G., and that it is
not necessary for me to make an enemy, as E. C. F. G. has and can
further inform Valtin Graffe. At Wittenberg, Friday after *Assumptionis
Mariae* \[Aug. 21\] 1528.

E. C. F. G.

willing Martinus Luther.

**No. 1287.**

(Wittenberg.) (Towards the end of August) 1528.U

**To Eberhard Brisger in Altenburg.**

From the Leipzig diatribe about Luther\'s marriage and his response to
it, etc.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 87; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 299 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 362.

*Scribere clericulis paro doctrinale novellis, Pluraque doctorum sociabo
scripta meorum.* 2)

Spalatin offered me to write two verses, so far did he go in it that he
did not want to return without something in writing.

1\) In Schütze and De Wette, this letter has the date: \"April 8\",
which is in any case wrong, as can be seen from the content. A clue for
the approximate timing we get from the fact that Spalatin was in
Wittenberg for two days towards the end of August (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I,
996 and Luther\'s letter to Spalatin of Sept. 3), then suddenly left and
took this letter with him. Knaake assumes that Luther wrote *fer. 4.
post Anastas.*, and by wrong solution by using *Anast. episc*. (April 1)
instead of *Anast*. *mart*. (21. Aug.), the date: \"8. April\" was set
instead of: \"26. August\".

2\) These are the initial verses of the medieval school grammar, the
*Doctrinale puerorum of* Alexander *de Villa Dei* written around 1209. -
Spalatin had asked for two \"lines\" (vorauf; Luther here jokingly takes
the other meaning of the word and writes the above two \"verses\".

Therefore, I have written these two, since he would not be satisfied
that he would be a living letter au you for me. You will therefore hear
everything from him. With regard to your house, I am satisfied, because
I have it healthy, that it was promised 3) to another (which I did not
know), so that Bruno\'s 4) faithfulness and belief would not be
endangered. There you have the *imaginary* book, 5) \"the shitty book
Bruno (I mean) sent over. The donkeys in Leipzig want to have such an
answer\". May the Lord keep your son. I have another little daughter 6)
on the way. God give his blessing and you pray, \[? August\] 7) 1528.

. Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1288.**

Weimar. August 30, 1528.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Luther is repeatedly reminded that he should prepare the concerns about
the marriage matters so that they can be followed in the chancellery. He
was commissioned to win Melanchthon as visitator for Thuringia and to
conduct the visitation in the district himself.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji*, fol. 50. V.
5. 1528. 3. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 140 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 364.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We have received
from our council and dear faithful Benedict Pauli, licentiate, the
visitation trade, which we have ordered you and several others to move
on, in addition to your objections, and because we have found from this
that you have a need to raise your objections for the sake of
matrimonial matters, as we have indicated to you in our previous letter,
so our gracious request is that you should prepare it, if you can do it,
and send it to us, so that our councilors and the registry may have it
at hand, so that they may then decide in advance on the matter.

3\) Here, we have to deal with the Erl. Briefw. Förstemann\'s Conjectur:
*voto* instead of: volo.

4\) Bruno Brauer, pastor at Dobien, to whom Brisger had transferred his
little house for administration when he left for Altenburg.

5\) The \"Neue Zeitung,\" which was only fingirt. St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XIV, 766.

6\) namely instead of Elizabeth who died. Luther\'s hope was fulfilled
by the birth of Magdalene, on May 4, 1529.

7\) As already noted, in Schütze and De Wette: *April* 8; in Erl.
Briefw, a gap.

**1194**

Letters from the year 1528. no. 1288. 1289. 1290.

**1195**

We have also noted that it was considered good that Doctor Jonas, the
provost, should be ordered to visit Thuringia among others. After we
also note that it was considered good that Doctor Jonas, provost, should
be ordered to the visitation in Thuringia along with others, we also
consider it good for several and various reasons that Magister Philipp
Melanchthon could be used for this. Therefore, we would like to talk to
him about it and indicate that he would like to be at leisure for such a
visitation for fourteen days or three weeks, in addition to Justo Menio
and others assigned to him, because, according to our understanding, the
visitation is to take place in that time. And if he will allow us to do
so, as we wish, then let us know in a favorable manner. We also want to
send you a recent order and the visitation order, so that you may
then 1) also do and carry out the visitation. In our gracious opinion,
we do not want you to do this, and do us a gracious favor. Date Weimar,
Sunday after Augustini \[Aug. 30\] Anno Domini 28.

**No. 1 289.**

(Wittenberg.) Early September) 1528.

**To an Unnamed Person, Report of Both Shapes 2c.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1344. - There, the time is determined:
\"After June 14\", but already in the note it is stated that this
document \"should perhaps be set some months later\". In the meantime, a
letter from Rörer to Roth has come to light (Buchw. No. 45), dated
September 6, in which it says: \"Another book is being printed, which D.
Martinus has written about both forms of the Sacrament against the
Bishop of Meissen, which will also be completed for the Mass.

**No. 1290.**

(Altenburg.) (After September 2) 1528.

**Spalatin to Luther.**

Request for Luther\'s Concerns in a Matrimonial Matter.

Printed from Spalatin\'s papers in Kapp\'s small Nachlese, vol. II, p.
714 and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 365 f. - Only up to Spalatin\'s
signature is this document in Latin, the following in German. Answered
by Luther on Sept. 8. For the sake of this answer, we share the document
here.

Heinrich Einsiedel urgently requests that you answer either him or me
about this marriage matter. For apart from these things, which you

1\) namely in Churkreis, Wittenberg 2c.

In my letter to Heinrich Einsiedel, H. Einsiedel assures me that the
younger Aerger still absolutely denies that he has promised the girl
marriage, but he was ready and is still ready to marry the girl, if only
the father consents, but the father quite stubbornly refuses. Therefore,
S. Einsiedel asks whether the girl should be given to the young man even
without the will of his father 2) or whether she should be left to
someone else. Answer therefore, I ask you for the sake of Christ, and
that is so that a greater evil does not occur here. For you see that
Satan does not rest in these matters. Write again, therefore, venerable
Doctor, also in regard to this matter, together with the Lord Philip,
even if only very briefly. G. Spalatin.

[Think piece]{.underline}.

Heinrich von Einsiedel writes and tells me that Aerger\'s son has let
himself be heard against him that he is not in denial that he wants to
have the virgin; there should also be no lack of him, if only his father
would not be repugnant to him in this, or to be persuaded of it. But
that he should have promised her marriage, he, the von Einsiedel, could
not bring out of him.

[The old and young Aergers statement]{.underline}.

Matth. Aerger said, first of all: if the woman can make it true that she
would have been prevented from another marriage by him, then he will
suffer what is right.

Secondly, he has also decided that he will not ask for it; his son may
take it or leave it, he will not refuse him, and there is no fault in
it; but he does not want it in his house.

Thirdly, he knows that she is not to blame, because she is quarrelsome
and wicked, and he fears that she will not let him have his son when he
needs him.

Fourth, he complains that they have nothing. This is a useless sorrow.

I. Thus he, the old wretch, said before the Lord that he would not ask
anything about it, his son would take it, so he would gladly do his part
and help to arrange the wedding. The son also said to our lord that he
would not take an oath, so that he would not be accused by others of
having taken a false oath 2c.

2\) It is a marriage promise which Brosius Aerger had given to Cath.
Gockritz, his father\'s servant, in Janshain (Kapp, p. 710).

**1196** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1290 to 1293. **1197**

[Of a matrimonial affair among the von Einsiedel family]{.underline}.
^1)^

**I ask that this be returned at the same time as the reply.**

**No. 1291.**

(Early September?) 1528.

**Heinrich, von Einsiedel to Luther.**

(Regest.)

He asks for Luther\'s concern in a marriage case. Margaretha Hofmann is
said to have vowed marriage to Pancratius Kupfer without the knowledge
of her father, but afterwards, with the knowledge of her father, a
public betrothal of the virgin to Urban Kune took place. Before Heinrich
von Einsiedel, when Kupfer was sued, she denied the engagement with him,
but when the matter came before the official at Zschillen, she admitted
it. When she was asked why she had concealed the secret engagement in
public, she answered that she had not been allowed to say and confess it
for fear of her father. She asked the official not to reveal anything,
because her father and brother would kill her. When her father and
brother were summoned before the official, they said that they had not
forbidden her anything, but had asked her more than once whether she was
engaged to someone before; then she should have said no \[to the new
engagement\]. This official did not want to issue a verdict. However,
\"recently\" another official came to Zschillen, to whom Einsiedel
turned with the request: because the virgin had pledged marriage to the
copper, and in his opinion she had not had the power to be joined to
another, because she also had more inclination to the first than to the
other, and the latter also to her again, the official should act so that
the first betrothal was carried out. The official does not comply with
this request, but \"urges Pancratius Kupfer with his supposed ban\" to
appear before him and to hear a verdict, \"in which Kupfer fears and
suspects to be divorced from the virgin\". At his request, Kupfer did
not obtain a postponement of the ban in order to recover advice from the
official. During the various interrogations that were conducted with the
virgin, she soon confessed the first engagement, soon denied it, even
under oath, but finally, after she had been admonished again, she
admitted it again. - Now things stand like this: The virgin\'s father,
as a hard man, does not want to consent to the first, secret engagement.
Urban Kune, to whom she is publicly engaged, insists that he does not
want the virgin. The official pretends that he wants to continue with
the ban against Kupfer in order to get him away from the virgin, and
perhaps he also wants to urge the Lord of Einsiedel to instruct Kupfer
as his subject to settle this matter before his so-called spiritual
court, since both Kupfer and the virgin are in Duke George\'s
principality, who perhaps also wants to urge him to do so. Now Luther\'s
advice and concern is desired to write again to the present messenger:
which of the two above-mentioned is entitled to the virgin for a
conjugal spouse, especially because

1\) It is doubtful whether this is the signature to the preceding or the
signature to the matrimonial matter discussed in the following number.

the present official at Zschillen has rejected the first betrothal by
saying that they are to be spouses, also 2) that the public betrothal is
to be preferred to the secret one. Likewise: What Einsiedel and his
family should do to get out of this matter. Finally, what Einsiedel and
his family should do or refrain from doing upon the official\'s further
request and demand in Zschillen, so that they all act in a Christian
manner.

The original concept from Spalatin\'s hand is in the Einsiedel family
archive. Printed in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 367.

**No. 1292.**

(Altenburg.) (After September 2, 1528.)

**Spalatin au Luther and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

About the occupation of the parish of Gnanstein. After Spalatin has
explained the circumstances, he continues: \"Therefore, it is requested,
for the sake of God and His Christ, that you, considering their \[the
von Einsiedel\'s\] so many dangers, answer through this messenger, who
will return immediately. First, what you think should be done. Whether
one should allow the Count of Leisnig to send a priest to the von
Einsiedel? Or that the Einsiedel themselves should accept someone? And
if it seems to you that one should be accepted from the Einsiedel, that
you send an unmarried, godly and learned man to the Einsiedel, who is to
be presented by them to the Count of Leisnig.

From Spalatin\'s manuscript printed in Kapp\'s small Nachlese, vol. I,
p. 159; in *Bindseil, Supplementum ad Corp. Ref.* 1874, p. 31 (set in
January) and in Erl. Briefw., Vol. VI, p. 371 f. - Burkhardt, who gives
a regest of this document on p. 131, has already recognized that the
objection to Spalatin, which we communicated on Sept. 8, 1528, is the
answer to this, but he places both incorrectly in January. In our letter
there is a twofold clue for the time determination; at the beginning in
the words: \"Now Abraham von Einsiedel has come to talk with Leisnig, as
the local feudal lord, in past Lent.\" The fasting began in 1528 on
February 26. From this it appears that \"January\" cannot be correct.
The second time determination is found in the words: \"As soon as
Wednesday after Egidii \[Sept. 2\] a writing came from the count of
Leisnig to the Einsiedel.\" After that our dating.

**No. 1 293.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. September 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request to award the completed parish position in Lochau to Michael
Stiefel.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108. 41. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 54; in Walch, vol. XXI, 266; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 370 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 34.

2\) In the text, probably erroneously: \"on\" instead of: \"also\".

**1198**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1293. 1294. 1295.

**1199**

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sincerely, Reverend F., gn. F., gn. Lord! M.
Franciscus, 1) pastor of Locha, is deceased in God: so the villagers
have asked me to confirm the old castle 2) there. But since I have
nothing to do in this matter, I have referred them to E. C. F. G.. Now I
would like to keep Michael Stiefel in the country, 3) considering that
he is pious and almost skilled in writing and preaching. Where it would
please E. C. F. G., some of us have considered that it would be good if
he were to become pastor of the Locha. Locha parish priest, until
perhaps something else happens; for the good man makes him feel as if he
were complaining that he is with me, and always wants to leave, so that
I have enough to keep. For I would rather see pious, learned people stay
around us, otherwise there will be too many of them. If he were to
become a pastor, one might try whether he would also accept the poor
abandoned wife, the pastor\'s wife, with two children 4) for God\'s
sake, who is truly in great misery, and if misery will henceforth be
more, if not, then God\'s will be done; put all this in the home of E.
C. F. G. and ask for a gracious answer, and ask for a gracious answer;
but please understand that the name of Michel Stiefel is known to E. C.
F. G., who was traveling with us to Weimar, and E. C. F. G. is a friend
of his. C. F. G. gave him five guilders 2c. Christ be with E. C. F. G.
always, Amen. Dornstags nach Aegidii \[Sept. 3\] 1528.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 129 4.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. September 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request for a free apartment for an old servant.

1\) M. Franciscus Günther.

2\) \"The old locksmith\" is Thomas Windisch according to the Elector\'s
answer.

3\) Michael Stiefel, expelled from Austria, had been staying at
Luther\'s house since February.

4\) As pastor in Lochau, Stiefel married Günther\'s widow in October.

Ans dem Weimarschen Archiv 5) in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 55, no. 76;
in Walch, vol. XXI, 261; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 371 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 35.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Mr. Jakob Eißling, who also served at the monastery in Wittenberg
for a long time, in his ninth year, has asked me to make this
intercession to E. C. F. G.. He asks for the house, which has now died
unmarried by L. Sebastian Schmidt of Chemnitz, formerly the Lord of
Wittenberg, that E. C. F. G. graciously grant him and his wife, who now
remains well aged and heirless, to live in it for the rest of his life.
Since the man is almost pious and deserving, and may live for a short
time, I do not know how to refuse him such a request: I therefore humbly
ask that E. C. F. G., if it could be, would graciously consider his
request, as I am sure E. C. F. G. will do. God be with E. C. F. G.
always, amen. Thursday after Aegidii \[Sept. 3\] 1528. Mart. Luther.

**No. 1295 .**

**(Wittenberg.) 3. September 1528.**

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Luther longs for contact with Spalatin, who has just returned home; he
gives news of the visitation and exhorts him to overcome the weariness
of his office.

The original is in Gotha, *Cod.* 122, fol. 31. The manuscripts contain
only the second paragraph, namely *Cod*. *chart. Goth*. No. 16, Quart,
p. 639 (as from the year 1524); in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod Aug*. 11. 20, fol.
230b (see d.) and in Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, p. 98 (as from the year
1524). Printed in Aurifaber, the first paragraph (as a special letter)
vol. II, p. 3875; the second paragraph vol. II, p. 2395 (as from 1524);
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 372, completely after the original, and
likewise in Erl. Only the second part in De WetteSeidemann, vol. VI, p.
52 (from 1524) and (likewise) in Seidemann\'s \"Lutherbriefe\", p. 23
(after Aurifaber). German in Walch, der Anfang Bd. XXI, 1119, the rest
ibid. 912.

> To his at the same time extremely dear and highly admired brother, Mr.
> Georg Spalatin, the very faithful servant of Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! This messenger came desired, my dear
Spalatin, because since

5\) Both De Wette and Burkhardt say that he did not find this letter
there.

**1200**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1295. 1296. 1297.

**1201**

After your departure, I wished nothing more than that as soon as
possible a convenient messenger to you would show up, through whom I
could get going again with mutual letters what was prevented by your
sudden departure. I am therefore pleased that you have returned home
safely with your Eva. God would have wished that I could have been in
contact with you longer, or at least that I would have been able to do
so more often. The visitation has been ordered; the prince has written
that those who are ordered to do so are to leave soon.

See to it that you overcome or despise the thoughts of weariness with
which you are plagued because of leaving your office. Christ has called
you; yield to him, serve him, and conform yourself to his good will;
what you do you do not know now, but you will know later. It is a mere
temptation; why you suffer it, you do not know sufficiently; we, who are
spectators, see it better. Therefore, you must believe not yourself, but
rather us, who speak to you in the Lord and before the Lord; indeed, the
Lord speaks to you through us, comforting and admonishing you. For we
have nothing else in mind than the honor and the will of the Lord in
your profession, not our own advantage or anything like that. Yes, it is
a sure sign that your ministry is not displeasing to God, and not
unfruitful among men, that you are so contested with displeasure against
it. For if your ministry were displeasing to God, you would rather long
for it and seek it, as those do who are displeasing to God and go
against his will, since they are not sent, speaking since they are not
commanded. Hence it is that Satan regards those whom he sees to be
pleasing with disgust and weariness to retain the office, but incites
those whom he sees to be displeasing with zeal and impetuosity to obtain
the office. Therefore, you must be a strong man and heartily despise the
spirit of displeasure. But ask Christ and he will help you; we will pray
with you. Fare well in the Lord. September 3, 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1296 .**

After September 3, 1528.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Response to Luther\'s letters of Sept. 3, No. 1293 and 1294.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives. Printed by Burkhardt, p.
141 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 377.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! Your letter,
which you have now sent for Ern Michel Stiefel, that we wanted to
appoint him as pastor in Lochau, we have read its contents, and do not
want to conceal from you that before this letter of yours, we were also
requested and asked by the village authorities to confirm the old
Schösser Thomas Windisch as pastor. Thereupon we wrote to our bailiff
there to send him to you and to Magister Philipp Melanchthon against
Wittenberg, and, if he was found by both of you to be sufficiently
qualified for this after interrogation, it would not be contrary to us
that he, since he had already been appointed, would be accepted and
confirmed as pastor. However, since we would like to have the
above-mentioned Stiefel in our principality, and since we are concerned
that the parish with its income in the Lochau area might be somewhat too
small for him according to his skills, and that he would have difficulty
maintaining it, we would like him to move to a different and more
convenient location. After the visitation starts again shortly, \[he\]
will be able to be accommodated and used, on which you will also know
how to think for yourselves, which we graciously did not want you to do.
*Date*.

When you also asked Jakob Eiseling, who served for some time at our
monastery in Wittenberg, in another letter to let us introduce him to
Sebastian Schmidt\'s blessed dwelling, we were also asked about this
beforehand, and wrote for instruction, which we also did not want to
leave undisclosed to you, *date uts*.

**No. 1297.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. September 1528.

**To Wilhelm Reifenstein in Stollberg.**

Request to take care of a poor orphan.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. 6, fol. 236 and in Copenhagen, Lls. 1393, p.
141. Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 283; in the
Jena edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 3736; in the Altenburg edition, vol.
IV, p. 444; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 555; in Walch, vol.
XXI, 267 f.; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 373 and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 54, p. 36.

**1202** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1297. 1298. **1203**

> To the prudent and wise Wilhelm Reiffenstein, Rentmeister zu Stollberg
> 2c., my friendly dear brother-in-law, Martinus Luther.

Grace and peace in Christ. Friendly dear brother-in-law! You know how
God in Scripture \[Ps. 68:6\] allows Himself to boast of a father of
orphans and judge of widows, of course not without cause, because He
knows the world so well that it not only relies on the orphans, but also
persecutes and envies them: as this poor Lorenzen Rieber\'s case well
proves, who is so completely abandoned by his friends, and is also
persecuted, that one should be justly hostile to the world,^1)^ flesh
and blood before God and men.

But because God has so richly gifted you that you not only confess His
word, but also love it, I could not refrain from commanding the
above-mentioned Lorenzen (whom you have now and recently also done well)
to you, and I ask that you continue to be the father of a poor,
enfeoffed orphan and help him, so that he may also get on his feet.

I do not think it would displease God if you fell into his office and
took hold of it, and also supported you to be the father of an orphan,
yes, it would enlighten him that he should communicate such a title to
you, because you would become the witness to it, by which he would
become the father of this orphan, and would come to such a title and
honor through you, so that his fame would be confirmed and truly found
in the Scriptures; how you can mean all this better than I can write.

So I ask you kindly, because you can serve God with words and works to
such honor and title to the good journeyman for the best, want to prove
your Christian heart, so that such an example of light shines into the
North-House darkness, to much improvement; and if the darkness would not
understand, that they would be disgraced by it, Amen. Friday after
Aegidii \[Sept. 4\] Anno 1528. Martinus Luther.

1\) \"Shall of the world\" put by us instead of: \"of the world shall\".

2\) Stollberg is 2-1/2 German miles northeast of Nordhausen.

**No. 1 298.**

(Wittenberg.) September 8, 1528.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Response to No. 1292, concerning the Aergers marriage case.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 216. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 3885; in Kapp,
kleine Nachlese, vol. II, p. 716 and in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 374
(incomplete in all of these). Complete in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VI, p.
379. German: handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod*. *Aug.* 20. 2. p. 147
(without address and date!). Printed by Kapp l. c. p. 718 (in
Spalatin\'s translation, with inserted note, whether by Luther?). As
\"Bedenken in einer Ehesache, Anno 1528,\" in the Eisleben edition, vol.
I, p. 417; in the Altenburger, vol. Ill, p. 893; in the Leipziger, vol.
XXII, p. 434; in Walch, vol. X, 964 and (as a letter to Spalatin) vol.
XXI, 1119, and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 64, p. 285. Further, as
\"Luthers Bedenken, da einer eine Magd geschwängert,\" in sämmtlichen
deutschen Ausgaben der Tischreden, Cap. 43, § 109, with the exception of
the St. Louis edition, in which we have referred to the 10th volume,
where this \"Bedenken\" is printed according to Walch\'s old edition.
Therefore, we give here a new translation, which is made and completed
according to the original.

> To the venerable man in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, your servant of
> God at the Gospel in Altenburg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! First of all about the marriage matter.
Mail must first urge the young man (if it cannot be done otherwise),
even by an oath, to confess whether he has pledged marriage to the girl;
if he denies it under oath, he must be free, because no one who is
accused only by a man\'s mouth may be judged; if he should confess, then
his father must be summoned, especially for this reason, that (as is
said) the son has prevented her from being married by another. Because
he should plead paternal authority, he may be told that he must have
shown the same in negating the son, and that he should have prevented
his son from harming someone else, namely by preventing the marriage;
therefore he is obliged to restitution and satisfaction. For paternal
authority should not be against but for the love of one\'s neighbor. If
in the one case he has not done what he is obliged to do as a father, by
which the neighbor has been harmed, he must in turn give way in the
other case, in which he follows his head, and be deprived of his right
as a father.

**1204**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1298. 1299. 1300.

**1205**

\"It would be fine thing to use and let go paternal authority of my
liking to corrupt my neighbor.\" Paternal authority is granted only
where everything is uninjured, namely, where a third person with yours
is not injured 2c.; therefore, he may be cornered with this reason of
proof: Why did he fail to govern the son so that he did not harm the
girl? 2c. 1) Moreover, lest I forget, if thou shouldst charge me anew
with a matter, beware that thou appoint not so short a time for the
Boteu to return. For you know that I am not only busy with writing
letters, nor do I sit idle or ready, as if I were waiting for the future
messengers. Fare well in the Lord with your wife. In haste. On the day
of the Nativity of Mary (Sept. 8, 1528).

Martin Luther.

Inserted note (whether from Luther?).

But if the parents do not want to grant it, then you can let us know if
there is still any advice to be found. But it would be best if the
parents could be persuaded; that would be for all of them. For in the
same case my most gracious lord confirmed the marriage, but when the
parents did not want to grant it, he imprisoned and held the bride and
groom for several days as punishment for their disobedience.

**No. 1299.**

(Wittenberg.) (September 8, 1528.)

**To Spalatin.**

This is the answer to Spalatin\'s letter No. 1292, concerning the
filling of the parish in Gnanstein. Spalatin sent it to Einsiedel on
Sept. 10. Perhaps this answer is only an enclosure to the previous
letter.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 250b; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 3I8b; in the Altenburg edition, vol. I V, p.
369ff; in the Leipz. ed, Vol. XIX, p. 662 ff; in Walch, Vol. XXI, 238;
in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 278; in Kapp\'s Nachlese, Vol. I, p. 163 and
in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 53, p. 437. Ueberall undatirt.

1\) The following is missing in all editions except the Erlangen
correspondence. Because Spalatin wrote it out and sent it with the next
number to Heinrich von Einsiedel on September 10, Seidemann assumed in
De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 617, that a letter from Luther to Spalatin of
Sept. 8 or 9 was missing.

We do not know how to advise my dear lords and friends, those of
Einsiedeln, any better, because they have expressed themselves against
the one from Leisnig, that they will leave it at that, and ask for one,
the better he can be obtained. For if they should dare to appoint a
priest again, it might become much worse. But that they are concerned
that a priest might be forced upon them, I think, should be due to the
fact that the von E\[insiedel\] have not freely handed over the power to
confer the parish, but this time, in a petitionary manner (for reasons),
have requested such from the Count of Leisnig, and would still like to
make such a request, or keep it with fine words and indicate: that,
although they had the power, and also did not know how to arrange, to
confer the parish out of their own power and authority, 2c., 2c., the
necessity and cause that they must ask the count to appoint a parish
priest there 2c. Thus the court and power would not be handed over, and
yet for a time unused for the present need 2c. With not let mau Duke
Georgen give pastor. If, however, he who comes from the Count of
L\[eisnig\] is not evangelical, they may let it go until God makes it
otherwise. It can not go in need, as in the Willköhre 2c.

D. Mart. Luther.

**No. 1 300.**

(Wittenberg.) II September 1528.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

It has been brought to Luther\'s attention that Agricola brings up the
new doctrine that faith can be without works, and he therefore warns him
against erroneous teaching.

Handwritten in Cod. Rathend, and in *Cod. Jen*. B. 24. n, fol. 161.
Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 387b; in De Wette, vol. III,p. 375 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 381. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1121.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, M. Johann Agricola, the
> faithful instructor of the youth at Eisleben.

Grace and peace! Someone told me a story about you the other day, my
dear Agricola, so persistently that he did not cease to assert it until
I said I would write to you and inquire about it. But the story was
this, when

**1206** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1300. 1301. **1207**

Whether you began to contend with a new doctrine, and to assert that
faith can be without good works. And this thing (he said) thou didst
make a show of it, and soldst it with a great deal of oratorical
artifice and arguing with Greek words. But I, who am instructed by the
drudgeries of Satan, am compelled to fear sure things also, and write
not only because I promised it, but also to warn thee earnestly to take
heed of Satan and thy flesh. For thou knowest that nothing is sufficient
for protection and preservation against the wiles of Satan, if I am not
always guarded anew by heaven, and that in his wiles there is so much
poison and danger, that from a spark there ariseth a conflagration, or,
as Paul is wont to say, by a little leaven the whole dough is leavened
\[1 Cor. 5:6\]. Therefore, in this so great a matter, there is no
playing or trying, be it ever so little, since this enemy is wont to
penetrate through the smallest cracks, and does no less harm than if he
had broken in, since all doors are open. This memory, from which you see
from which heart it arises, take for the best, and I ask you to give me
(if you have time) news of how this matter stands. For what did I fear
less than that Oekolampad and Rhegius and others would fall? and what do
I not fear now for ours here, who are the most trusted? It is not to be
wondered at that I fear also for you, of whom I would least of all like
to see him depart from us. Fare well in the Lord and greet your Elsa
with her grapes. The Lord has taken away my Elsa so that she would not
see any misfortune. September 11, 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1301 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 11, 1528.

**To the knight Martin Baumgartner at Kufstein am Inn.**

Luther consoles him over the hostility he experiences because of his
adherence to the gospel.

Printed in: \"Christliche Predigt bey der Leich und Begräbnuß des Edlen
und Besten Christoph Philippsen von

Baumgarten \[son of Martin Baumgarten\] on Allmannshaußen and Graßelfing
2c. who died blessedly in God at Wiseud, the XVII. day of *May. Ao*. M.
D. XCIII. In the sibentieth of his gloriously risen age. Held by M.
Christophoro Donauern, pastors there\" 2c. \"Printed at Nuremberg in the
Gerlachische Truckerey, by Paulum Kauffmann. L1. D. X6IIII.\", page 16
f. From it in \"*Continuatio IV. Et VItima Spicilegii etc.* given to the
light by *Jo. Zachar. Gleichmanno*\" etc. Jena 1727, p. 20; in
Seidemann\'s \"Lutherbriefe,\" p. 31 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p.
382 f.

> To the strict and honorable Martin Baumgartner, Knights zum
> Kopffstein, my favorable lord and friend in Christo.

Grace and peace in Christ. Dear, dear Lord, most solemn, most honorable
one! I have been informed of your concern, which is now taking place,
because of the gospel; 1) I have also seen your scripture, in which you
desire comfort. May Christ our Lord, who has begun his word and work in
you, comfort and strengthen you by his Spirit, so that you may suffer
and do the very best and dearest will of God his Father, amen and amen.
But you know without a doubt that our cause, if we have the word of
Christ, cannot stand in any other way than that we have to suffer
hardship and misfortune because of it. It is a word of the cross, and it
remains a word of the cross. That is why it is also called a word of the
cross. But St. Peter says \[1 Petr. 4:12\]: \"Let it not seem strange or
odd to us whether such a heat comes against us, because it is a
temptation, whether we have accepted the word with earnestness or not.
It has happened to all the saints and to the head of all the saints, and
we will not have it any better if we want to be partakers of grace and
life with him in any other way \[2 Cor. 1:7\]. If they called the father
of the house Beelzebub, how much more his household \[Matth. 10, 25\].
These and many other sayings can comfort you, which you will find in
abundance in the Psalterio, which you must diligently have in your
hands, read and practice. Let it be enough for us, whether all men are
enemies to us, that Christ is our friend, who so warmly and kindly
promises us \[Matth. 11, 28 f.\]: \"Come unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden.

1\) This refers to the persecution of the Protestants in Austria as a
result of Ferdinand\'s mandate of Aug. 20, 1527, which was renewed on
March 24, 1528.

**1208** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1301. 1302. 1303. **1209**

take my yoke upon you and learn from me, for I am gentle and humble in
heart, and you will find rest for your souls. For my yoke is easy and my
burden is sweet.\" I hereby commend you to GOD, the Father of all
comfort and strength, Amen, Amen. 11 Septembris 1528.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 130 2.**

> (Around mid-September 1528.)

**Chancellor Gregorius Brück to Luther.**

On behalf of the Elector, he asks Luthern to provide actliche
Nachrichten and his expert opinion on Carlstadt\'s recent position.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, p.367. N. 183. 3. Printed
by Burkhardt, p. 143 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 385.

My willing services before. Venerable and highly respected, especially
dear Mr. Gevatter! Some weeks ago D. Carlstadt had a messenger here and
had a letter 1) sent to me, in which, when I opened it, I found a
supplication to my most gracious lord, the Elector of Saxony, which I
humbly sent to his electoral graces and also read to his electoral lord.
And when his churfürstl. G. noted his impropriety and that he would not
allow himself to be turned away from his error, his Elector G. did not
want to hear anything about the long document and convention that he had
written to me, as I myself did not know how to regard it as good, 2) but
ordered me to send you such documents to read out and to move, as you
will find them enclosed. However, since His Lordship may not know how
the conversation between Carlstadt and you is supposed to have been, His
Lordship has graciously asked you to inform him about it and what has
happened between you. His Elector. G. also wanted to provide you with
the answer that Magister Georgius Spalatinus gave to Carlstadt three
years ago, ^3)^

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2076, no. 701.

2\) \"to look at\" put by us instead of: \"looked at\".

3\) This answer is not known; compare, however, No. 908. Perhaps the
answer written by Spalatin on the basis of this instruction is meant.

The author has kept a copy, which is now not to be found in the
Chancellery for the sake of insanity. Thus, his lordship also desires a
copy of them, if you have some, and after his lordship has sensed so
much from his supplication that the Carlstadt of fear, which he received
from the next peasant outrage, has to some extent been forgotten again
and has been somewhat bold that he might be accepted elsewhere, he will
also perhaps know, for which reason he also, as you are to decide, asks
for a farewell. For this reason, his Lordship requests that you, after
reading and moving his writings, indicate your concerns, and what
Carlstadt should be given in response to them, and what you should do
and undertake for his sake, as well as what you consider to be his
intentions and requests,^4)^ and send this, along with the
above-mentioned report of your conversation and action, together with
Carlstadt\'s writings, to the appropriate embassy. You will do his
Lordship a gracious favor. As my dear lord and godfather, I did not want
to leave this undisclosed to you on the order I received, for I am quite
willing to serve you. Date.

**No. 13 03.**

Eisleben. (Second half of September) 1528.

**Agricola to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Agricola answers the letter No. 1300, and apologizes for what he should
have preached in Altenburg, since he was on the journey to Bohemia with
the younger Prince of Saxony. After a long discussion (three closely
printed pages), he summarizes this in the following sentences: \"I have
mainly insisted on three things: first, that faith alone justifies man,
without our gratifications and works; second, that it is blasphemy if
one wants to claim that faith justifies with works; third, that faith,
the gift of the Holy Spirit, is something other than the demonstration
of faith. Now if these are oratorical devices, I will gladly suffer to
be called a rhetor, but, I hope, a Christian one, and I will rejoice if
it be said that I have concocted Greek words, since I have preached what
the apostle himself wrote.\" (Cf. St. Louis ed., vol. XX, ing., p. 47
b.)

From *Cod. Ratzenb*. in Brecher\'s Zeitschrift für historische
Theologie, 1872, 375 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VI, p. 386.

4\) This that Luther on Sept. 24. See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2089,
no. 702. Compare the introduction to the 20th Baude, p. 27.

**1210**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1304 to 1307.

**1211**

**No. 1304.**

(Wittenberg.) September 18, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks that the request of the Brunswickers to keep Bugenhagen for
another year be rejected, but that his leave for Hamburg be extended
beyond Martinmas.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 153, HHH.
Handwritten in *Cod.* 452.1, *Bibl*. *Goth.* Printed in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 376 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 37.

G. and F. in Christ. S., esteemed. F., gn. H. Those at Brunswick write
here to grant Johann Pomerania another year, as they have done to us,
and ask us to help them obtain it from E. C. F. G.. We ask, however,
that E. C. F. G. refuse such a request, 1) considering that we cannot do
without this man, and so far can hardly do without him, because in
addition to the visitation, our work and business increase daily. So,
praise God, their cause is done, and fine people have gotten enough
there, and care that they perhaps think to attach and keep him with them
in time. So there is more to Wittenberg at this time than to three
Brunswicks. He Johann also complains almost very much, as he writes to
us, and asks with concern that we are working at E. C. F. G., that the
Brunswick request at E. C. F. G. will not be heard. Thus our most humble
request is that E. C. F. G. will graciously consider our request, as we
have no doubt that E. C. F. G. will do. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen.
Friday after *Crucis* \[Sept. 18\] 1528.

**P. S.**

He Johann Pommer also requests, because E. C. F. G. have allowed him to
be outside until St. Martin\'s Day, and it is impossible to make such a
request to Hamburg, that E. C. F. G. graciously grant him a longer
period of time, so that he can satisfy his conscience, that he does not
drive according to his own will without obedience or command.

1\) The request of the Council of Brunswick, dated Saturday after
*Nativ*. (Sept. 12), the resolution, datirt Druckenborn (Trockenborn,
old hunting lodge near Hummelshayn) from Tuesday Mauritii (Sept. 22); it
was negative (Burkhardt).

**No. 1305 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 22, 1528.

**To Wolfgang Fues, pastor in Colditz.**

About a marriage case and another matter,

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 389; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 377 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI, p. 391., German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1122.

> To the faithful servant of Christ, Wolfgang Fues, Bishop of Colditz,
> his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! It is up to you, my dear Wolfgang, to judge
in this matter of the man, because if the matter is as he says, that his
wife has transgressed and she has followed the adulterer against his
will, then he is free. But see that all this is known to the neighbors,
for the unworthiness of people is extraordinary nowadays, which no one
can sufficiently believe or guard against. In your and the elder
Vicar\'s matter I have certainly acted, and I wonder that nothing has
been written; that is what these noises and preoccupations do at. Court.
If the older vicar still has no answer, I ask that you both send me
another petition. For I have handed over the earlier petitions; but I
will keep this one, so that I can pursue it through them, for we hope
that the chancellor will be here soon; I would certainly not like to
forget yours and yours. Give my best regards to your vine with its
grapes, and farewell in Christ. On Tuesday after St. Matthew \[22
Sept.\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1306.**

(Wittenberg.) September 24, 1528.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XV, 2089, no. 702.

**No. 1307 .**

(Wittenberg.) September 29, 1528.

**To Leonhard Beier in Guben.**

Luther asks that he help Paul Heinz, former schoolmaster in Gaben, to
get his outstanding, earned money.

**1212**

Letters from 1528.

No. 1307. 1308. 1309.

**1213**

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B. 24u, fol. 47. Printed in the
\"Trostschriften und Predigten,\" Jena by Rödingers Erben, 1556 or 1557,
bl. diiij; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 95 and in the Erl.
Edition, vol. 65, p. 236. In all these editions inaccurate, without the
name of the addressee and instead of the names in the letter merely
\"N.\". According to a copy from *Cod*. *Jen*. in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
p. 392.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear M. Leonhard! You know without a doubt
how the good fellow Paulus Hentz, about your schoolmaster, still owes
some citizens of Guben a debt in blood, which he has not been able to
get with much effort and expense, and yet he is quite poor, has nothing
else to eat this winter, because his father is afflicted with fire in
Lübben. So I kindly ask you to take Mr. Licentiate Pichen to you, and
both ask the honorable council of Guben for my sake, that they would do
a good work of mercy and, considering his poverty, pay such a debt from
the council\'s money and give it to him, and take the trouble of
reminding the citizens, as they would owe it to themselves to do so,
since they are their citizens, and should not suffer anyone to hold
their own against them, which sin calls to heaven, and is as much as
stolen and robbed. Dear, judge this well, because you also owe to do
this, so that you do not become a part of their robbery. Give my
friendly regards to Ern Licentiat Pichen. I hope you are well with your
Eva and Abel. God has taken an Elslin from me. Hiemit GOtt befohlen,
Amen. *The Michelis* \[29 Sept.\] 1528. *M. L*.

**No. 130 8.**

(Wittenberg.) September 30, 1528.

**To the Zerbst City Council.**

Lckther promises to look for a preacher for Zerbst.

The original is at Zerbst in the city archives. Printed in Sintenis,
Denkschrift, p. 43; in Erl. Ausg., Vol. 56, p. 179 and in De
Wette-Seidemann, Vol. VI, p. 96.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> lords and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! Lest I leave
E. W. without an answer now, it is true that in

Such a journey is not easy to get preachers, and I have none available.
However, I will answer E. W. again in eight days, what I have done or
can do in the meantime. For I am inclined to help E. W. and the whole
city. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Wednesday after Michaelmas \[Sept. 30\]
1528. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1309 .**

Wittenberg. October 5, 1528.

**All the Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.**

After Luther\'s letter of August 21 (No. 1286) had also remained
unsuccessful, he now publicly calls on the Elector in this printed
letter to do justice to Wolf Hornung, and at the same time confesses
himself as Hornung\'s previous advisor.

The first printing appeared under the title: \"An den kurfürsten zu
Brandenburg Marggrauen Joachim, Christliche vermanung. D. Martini
Luther.\" Without indication of place and time. The printer is Hans
Lufft in Wittenberg. In the editions: in the Wittenberg (1569), vol. IX,
p. 286b; in the Jena (1566), vol. I V, BI.470d; in the Altenburg, vol. I
V, p. 453; in the Leipzig, vol. XIX, p. 660; in Walch, vol. XXI, 262; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 381 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 41.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Mr. Joachim,
> Margrave of Brandenburg, Elector and Chamberlain of the Roman Empire,
> Duke of Stettin, Pomerania 2c, Prince of Rügen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most
Gracious Lord! First of all, I humbly request that E. C. F. G. will not
be surprised that I am writing to E. C. F. G. by printed letter, and
that they will hear my just cause and excuse. I have now written twice
in my own handwriting to E. C. F. G., and sent it, and would have liked
to have put my matter in writing; but I have not received an answer, so
that I do not need to know how it is done. Thirdly, I have also had my
request submitted verbally by Valtin Grafe, who was then made by E. C.
F. G. in Wolf Horning\'s matters, which also went unanswered, as did
Wolf Horning. Finally, because this matter cannot nor should be kept
silent, or left untreated, I have sent the

**1214** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1309. **1215**

last council invented to address publicly before everyone E. C. F. G. by
printing.

It is true that, at the request of Valtin Count, E. C. F. G. wrote to my
most gracious lord, the Elector of Saxony, to present me together with
Wolf Horning, as if we had let ourselves be heard with disgraceful
words, I with disgraceful writings, Wolf Horning with my fist, to touch
E. C. F. G.; and I wanted to be Wolf Horning\'s counselor. Thereupon, S.
C. F. G. ordered both of us not to undertake any of these things, but to
refrain from them; all of which would not have been necessary for E. C.
F. G.. But I will interpret it, in honor of God, as if E. C. F. G. had
not invented such things maliciously or carelessly. For Valtin Grase
cannot have applied for such a thing with truth; but that E. C. F. G.,
for the sake of these dwindling runs 1), has taken care of the piece for
abundance, since there is no worry. For I (praise God) have so far not
been afraid to write disgraceful books; I am also still so skilled that
I may, as before, affix both my name and the name of the person to whom
I am writing to the page, and offer myself justly, which are not, nor
may be called disgraceful writing, according to all law.

And if I had wanted to write defamatory letters, I would have been so
prudent as to leave nothing of my letter to E. C. F. G., or to report my
person, but rather, as is the way of the blasphemer, to bring the
blasphemy to light before anyone knew who had done it. In addition, even
if I wanted to do it, I would not know with all my heart how I should
write a special defamatory letter from E. C. F. G.. The praiseworthy
country cry from the armory 2) is probably so great that I would not be
able to obtain it. That is why E. C. F. G. might well have overruled me
in such disgrace against my superiority. Nor shall (whether God wills
it) the world with all princes and kings become so good to me that I
shall have my soul disgraced for its sake.

1\) This refers to the Minkwitzian Febde.

2\) In the morning after the first night in which Hornung\'s wife had
been out of the house, the Elector told him that she had been with the
armorer overnight, but the next day the Elector confessed to him that
she had been with him.

or any other such bad habit. I say this in my apology.

Thus Wolf Horning, who has been my guest from time to time, as a poor,
outcast fellow, has been so highly graced by God that he has obeyed me
and others who teach and counsel according to the Gospel, quite
willingly, and has never been neither willing nor able to do anything
against E. C. F. G.; even if the country cry were true, he would have
been justified in doing so by E. C. F. G. according to imperial and
papal law. C. F. G.; if, however, the land cry were true, he would have
been able to carry out such a thing in accordance with imperial and
papal law, and there would have been enough people who would have
offered him money and strength.

And certainly, if he had ever been willing, E. C. F. G. would have long
since learned something else from him. But I, I say, I have defended
myself here, and faithfully counseled against, not E. C. F. G.\'s
beautiful hair, but poor people; but especially the Gospel of God, which
teaches us to command revenge and justice, to suffer violence and
injustice. That is where it has remained. I also promise him that he
will let it remain so forever, especially because Wolf Horning has
already smelled too much, whether the matter comes to repentance or not.
This is for our excuse against my superior and for everyone.

But that I am his advisor is now indicated enough, what I have advised
him. And if I only knew a lot of good to advise him further, I would
know myself guilty, and hope that E. C. F. G. would not hold it against
me; and if they did hold it against me, they could well mean how much I
would give to it. But that we come to the point, why I wrote and
knocked, and now knock and write publicly, is the cause:

Wolf Horning is in misery now into his fourth year, driven away from
wife and child, from house and court, from property and honor, from
friends and brothers-in-law, and no one shall say why? And is also in
truth no guilt not there, and E. C. F. G. will not hear nor answer how
much one calls and cries. In addition, two councilors have recently
written to Wolfen Horning that he should leave E. C. F. G. in peace. 3)
Such un-

3\) Compare No. 1280 and 1281.

**1216** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1309. **1217**

Wolf Horning has had to suffer increased hardship, and is still
suffering. Over this is another trouble, he is a young fellow, who
hovers in peril of youth and flesh, but can neither come to his wife,
nor be divorced from her (as is proper), that he might start something;
must therefore be in peril of his conscience every hour and go astray.
This last piece (I say) is what compels me to write. There I am obliged
to advise the wretched conscience with what I can; but I cannot do
otherwise than in such a manner. For whether E. C. F. G. is a minor
eighth, where Wolf Horning remains, we cannot regard it as minor. I want
to spare E. C. F. G., and still nothing of the country cry and public
deed and E. C. F. G.\'s own letters, but rather rely on the next writing
of the two councilors.

E. C. F. G. is obligated by princely sovereignty to keep the wife to the
husband, and not to suffer that they remain from each other without
cause. But E. C. F. G. does not allow this alone, but approves of such
unchristian divorce, as the counsel\'s writing entails; does not approve
of it alone, but defends it; does not defend it alone, but plugs the
ears, and calls Horning to silence. What will the length become of it?
Now this must break in the end, that I know for sure.

Since we have neither authority nor power over E. C. F. G. (for such
should be done by the bishops, if they wanted to be what they boast of),
we hold ourselves to the duty of love; and first of all we admonish and
ask for God\'s sake that E. C. F. G. should let Wolf Horning follow his
wife and child 1) together with all that is his, and the wife also hold
to it, as E. C. F. G. owes and she herself has often requested. C. F. G.
is obliged to do, and she herself, the wife, has often requested and
asked; or, where this should not or cannot be the case, help to ensure
that a legal and public divorce takes place, so that the poor journeyman
may come out of the carriage of his conscience, and make provision for
himself. On the other hand, we proclaim to E. C. F. G. the commandment
and judgment of our all Judge Jesus Christ, who has given such to E. C.
F. G..

1\) Wolf Hornung had a little daughter, Anna, from his marriage.

F. G. has the power to command, demands through us, and will even judge
severely, and commanded us to report such in his name (as neighbor to
neighbor) to E. C. F. G..

But we do not want to have an umbrella 2) that a writing and power of
attorney are sent here in the name of the woman, as has now happened.
For this will not be enough for a public divorce, because we know who
has written such a document, and if we know, we may not act in it with a
clear conscience. She herself shall deal with him personally. If it
turns out that she does not want to go to him, we should not be so eager
for her, and with a clear conscience we want to draw up a letter of
divorce. Of course, she is not allowed to take care of escort, because
she does not forfeit anything in the Saxon principality, and Wolf
Horning, for the sake of his person, has previously attributed escort to
her.

If E. C. F. G. does not do so, we will have to suffer; but we
nevertheless want to warn E. C. F. G. of this and have warned him
seriously: we do not want to do anything offensive or blasphemous, but
rather diligently ask God, our Father, against E. C. F. G., that he have
mercy on the imprisoned conscience and bring the Elector of Brandenburg
to justice, and we certainly want to be heard. After that, we will
present ourselves before God and the world, and publicly disclose E. C.
F. G.\'s own letters and the councilors\' writings, so that Horning\'s
cause and conscience will be publicly recognized, and I will also gain
the ability and space to further advise in his cause. However, we want
to be justified in all this, even before our enemies, so that E. C. F.
G. will not have cause to denigrate us against our superiors. If we do
injustice to E. C. F. G., they can only accuse us confidently; if we do
not answer, we want to suffer our right.

And E. C. F. G. shall know that I have not intruded into this matter
wantonly. I have been asked from Berlin, and immediately from the
armory, with high words, since I did not yet know where Wolf Horning
was, that I should help to advise whether one could bring the couple
together. But I ask God Almighty to let E. C.

2\) \"Umbrella stroke\" == Fencing stroke, feint.

**1218**

Letters from the year 1528. No. 1309 to 1313.

**1219**

> F. G. enlighten and move him to do what is right, amen. Given at
> Wittenberg, Monday after Francisci \[Oct. 5\] 1528.

E. C. F. G.

willing

Martinus Luther.

**No. 13 10.**

(Wittenberg.) October 9, 1528.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 2108.

**No. 1311 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 12, 1528.

**To Friedrich Pistorius, Abbot at Nuremberg.**

Luther asks him to be helpful in reimbursing Johann Hofmann for the
costs he had incurred in obtaining his master\'s degree.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 389; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 387 and
in Erl. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1124.

> To Mr. Friedrich, head of the Aegidien Monastery at Nuremberg 2c.

Grace and peace! My dear sir, Johann Hofmann, who has recently become a
master, has asked me to intercede for him with your dignity, so that he
could obtain the money, which he has paid for the master\'s degree or
still owes, through your requests, indicating that it would be of
benefit to him if you, asked by me, would ask and work for him;
therefore, I recommend his cause to you. 1) Perhaps tomorrow I will
write more and more extensively with the book guide, for now I am busy,
and that with more than one thing, and am forced to be brief. Be well in
the Lord and pray to the Lord for me. October 12, 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1312 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 14, 1528.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

On the persecutions and oppressions of King Ferdinand. He recommends the
Ll. Stenzel goldsmith.

1\) Hofmann received 10 gulden as a gift from the Nuremberg Council.

> Handwritten in Hamburg, Ms. 1, fol. 38. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
> p. 389 b; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 388 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VI,
> p. 396. German
>
> Walch, Vol. XXI, 1124.
>
> To the man to be highly honored in the Lord, Mr. Johann Heß, pastor at
> Breslau, his brother who is exceedingly dear in Christ.
>
> \"Grace and peace in Christ.\" I am surprised that you, knowing that
> these worthy citizens were traveling to us, did not give them a letter
> to us by which you would make us happy or at least certain about their
> fate. For we hear that Ferdinand or rather his governors (*satrapas*)
> are extraordinarily angry against Christ, 2) but the second psalm is
> their tyrant, again also our comfort. I ask you to decree that your
> church should pray for all of us, because Satan is pursuing us with
> all his might and with all his troops, therefore we too must join
> hands and hearts in fervent prayer that the Lord may tread Satan under
> our feet, amen, 3) Jonas Justus and Philip greet you reverently. Then
> I commend to you \"Master Stentzell Goldsmith,\" whom we have
> endeavored to plant; you set about watering. For he has bravely
> disputing full of the providence of God. Farewell and greet Moiban and
> all brothers in the Lord. October 14, 1528.

Martin Luther.

> **No. 1313 .**
>
> (Wittenberg.) October 15, 1528.
>
> **To the Zerbst City Council.**
>
> Luther has not been able to raise a preacher for Zerbst until now.

The original is at Zerbst in the city archives. Printed in Sintenis,
Denkschrift, p. 44; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 180 and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 97.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> lords and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! I have given my

2\) On July 24, a strict edict was issued against Lutheran books; book
printers and book keepers were to be punished with deaths, and the goods
were to be burned 2c.

3\) The following has been added by the Erl. Briefw. inserted after the
manuscript.

**1220** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1313. 1314. 1315. **1221**

I have been looking for a preacher, and even without your current
letter, I was willing to answer you today. For I am not able to find one
now for the winter and in such perilous times, even though I thought I
would not have missed it. Therefore, you may have patience with the
present ones of your deacons until the deaths are somewhat alleviated;
so I hope they will be well received again. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen.
Thursday after Calixti \[Oct. 15\] 1528.

\" Martinus Luther.

**No. 13 14.**

(Wittenberg.) October 16, 1528.

**To Michael Stiefel in Lochau.**

Luther wishes him luck with his new position in Lochau.

Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 59; by De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 388 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VI, p. 397. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1125.

Grace and peace! We have received the ten pennies, my dear Michael,
which we also handed over to the impudent and profit-seeking carter.
Such are these people, hard and clumsy, that we must tolerate them if we
want to live. However, I am glad that you are provided with food and
lodging in the castle, but especially that you have the parishioners and
the parish itself healthy in a different way than we had believed. Of
course, I would like nothing better than for it to be invented in such a
way that it could feed you well, so that you would have the desire and
reason to stay there and persevere. You have not yet written to me about
this, perhaps because you have not yet explored the matter; therefore
inquire, and indicate what your will is. For as far as the widow is
concerned, 1) it is entirely up to you to consider this and to fast a
counsel in it, but above all to implore the Lord in prayer that he may
rule your heart and move it for his glory and your salvation. Be well in
Him. Philip 2) left yesterday to take upon himself the burden of the
visitation. You pray for him. On the day of St. Galli \[Oct. 16\] 1528.
Martin Luther.

1\) The widow of the previous pastor, Günther.

2\) Melanchthon was absent from Wittenberg on the visitation in
Thuringia from October 15 to January 23, 1529.

**No. 1315 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 20, 1528.

**To Gerhard Wilskamp in Herford.**

Luther thanks him for gifts received and promises him that he and
Montanus will receive his writings in the future.

Printed in the *Bibl. of Bremen, Cl. 1, fasc.* 2, p. 138; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 123; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 389 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. Vl, p. 398. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1126.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Gerhard Wilskamp from
> Xanten, 3) the pure and loud lamp in Christ, his extremely dear
> brother.

Grace and peace in Christ! We received both the letter and the cloth
with pleasure, my dear Gerhard Light Giver,^4)^ because the gift was
sent to us out of such great honesty of mind and inclined heart, so that
I have done right and believe to have done right that I have called you,
I do not know by what fate or counsel, a Light Giver. For thou shinest
altogether by sincerity, and glowest with love in the frail shard of thy
womb. Yes, constantly every night, until this day, we, my Käthe and I,
use your lamps, and we are sorry that there is no gift from us or can be
sent, which would also keep our memory alive with you, and we are very
ashamed that you were never at least given a paper gift, since we could
have easily done so. But when \[people (for promotion)\] are there,
nothing new is published; meanwhile, the booksellers seize your purse
beforehand. But I do not want to be guilty of this, that I should not
finally send, even if only a bundle, books, may I come later or at the
same time as the booksellers. And now I would have sent the Isaiah 5)
which recently

3\) \"Xanten\" actually means *Santena*, but here it is given by *de
Santis*, so that it could also be translated by: \"of the saints\". - In
No. 1116 Luther writes: *Xanthensi*.

4\) *Lampadarie*. We did not dare to use because of the two

The meaning of the word is to translate it by \"lampstand\".
*Lampadarius* is a lamp or torch bearer, one who shines there.

5\) The Prophet Isaiah, German. Wittenberg. 1528. quarto. See St. Louis
edition, vol. VI, 4, note.

**1222** Letters from the year

German has been finished, but the copies have gone so far that I have
none for myself. From now on, I will order a box for you and Montanus,
in which the copies to be sent to you will be placed, of everything that
has come out.

I gladly accepted Hermann von Lippe, whom you recommended, and offered
him my care and help wherever it might be needed. My extremely dear
Käthe and her little son respectfully greet you. For Elisabeth has bid
us farewell and has gone through death to Christ into life. May the
grace of God be with you. October 20, 1528, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1316 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 20, 1528.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Luther recommends a young man to him, reports the escape of Duchess
Ursula von Münsterberg from the convent, etc.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod*.
*Dessav*. 196 and in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 216. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II. Bl. 390d; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 390 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 1. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1128.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, Bishop
> of Altenburg, his brother who is exceedingly dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! This young man, who is poor and displaced, is
looking for some place where he can devote his work to teaching the
children to write German, for he understands little Latin. However, he
seems to have a good and skilful head. Therefore, he desires to be
recommended to you or to another friend, whether he could be of use to
you through his work, as you will learn from him, my dear Spalatin;
therefore, you will do what seems good to you. For there was no
opportunity for him to earn his living here.

I believe that you have heard the new news that by a great miracle the
Duchess of Münsterberg has escaped from the convent at Freiberg, 1) she
is now staying with me.

1\) Ursula of Münsterberg was a daughter of Duke Victorin of Troppau, a
son of King George.

1528\. no. 1315. 1316. **1223**

as my housemate with two virgins, one of whom, Margaretha Volckmar, is
the daughter of a citizen of Leipzig, the other, Dorothea, of a citizen
of Freiberg, who from her father\'s inheritance has brought 1400 gulden
2) to the monastery. She has left that in the lurch, and follows poor
Christ with her wife 3) Ursula; all together they have not brought even
a penny. Here Duke George plagues our prince; what will happen I do not
know. For she is a relative of Duke George, which you know, as I
believe, namely both were born of two mothers,^4)^ who were sisters.
They say that Nicolaus von Minkwitz is recruiting a large army, and I do
not know where he will invade. I wonder what the princes who see and
allow such things may think, since one must fear that from this spark a
dangerous conflagration will arise in Germany. Some say that he will
give it to the Woi-

Podiebrad. The daughter of Podiebrad, Zdena, was married to Albrecht of
Saxony, and mother of the dukes George and Henry of Saxony. According to
this, Ursula and Duke George were probably siblings, but not, as Luther
says later, the children of two sisters. Ursula had lost her parents
early; her aunt Zdena and her son, Duke Georg, took care of her and
brought her to the convent of the order of St. Mary Magdalene at
Freiberg. On October 6, 1528, she escaped from the convent, and Luther
published not long after that the writing in which she justified herself
for this step. (See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1694.) She remained
with Luther until the end of the year 1528, then she went to a married
sister in Marienwerder in Prussia, followed by her faithful companion
Dorothea Tanberg. In 1530 we find her with her cousin Duke Frederick II
in Liegnitz, where she was not much pleased because of the Schwenkfeld
doctrines prevailing there. Therefore, she turned to Elisabeth von
Weyde, abbess of the Protestant monastery of Gernrode, for admission to
the same. Whether her request was granted is unknown, also her further
life fate is not known. The information that she was married to the
Baron von Biberstein is based on a confusion with a daughter of the same
name of her cousin Carl von Münsterberg. Tanberg later married M. Georg
Scharff, pastor at Brießnitz near Dresden.

2\) a significant sum for that time; the duchess brought only 500 gulden
as a dowry.

3\) In the monastery, the Duchess Ursula was called \"das freuichen\",
which Seidemann, \"Erläuterungen\", p. 108, explains by princess.

4\) This information of Luther is followed by Seidemann (Erläuterungen,
p. 106), likewise by us, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, Introduction, p.
64. The information given in the first note to this letter is according
to the Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 2, note 1.

**1224** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1316. 1317. **1225**

1\) others that they are armed against the margrave, who, however, is
surely snoring. 2) Pomeranus has traveled to Hamburg, Philip to
Thuringia. We 3) will start our part of the visitation on the day after
Ursula \[Oct. 22\]; I hope that you will also do the same,^4)^ . Christ
help all and give His blessing, Amen. Greetings M. Eberhard and Erhard
5) and the other fathers who may still be with you. October 20, 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1317.**

(Wittenberg.) October 21, 1528.(?)

**To Caspar Aquila, pastor at Saalfeld.**

On the doctrine of providence and predestination, that one should
refrain from futile brooding about it, on the occasion of the
disputation of a certain friend.

Handwritten in Copenhagen, Dls. 1363, p. 144, and again p. 343, dated
Oct. 21, 1530 and addressed to Doctor Caspar Lindemann; in Wolfenbüttel,
*Cod*.

*Aug.* 34. 2, fol. 101 and (in part) in *Cod. Aug.* 11. 10, fol. 246b
(in the former codex Lindemann is the addressee; both codices are
undated); in Gotha, *Cod.* 402 (from 1530) and in *Cod. Closs*. (now in
London, *British Museum, Addit*. 12059). Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 392 d; by Schütze, vol. II, p. 91 with the superscription: *Incerto*
(of Oct. 27, 1528), and again Vol. II, p. 199 (of Oct. 27, 1530); in De
Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 391 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 4. German in
bad translation in sämmtlichen Ausgaben der Tischreden, Cap. 2, § 162
(only omitted in our edition and referred to this letter); in Schlegel,
\"Vita Aquila,\" p. 202 (Oct. 21, 1530) and in Walch, vol. XXI, 1129. -
Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 465, note 3, says: \"This is one of
the many letters that have been frequently addressed.\"

Grace and peace in Christ! I am a little late in replying to your
letter, my dear

1\) The \"Voivode\" is John Zapolya of Transylvania, according to which
the troops would have been intended against King Ferdinand.

2\) When Joachim I learned that 800 men were gathered in Lauenburg, he
sent his son with troops to the Elbe to protect the border of the Mark,
while he himself made new armaments in the Mark.

3\) namely Luther, Hans Metsch, Benedict Pauli and Hans von Taubenheim.

4\) Spalatin and his comrades did not begin until Nov. 22.

5\) Either Erhard Steinbach, Diaconus in Altenburg, or Erhard Schaubis,
preacher at the Nicolaikirche there.

Caspar, but not through my fault, because no certain claimant demanded
the letter, and I had no certain messenger. But our Ulrich took this
letter to make sure that it would be delivered to you. 6) That first
disputation of the brother (of whom you write that he is now 7) your
guest) about the hidden works of God is the so-called challenge to
blasphemy, in which many have perished, and I have been in danger more
than once to the point of death. And what is it that we exceedingly
wretched people, who cannot yet grasp the rays of the divine promise by
faith, or grasp the sparks of God\'s commandments by works (both of
which He Himself has confirmed by words and miraculous signs from
heaven), nevertheless allow ourselves to be carried away in our impurity
and weakness to grasp the majesty of the sunlight, yes, of the
incomprehensible light of God\'s miraculous works? Do we not know that
He dwells in a light that no one can approach? \[1 Tim. 6:16.\] And yet
we approach, rather we presume to approach. Do we not know that his
judgments are unsearchable? \[Rom. 11:33\] and yet we presume to search
them out. And this we do before we are penetrated and filled with the
rays of the promises and the sparks of the commandments, plunging with
mole\'s eyes into the majesty of this light, which is revealed neither
by words nor by signs, but rather is hidden and not made known. What is
it to wonder if the glory crushes us as we explore the majesty? What is
it to wonder if we, in perverse order of light, ourselves perverse,
desire the brightest light before the morning star? First (as Peter says
\[2. Ep. 1, 19.\]) the morning star rises in our hearts, then we will
finally see it resting in the noonday \[Hoh. Lied, 1, 7.\].

It is true that the inscrutable will of God must be taught in order for
us to know that it is such, but if one strives to understand it, that is
an exceedingly dangerous

6\) Here the table speeches begin the letter.

7\) Here we have with *Cod. Clossius*: *jam* read instead of: *Gajum*.

**1226** Letters from the year

1528\. no. 1317. 1318. **1227**

Abyss. Therefore, I keep myself in check with this word of Christ, which
he said to Peter \[John 21:22\]: \"Follow me. What is it to thee, if I
will that he tarry?\" since Peter also discoursed of a strange work of
God that would come to pass with John. And \[I restrain myself\] by the
word to Philip, who said \[John 14:8, f.\], \"Show us the Father, and it
shall be enough for us,\" whom he restrained by saying, \"Believest thou
not that the Father is in me, and I in the Father? He that seeth me
seeth the Father also.\" Namely, Philip also wanted to see the majesty
and mysteries of the Father, how GOD was far above Christ by promises
and commandments. So also the wise man says \[Sir. 3, 22. f. Vulg.\]:
\"Do not seek after things that are too high\' for you, but be
constantly mindful of what you are commanded.\" And, beloved, supposing
that we already knew these hidden judgments of God, what fruit could the
commandments and promises of God still bring us? Therefore, watch and
tell that man that if he wants to have peace of heart and avoid the
dangers of blasphemy and despair, he should refrain from such thoughts,
since he certainly knows that they are incomprehensible. Why does he let
Satan trouble him with such things, which are impossible? Just as if
someone were concerned with how the earth could stand above the waters,
so that it would not sink, or something like that. But first let him
exercise faith in the promise and the works of the commandments; when
this is done, he will see if he has to concern himself with impossible
things. If he does not want to hear this, he may see to it that he does
not regret it too late, since there is no other remedy than to let go of
these thoughts, although it is very difficult to refrain from them
because of Satan\'s insistence, for he makes it a necessity to
investigate these things. Therefore, here one must fight with him no
less 1) by contempt than with disbelief, despair, heresy, or any other
approach.

1\) Here we have added *eo* (that is, to Satan) to make sense. That this
passage has already been offensive to many others can be seen from the
fact that in three manuscripts and two prints *pro is* read instead of
*cum*.

temptation. Most of them are mistaken, because they do not believe that
these thoughts are temptations of Satan; therefore, almost no one
despises them or fights to despise them, even though they are the fiery
darts of the most evil spirits under heaven \[Eph. 6:12, 16\]. For by
them Satan fell out of heaven, wanting to be like the Most High and to
know all that GOD knew, not satisfied with knowing what he needed to
know. That is why we have to fight by fleeing, and not to think more
highly of ourselves than is proper, but to think moderately of ourselves
\[Rom. 12:3\]; whoever does not do this will be defeated. For one cannot
think of Christ where these thoughts prevail. Thus he brought Adam down
by challenging him, since a tree was forbidden, with the wisdom and the
supreme will of God. This is the most noble and actually devilish
temptation; therefore it is enough to be challenged with human
temptation.

With this you can also answer the other question, that the preacher may
administer his office, which God has commanded him to do, and leave in
order what God has not commanded him to do, namely, to know why one
hears and another does not. What is it to you (says Christ), you follow
me; me, me, follow me, not your questions or thoughts.

About the Jews, that I should remember them in another book, I will see
when I have time; now I have other things to do. Farewell and pray to
the Lord for me. 1528, October 21. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1318.**

Eisleben. October 23, 1528.

**Agricola to Luther and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

Agricola asks that another teacher be sent for the sons of Count
Albrecht of Mansfeld after Erhard, from Holstein, has left.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzenb*. Printed in Zeitschrift für historische
Theologie, 1872, 379; in *Bindseil, supplem. ad Corp. Ref.,* 512 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 8.

**1228** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1319. 1320. 1321. **1229**

(Wittenberg.)

> **No. 1319.**

October 25, 1528.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

About the teacher desired by Agricola. Luther reports that he is about
to leave for Lochau in order to marry Michael Stiefel there and to
introduce him into his office.

Handwritten in *Cod. Ratzeb*. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. 11, p. 386; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 394 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 9. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1123.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Johann Agricola, the
> extremely faithful head teacher of the youth in Eisleben.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Philip is absent as visitator in Thuringia,
my dear Agricola, therefore I could not use his advice and help in
determining a teacher. I will therefore deal with Milich 1) and Georg
Major to see if we can find someone and send him there as soon as
possible, although I have already been told that Veit, 2) who already
administered this office, is staying with you; I do not know what the
reason is why you are not putting him in the position for the time
being. Within eight days we will answer what we have arranged. At this
hour I am traveling to Lochau to marry Michael Stiefel to the widow of
the bishop of Lochau, M. Franz, whom you may have known, and at the same
time to hand over the parish to him. It is to be wondered how one thing
pushes the other. I have not been able to keep the man with me, he is so
overly ashamed, fearing that I will be weighed down by the worry of
feeding him, so that he has preferred to live elsewhere under any
circumstances, until I, tired of fighting, have been forced to let the
man go, albeit very unwillingly. He also sends letters here, which were
delivered to me, by which he invites some of you to the wedding, but I
was only able to send them late; you will see to it that they are
delivered. And now be well in the Lord with your dearest Hans.

1\) Professor of Medicine in Wittenberg; he died there in 1559.

2\) Veit Amerbach. Cf. no. 1006.

Albrecht 3) and all the grapes of your lovely vine. On the Sunday after
the eleven thousand virgins \[Oct. 25\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1320 .**

Dresden.. . 28 October 1528.

**Duke George of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 425. - The locations of this writing
are given there in the introduction, col. 422.

**No. 1321 .**

Wittenberg. October 29, 1528.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Luther consoled Spalatin about the blasphemies he had suffered because
of his marriage; because of his preaching ministry and his livelihood.

The original is in Gotha, Cod. A 122, fol. 33. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 391; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 395 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 11. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1133.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, Magister Georg Spalatin,
> the extremely faithful servant of God.

Grace and peace in Christ! That your marriage is notorious as
fornication,^4)^ my dear Spalatin, you must not only not grieve over it,
but rather rejoice, since you know for certain that this state is
approved by God, praised by the angels, honored by all the saints, and
then this seal is added to it, that it is distinguished by the cross,
namely that it is blasphemed by the devils and godless people, also by
false brothers, as it happens to every work and word of God. Therefore,
see to it that you do not regard these blasphemous words of ungodly
people, who are outcast against you, any differently than precious gems,
by which you are indeed stained before the world, but glorified before
God, considering that the world is not worthy to see the glory and honor
of this work of God, which you see and have. The same is to be kept and
much more to be kept of your preaching ministry. Let the world have a

3\) Not the town clerk Hans Albert, as Burkhardt p. 144 assumes, but
Agricola\'s son.

4\) by the canons of the Georgenstift in Altenburg.

**1230** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1321 to 1325. **1231**

good year together with its prince With its foolish, sacrilegious,
blind, furious judgments and slander. It is written: The wicked shall be
destroyed, that he may not see the glory of God, but \"the heavens
declare the glory of God\" \[Ps. 19:2\]. There is no doubt that the
world spews out shame against God.

I don\'t understand what you write about the danger to your livelihood.
For I also do not believe that the Bethaven monks are troubling you. But
they may be whoever they want, so you now have the office of visitation,
then a very gracious prince who will not suffer that you are deprived of
what is necessary for life. May the Lord Jesus strengthen you with His
Spirit and guide you in this direction of the episcopal office (xx xx
xxxxxxxx xxxxx), Amen. I ask

you, pray for me. Wittenberg, Thursday after Simonis and Jude \[Oct.
29\] 1528,

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1322 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 29, 1528.

**To Eberhard Brisger in Altenburg.**

Luther apologizes for not sending books and complains about his many
businesses.

Handwritten in Gotha, *Cod*. A 1048, fol. 75 and in Wolfenbüttel, Cod.
6n6. 214, fol. 64. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 391b; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 396 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 12 f. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1134.

> To the most esteemed brother in Christ, M. Eberhard Brisger, his
> extremely dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Indeed, I do not think of the books that are
to be sent to you, nor have I thought of them, my dear Brisger, because
I rely on your manager (*factorius*) Bruno to take care of these things;
therefore, you may lay it on him if nothing is sent. My Käthe sends you
her love, together with your wife and children; she is pregnant, but the
fruit does not yet show any life. Pray for us. I write under a lot of
business as a visitator, 1) lector, preacher, scribe, listener,

1\) On that day Luther went with the others to the visitation in Kemberg
and Schmiedeberg.

Worrier, runner, lawyer, and what else. Greetings to all of us. Thursday
after Simonis and Jude \[Oct. 29\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1323 .**

Wittenberg. October 31, 1528.

**To Duke George of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 426.

**No. 1324.**

Wittenberg. November 1, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther complains about Amsdorf\'s silence and gives news about the
plague and the visitation.

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 394; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 398 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 15. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1135.

Grace and peace in the Lord Jesus Christ! Your silence is astonishing,
my dear Amsdorf, compared to your wisdom and my merit, especially in
this time, which is full of temptations and dangers. The plague does not
reign with us, but still it appears from time to time and shows itself
in some corner. But Christ keep you healthy in the midst of this
conflagration, amen. We are visitators, that is, bishops, and we find
poverty and lack everywhere; may the Lord send laborers into his
harvest, amen. You, I pray, pray to the Lord for me and be well. The
rest of us greet you. Wittenberg, November 1, 1528 Martin Luther.

**No. 1325 .**

(Hamburg.) (November 1, 1528.) 2)

**Bugenhagen to Luther.**

Bugenhagen reports on the success of his work in Hamburg, on the
religious conditions there, and asks that he be helped to remain there
for some time.

The original is in the archives at Weimar. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 145;
by Vogt, Bugenhagens Briefwechsel, p. 76, No. 26 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VII, p. 15.

2\) This letter was apparently written at the same time as the following
one and arrived together with it at Luther, whereupon the latter wrote
to Brück on Nov. 11, and on Nov. 17 the Electoral Resolution was sent to
the Council of Hamburg and to Bugenhagen that Bugenhagen could
\"persevere a little longer in the name of God\". (Burkhardt, p. 145.)

**1232** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1325. **1233**

His father and master, Doctor Martin Luther.

May the Lord be with you forever and ever, dearest Father, who begat me
for Christ through the gospel. I am now producing the fruit that God
intended. But because I fear that the former messengers may have
deceived me, for it did not appear from your letter, which I received
through Matthew 1), that my two letters from Hamburg were handed over to
you, - now receive the history and account of my preaching ministry
here, which I have written quite carefully, namely as follows: After I
had come here through the help of the most illustrious Prince of
Lüneburg 2),^3)^ I wrote to you the next day, namely Dionysii \[Oct.
9\]. I first began to doubt for several days what kind of fruit I would
produce in this place; I had reasons to doubt and was even challenged,
although I was brilliantly received in all respects by this city. ^4)^
Now, at last, God has begun to show me that my work will not be without
fruit, since not a few are beginning to love the Gospel and to attend
the sermons even on weekdays, and nowhere have I seen among religious,
both monks and nuns, a favor that seemed to fall more to me than here.
For the whole Franciscan convent accepts the Gospel, and the convent of
the preachers does not seem to resist; the third convent is that of the
virgins, who are called \"the blue sisters\" 5). In this convent, all
the virgins, both the older and the younger ones, have changed the upper
garment and the veil 6) by which they were at least unattractive, and
they walk like bourgeois women. The other garments underneath they have
as before, for they are respectable garments and a skirt almost like
yours in the Augustinian order, so that they can go out to the sermons,
and so are safe.

1\) Matthäus Dillius or Delius, now second teacher, and 1537 Rector of
the Johanneum in Hamburg. - Both letters of Bugenhagen and the mentioned
letter of Luther are missing.

2\) Duke Ernst, the Confessor.

3\) Here Burkhardt offers: *venerabili* instead of: *venerum*.

4\) Upon his arrival, he was led by two councilmen to \"the Doctorei\",
which was assigned to him as an apartment. In the evening he was
deliciously entertained. On the following day the three mayors, Dietrich
Hohusen, M. Gerd van Holte and Joh. Hülpe, welcomed him in his apartment
and honored him as a gift an ohm of wine, a fat ox and two tons of
Hamburg beer.

5\) The Begrünen or Beghinen, whose task was nursing the sick and
burying corpses, especially dressing the dead.

6\) By *peplurn* here will be understood the thick curtain with which
the Begins covered their faces.

from the mockery of the children. All of them seem to be favorable to
the Gospel, and they have not reserved any superstitions from their
order, or rather from their disorder. All these monastic clergy, both
women and men, are free to leave their religious habit and become
married, which some have already done and live quite respectably. I now
urge this against all, that those should not be without laws who demand
an honorable life, who wish to remain in the monastery either for a time
or forever, so that Satan does not one day cause trouble for the Gospel
through idle people. And it is precisely this that those who preside
over the monasteries, the *Garri Anus*, *Pejor* and *Maystro*, 7) that
is the Master, demand and want the most, people who are certainly much
too good to deserve these names. Moreover, there is a virgin convent of
Benedictine order, two miles from here, in the Duchy of Holstein, 8) in
which the virgins, except for the outward appearance of dress and the
chanting of psalms, yet not out of the order of the prescribed ones,
have left nothing of nunhood with them, even against the will of the
provost. The superior (*Domina*) and two virgins have listened to my
sermons here for several weeks, twice conversed with me and once dined
with me. She is there a learned instructor (*magistra*) of all in the
Gospel, and has already sent out six into matrimony, one of whom is the
wife of the burgher who is here appointed administrator of my house 9),
a very beautiful and sedate woman who already bears the fruit of
marriage with her. That matron has only asked whether she may remain in
this ungodly larva until she has advised all of hers; for she fears that
through this appearance she would give an example to others who are
still willing to push their noble virgins into such Vulcan caves. I
advised her to stay. She is anxious to consult as soon as possible the
two friends whom she had taken to me, until, after all or many had been
taken out, she could follow herself. She fears nothing more than that
the convent will remain a convent. But of this only so much. We have
already begun to talk about the schools, and about the care of the pre-

7\) Common names for guardian, prior and mestersche, head of the
convent.

8\) Reinbeck, a Cistercian convent. Prioriu was Anna von Plesse.

9\) The senior Diedrich Bodecker, formerly a Dominican in St. John\'s
Monastery.

**1234** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1325. **1235**

and the care of the poor. Those who were sent to me last Sunday \[Oct.
25\] in the name of the council and the entire citizenry asked me to
preach about the schools in the evening. This I did, of course, since I
would otherwise do it at another time of my own free will. In the
following week, God willing, we will get closer to the matter. But since
I fear, my dear father, that I will have more trouble here between the
council and the citizens than was the case in Brunswick, even though it
was more than enough there as well, why was I sent here, and am forced
by obedience to our most noble prince, the Elector, to return
immediately to an unjustified matter? It would have been better that I
had not come here through so many dangers on the journey, in order
rather to put everything into turmoil than to establish peace. You did
not obtain a respite from the prince through your letters. For so his
Serene Highness wrote to me in Brunswick, which I read on the day before
Michaelmas \[Sept. 28\]: We want you to leave there as soon as possible
for Hamburg, and you will have to finish the matter before Martinmas or
at the latest two weeks thereafter. I rather believe that through your
letter you have given the Prince the reason for this, so that I would be
forced to return sooner. If I were free to return immediately, I would
not need an admonisher. If I were to stay here the whole winter, I do
not believe that I would accomplish enough. Therefore, I ask you, in
accordance with the letter of this senate, 1) to write to the most noble
prince, and even, what he likes to suffer, to prescribe a time by which
you will not give advice for my hasty return, but advise this cause of
the holy gospel of Christ, so that the prince may rejoice, so that you
and the brothers may rejoice, so that Pomeranus may rejoice that I have
not been here in vain. Moreover, my dear father, see not only the
distress of this cause, which alone should move 2c., but also mine and
that of my family. For it is not safe for me to go away when it pleases
me 2) because of the ambushes on the roads that may be laid for me
because of the gospel proclaimed in these places; let alone the
inconvenience of the time. What should I do with my

1\) The next following document.

2\) or perhaps anch: \"dem Churfürsten\"; in Latin only: *quando libet*.

n pregnant woman who, if God gives grace, will come down at the
beginning of March 2)? 2c. But if it should please you that a shorter
time should be granted by the prince (for the petitioners do not
prescribe a time, but the letter written to the prince is like yours,
and there is nothing else in it), then you must remind the prince that
his Serene Highness should not find it a burden to be asked again, if it
should be necessary, until the work of the Lord is accomplished this
winter. I ask you to write quite diligently to the Prince, and what God
is doing through me now. You understand the matter, only that you take
care 2c. If now the messenger should again bring such a letter as
before - O over me wretched, in what distress I would get! Perhaps you
are surprised that I do not indicate in the letters that I am worried
about the parish office there, even though I write often. But what
should I be concerned about, since you are a pastor? You have decided
that you would rather work yourself to death than let me go free; you
promised me that earlier. There is no need for you to recommend our
Matthew to me any further; I will do for him what I have already done
for our Philip by letter. God help your visitation. I have left writings
with Diaconus John 4) to be handed over to the visitators. Take care of
the starrer at Beltitz, 5) who is absent, and of his Diaconus. Greet
your fellow visitators, Hans Metsch and Hans Taubenheim, from me and let
them know all these matters of mine, if there is leisure to do so. I
wish our Michael Stiefel luck as the twofold successor of the bishop of
Lochau. Commend me to my mistress, the Duchess Ursula, and her two
virgins, and let her know the story of my nuns who are here by telling
it to her. You were quite right to write to me about the danger of your
little Hansen and, if you want to suffer it, mine and his, our Barbara,
so that no one else, with his lies stitched together from it, as it is
wont to happen, would like to put something on me. Here in the vicinity,
as they say, many warriors are staying these days, about whom there are
many different opinions, and many say that they are in the Brandenburg

3\) *Martius Adria*; the *Cisio Janus* for early March. Bugenhagen\'s
wife gave birth to a dead son in Easter week 1529.

4\) Mantel; not Rörer, as the Erl. Briefw. states.

5\) Johann Boldewan.

**1236** Letters from the year

. No. 1325. 1326. **1237**

> Mark will invade, some, at the instigation of Minkwitz, others, the
> whale 2c.

Certain people have said that that Christian 1) is doing something, I
don\'t know what. And those at Salzwedel (*Soldwedelii*) are said to
have broken off the dwellings they had outside the city for fear of
enemies. Yesterday some said that the men of war had not received their
pay, and therefore, since this nerve is not present, the enervated will
be easily separated. A certain doctor told me that three weeks ago, I
don\'t know where, princes had met, ours, the Margrave, the Brunswick
2c., and that they had gone away with enraged tempers; therefore, our
Elector is now gathering an army; but since you have written nothing
about this, I consider it a lie. Please, write to me about it. May God
be more merciful to us than that this should happen. Fare well with your
beloved wife and sons, with D. Jonas, D. Stackmann, D. Augustin, our
deacons, Cruciger, Hohendorf, 2) Benedict Pauli, Christian, Lucas 2c.

Your Johann Bugenhagen Pomeranus.

**No. 1326 .**

Hamburg. November 1, 1528.

**The Council of Hamburg to Luther.**

> The council asks Luthern to grant Bugenhagen another leave of absence.
>
> The original is in the Weimar Archives, 0, p. 153. HHH 1. Printed by
> Burkhardt, p. 148 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 20 f. We give the
> text after Burkhardt.

a\. In Lower Saxony language.

> The bailiffs are to receive all good things, valuable, highly
> respected, and respectable here, favorable good things. We consider J.
> a. w. of the anghekorden getruwen vlytes, so J. a. w. vnße vnde the
> vnßen written vnde muntliche forderinge by the durchluchtigsten
> hochgeboren fursten vnde Hern, Hern Johan Hertogen tho Sasszen sie.
> They, and the commoners, the mayors, the council and the community of
> the city of Wittemberge, have demanded that the most illustrious
> highborn prince, H.H. Johann Bugenhagen, and the town\'s mayor, be
> summoned to the
>
> 1\) The expedition of Christian II of Denmark did not take place until
> 1531, after he had regained the favor of his brother-in-law, Emperor
> Carl V, by resigning to the papal church in 1530. In the process, he
> fell into captivity in 1532.
>
> 2\) Mayor in Wittenberg. Cf. Tischreden, cap. 26, 62, St. Louis
> edition, vol. XXII, 824.
>
> The first part of the trade is still in such a way that it is not
> possible to find the right evangelical preacher\'s office and the
> reformation of the abuses, which are demanded of him by the principals
> of the church. In the trade first of all, there is still a lack of
> such a thing, that the church, by the people (of whom God will be
> remembered), as it exists among us, is in such a way that the church,
> with its embroidered term, is in the same way as the church itself,
> and the church itself is in the same way as the church itself. The
> affirmation of this law against the law of the land, the right of the
> law and the affirmation of the law of the earth 3) and the necessity
> of the two and other articles of the law, so that they may be easily
> executed, that many things are and will become more difficult, so that
> the things begun in the market will be done with the help of the time,
> and so that the time will be used to establish the business in this
> good city, because it is open 4). w. nye hie thor 5) stede gekomen
> were. Wente nhu to godes erhen alle syner churf. g. lande vnde stede
> vnde sunderlinges syner churf. g. lofflike vniuersetet tho Wittenberg
> mit ßo wythberompten 6) gelerten, ßo mennichfoldlich vorsorgeth, 7)
> dat ock eyne rumhe tidt des affwesweswes vilgemelten Hern Joannis
> Pomerani darsuluest gar weynich leiten vnde nicht allein in dußer
> guden stadt den ock bybelegen konigkrichen, The princely courts,
> lands, and estates of the city are therefore fundamentally inferior to
> the ones that, by the grace of God, could be used and demanded for the
> best and most valuable things, so that J. a. w., by the grace of God,
> could be used and demanded for the best and most valuable things, so
> that J. a. w., by the grace of God, could be used and demanded for the
> best and most valuable things, so that J. a. w., by the grace of God,
> could be used and demanded for the best and most valuable things, so
> that J. a. w., by the grace of God, could be used and demanded for the
> best and most valuable things. a. w. by hochgemelter churf. g. ock
> gemeiner vniuersiteten und der stadt Wittenbarg nochmals geliken vlyt
> willen anwenden, dat ore churf. g. werde vnde erßamheide willen
> hochgemelten doctorem Pomeranum, ßo ilich vnaffgerichteder ßake von
> hir nicht forderen, den syner a. w. de tidt in gn. 9) under which he
> shall not alone write or order the ordinance of the church in the
> outer order, but shall order it with all due diligence, so that first
> and foremost he shall receive the priesthood and then the order of the
> church in the outer order.

3\) \"erdome\" (error) put by us instead of: \"erdeme\" in the prints.
Cf. further below: \"furstendömen\".

4\) It seems to us that \"effte\" should be read (if).

5\) \"hie thor\" put by us instead of: \"hiethor\" in the prints.

6\) \"withberompten\" (far-famed) put by us instead of:
\"withbenompten\" in the prints.

7\) Here, the printers mistakenly put a semicolon.

8\) Instead of: \"alßo\" will read \"alße\" (as).

9\) \"nhageuen\" (to yield) put by us instead of: \"nhagenen\".

**1238** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1326. 1327. **1239**

The office and all my reverence therein noted, and the preceding
congregations, principalities, lands, and estates in honor of which may
be regereth and used, that we have provided for ourselves tho J. a. w.
by sinful grace of grace from the hymns before the demand of god\'s will
and will with all thankfulness J. a. w. (de wy gode almechtich,
luckzelich beuelen) stedes vorschulden. Ghescreüen vnßem signet am dage
*Omnium Sanctorum Anno* 1528.

Burgermestere vnde Rathmanne der Stadt Hamborch.

b\. The same script translated into High German.

Our kind service with desire of all good before. Worthy, highly learned
and respectable gentleman, especially favorable, good friend! We thank
E.^1)^ A. W. for the faithful diligence, so E. A. W. on our and ours
written and verbal request to the most noble, highborn prince and lord,
Mr. Johann, Duke of Saxony 2c. 2c., and the common university, as well
as the mayors, council and community of the city of Wittenberg, to
bestow the highly learned Mr. Johann Bugenhagen here. So, thanks be to
God, his A. W. has come here fresh and healthy, even without any
driving, with his A. W. servants, \[has\] started the right evangelical
preaching ministry and reformation of the abuses, therefore his A. W.
mainly (principalich) demanded here. In this business, however, everyone
is still so unskilled that his ministry among the diverse people (that
God wants to be remembered) that is present with us, in such a short
time, as his ministry by the high-minded Elector, with the date set for
his ministry\'s departure from here. Without further instruction from
God\'s Word, the presentation of the right truth and the removal of
errors, and what the necessity of the two and other articles would
demand, may accomplish so little that it would be and become much more
deplorable to cut off things so noticeably begun for the sake of brevity
of time with uncreated finality, and thus to cause more confusion than
harmony in this good city, than if his A. W. had never come to this
place. Since, to God\'s honor, all of his lordship\'s lands and cities,
and especially his lordship\'s praiseworthy university at Wittenberg,
have been so abundantly supplied with such widely renowned scholars that
even a considerable period of absence of the much-mourned Herr Joannis
Pome

1\) The \"I.\" in the original is to be resolved by \"Iwe\" - Ew., Eure.

rani suffered there very few, and not only in this good city, but 2)
also in nearby kingdoms, principalities, lands and cities, by thoroughly
pursuing the intended action, by divine grace something special would be
useful and beneficial for the best, and for the souls\' salvation as
well as for peace and harmony: therefore ask once again, E. A. W. at
hochgemeldter churf. G., also to the common university and the city of
Wittenberg to apply the same diligence once again, so that their churf,
Dignity and Honor do not want to demand the Reverend Doctorem Pomeranum
from here in such a hurried, unjustified matter, but 3) may yield to his
A. W. the time in grace, under which his A. W. may not only write or
order a constant order of Christian activity in these places, but 4) may
thus constantly arrange with all necessity, that first and last God\'s
honor, his Reverend Doctorem Pomeranum\'s praise and honor, and all
people\'s honor, may be guaranteed. Praise and Glory, and all people\'s
blessedness may be increased from it, and the kingdoms, principalities,
lands and cities, together with their inhabitants, may be peacefully
governed and used, that we, in E. A. W., by special grace, bestowed by
God from Heaven for the furtherance of divine work, are undoubtedly
provided for, and will always owe it with all gratitude for E. A. W.
(which we blessedly command to God \[the\] Almighty). Written under our
signet on the day Omnium Sanctorum \[Nov. 1\] Anno 1528.

Mayor and Rathmannen of the city of Hamburg.

**No. 1327.**

(Wittenberg.) November 8, 1528.

**To Spalatin.**

Recommendation of a young man and news about the visitation.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. A 197 and in Cod*. Jen*. a,

Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II, p. 394; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 398 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIl, p. 22. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1135.

> To his exceedingly dear brother in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin,
> Visitator and Bishop in Meissen, the exceedingly faithful servant of
> Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! This young man, who was told to you before
by our Philip

2\) The \"den\", which the text offers here, must have (if it is not
read differently) here and following still twice the meaning of \"but\".

3\) In the prints: \"den\".

4\) Burkhardt: \"den\"; Erl. Briefw.: \"denn\".

**1240** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1327. 1328. 1329. **1241**

Melanchthon is recommended to you, my dear Spalatin, I again recommend
to you, only so that you do not forget him, to promote him at every
given opportunity to the office you seek; but I know that you will do it
even without remembrance. And I thank you for standing by the young man
who wanted to lead a German school.

We have nothing new here, except that Minkwitzen\'s war has melted away,
praise God, and his men of war have run out of each other, except for a
few who plague the citizens of Sonnenwalde. Our visitation has
progressed. What misery we see there, and how often we think of you, who
will find equal or greater misery among that hard Voigtland people!
Dear, let us ask the Lord to help us all and to be helpful even to the
extremely miserable bishops, he, our best and most faithful bishop
against all arts and violence of Satan, amen. [My]{.underline} Käthe and
Justus Jonas respectfully greet you. And be well in Christ, the victor
over all your temptations, amen. On the eighth of November 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 132 8.**

(Wittenberg.) , November 11, 1528.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Luther asks him to obtain an extension of the leave for Bugenhagen from
the Elector, and sends the two letters No. 1325 and 1326, also the
letter of the Council to the Elector, which was sent to Luther.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, 0.152. Manuscript in *Cod.
chart.* 452. f. *Goth*. Printed in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 399 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 49.

*Grkatiam et pacem* in Christo. Respectable, Most Reverend Doctor! Here
is a messenger sent from Hamburg voig Rath und Er Johann Pommer, to ask
for further and longer time full of my gracious Lord, as you may hear
from enclosed writings. Although I have previously written to the good
man that he should not be so anxious about the time set, because
necessity and God\'s word demand otherwise; for our gracious Lord is
undoubtedly not inclined to do so. Lord is undoubtedly not minded to
hinder God\'s word, where

it is necessary to advise his, the Pomeranian\'s, person longer: but the
man does not have peace until he is assured of it by our Lord himself.
Lord himself of this. Therefore, it is my friendly request that you send
a letter to him from our Lord, in which it is requested that he return
as soon as he can and wants to, but provided that he does not harm and
hinder the word and work of God with his haste, but, if necessity so
demands, has the power to stay there longer, as E. A. will well know how
to do, and to send it with this messenger. Hereby commanded by God. On
the day of St. Martin \[Nov. 11\] 1528.

E. A.

willing

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1329 .**

(Wittenberg.) November 11, 1528,

**To Spalatin.**

Luther sends a letter from Argula von Staufen and gives news about the
visitation.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 259. Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II. Bl. 394 b; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 400 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 24. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1136.

> To his brother in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the extremely faithful
> servant of Christ in the Gospel.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I am very busy, I did not want to
let this school teacher, who was recently recommended to me by you and
is returning to you, come to you empty-handed. Of course, there is
nothing I could write, since I wrote everything in my last letter. I am
sending the letter from our Argula to you, so that you may read it
instead of a letter from me, and see what the extremely godly woman
tolerates and suffers. My Käthe greets you respectfully with your little
Eva and your extremely dear Hindin.

During our visitation in the Wittenberg district, only up to now have
all the pastors found themselves in harmony with their peasants, but the
people have been sluggish to the Word and Sacrament. Pray for us. On the
day of Martini \[Nov. 11\] 1528.

Martin Luther.

**1242** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1330 to 1333. **1243**

**No. 1330.**

(Wittenberg.) November 24, 1528.

**To Michael Stiefel in Lochau.**

Luther asks him for news and expresses his surprise that he does not
claim his debt.

Printed by Buddeus, p. 59; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 40t and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 24. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1138.

Grace and peace! I am sending you, my dear Michael, what belongs to you,
as you will see from the enclosed letter. I wonder, however, what it is
that you do not write anything to us or ask us to do anything, as if you
had forgotten ours, since you know very well that we still have money
that is due to you, which you should demand, unless you have found some
treasure besides your wife and children. Therefore, write immediately
and indicate whether the marriage still pleases you, and at the same
time pray for me that my faith will not cease. Fare well in Christ. The
day before Catharina \[Nov. 24\] 1528. Martin Luther.

**No. 1331.**

Wittenberg. November 25, 1528.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2235, annex, no. 8.

**No. 1332.**

(Wittenberg.) November 25, 1528,

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Duke Georg sent Luther\'s answer (No. 1323) together with a copy of
Luther\'s letter to Link to the Elector and demanded his intervention
against Luther. The Elector sent the letters to Luther through Brück,
who was traveling to Wittenberg at the time, and asked him to send him
an answer that he could deliver to the Duke. Luther gave this answer by
the present letter, which, however, he somewhat expanded and softened at
the request of the Elector. The thus modified letter was sent to Duke
George. Therefore, there are [two originals of]{.underline} this letter,
one in the archives at Weimar, the other in the archives at Dresden.

According to the original in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* p. 71, 6.
no. 18. 7, printed in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 404, with the wrong date:
\"November 30,\" and likewise in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 52.
According to the original in the Main State Archives in Dresden, locat
7268, fol. 32, printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 55, no. 78 (not
according to the Weimar copy, as De Wette states); in Walch, vol. XXI,
270 and in Seidemann\'s \"Lutherbriefe,\" p. 36. We give the text of the
first redaction, the changes in notes.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Johans, Duke
> of Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have received E. C. F. G.\'s letter together with the complaint
of Duke Georgen of Saxony, a copy of which is my letter to D. Wenceslaum
Linken, as if I had let it be known that I considered him 1) too low,
that he should ask me for an answer. herewith the copy of the answer I
gave to Duke Georgen, which I will leave at this time as well, and it
was also quite proper for me to give such an answer to S. F. G.\'s
writing, as I do not know any other way; but that I should consider him
too low to ask me, will not, whether God wills it, be found in my
answer. 2) Methinks he has thought himself too great and has not written
to me as Duke George. However, it is necessary, I can still answer more
to S. F. G.\'s writings, but I do not know how to do it, as the matter
stands. I am willing and obliged to serve E. C. F. G.. God keep E. C. F.
G. mercifully, amen. On the day of Catharine \[Nov. 25\] 1528.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1333.**

(Wittenberg.) November 26, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

From the visitation and two marriage cases.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum*, Ms. 26, fol. 270. Printed by Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 395; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 403; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 51 and (entirely German) by Walch, vol. XXI, 1137.

1\) Instead of \"him\": S. F. G.

2\) Instead of the following, the second redaction continues thus:
\"Thus I have written to His Fl. I have written to His Grace in such a
reply that H.F.G. will undoubtedly inquire from those who have received
and handed such notes, even without my knowing, what such writing is.
However, if it should be necessary, I can answer more to H. F. G.\'s
writing. I would like to ask for this, however, because if I also have
to report my need, no one can blame me for it. E. C. F. G. to serve\"
2c.

**1244** Letters, from the year

1528\. no. 1333. 1334. **1245**

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> bishop of the church in Zwickau, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! I wonder what it is that you seem to know
nothing at all about the visitation of the churches, my dear houseman,
since I know nothing else than that you yourself are a comrade and one
of the visitators of this region 1) with Spalatin, Dolzig and Planitz,
and I had hoped that you would have begun the visitation long ago. We at
least have already spent almost a month with visitations in our part.
Also, your region is not indicated by the prince as being in our
district. Everywhere Satan is Satan, but we hope for good, although the
contempt of the word is great. 2)

The marriage case with the virgin, who got engaged behind the knowledge
and will of her step- and right parents 2c., I see in such a way that
the journeyman or beadle sought money, and thus wanted to steal the
child from the parents secretly, which example is no good at all.
Therefore I would do according to the word of God in this matter, and
let the parents keep their right here, and such a thief of the
journeyman should be punished as an example to the others, and the maid
should also have a distemper; because where this would break down (as
before), \[no\] 3) alum would keep his child.

I give the blind man and the blind woman together in God\'s name,
considering the journey of dumb sins and other mischief. Whether
children were born of it, or it would be difficult to feed them, one
must accept it as an accident, to praise and honor God. Such a case
rarely happens, like another accidental evil. Perhaps God is trying our
faith in this way, eight also, so that we can find a job, so that such
blind persons can be trained. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Thursday after
Elizabeth \[Nov. 26\] MDXXVII.

From the heart, your Martin Luther.

1\) However, Hausmann (No. 1276) was initially taken into consideration
as a visitator, but later he was dispensed with; Joh. von Dolzig was
also not a visitator of this district; Christoph von Planitz, however,
belonged to the visitators of the Thuringian district.

2\) As far as the letter is Latin, the following is German.

31 This word is missing in the original.

**No 1334.**

Wittenberg. November 26, 1528.

**Luther, Metsch and Pauli to the Elector John of Saxony.**

The visitators of the Churkreis ask to leave Hans von Taubenheim with
them.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Ji, fol. 54b. A 5, 1528. 33.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 450 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 27.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince! Ew. churf. G. is ready with all will
beforehand to render our owed, subservient services. Most gracious Lord!
The honorable House of Taubenheim 4) has indicated to us from a letter
Johann Riedtesel sent to him, as if your lordship had been informed that
we would be finished with the visitation of the districts, which we were
ordered to do, on Elisabeth \[November 19\], therefore your lordship
would demand and humble him to the land accounts. Thereupon we ask your
Lordship to know that only up to now the district of Wittenberg has not
yet been completely settled due to many inaccuracies, and find that good
caution and diligence must be used in all places. Thus, the church
accounts are presented to us very darkly and erroneously, and there is
no one among us who understands them according to necessity. Should we
not have our friend from Taubenheim with us, we would be spoiled and
would have to deal with the matters for a longer time. Therefore, our
submissive request to the Lord Mayor, where it may be with honor and
without special disadvantage to the Lord Mayor, is that the Lord Mayor
allow von Taubenheim to remain with us until the end of our visitation.
We are quite willing to do this for the sake of E. churf. G. in all
submissiveness about the duty to deserve. Date Wittenberg, Thursday
after Elisabeth (26 Nov.) Anno 1528.

> E. churf. G. unterthänige gehorsame Martinus Luther, Doctor. Hans
> Metzsch, Captain. Benedictus Pauli,

Licentiate at Wittenberg.

4\) Taubenheim, the Laudrentmeister, was attached to the visitation
commission for accounting, and for the time after the visitation he had
already been recalled to the state accounts. At this request, the
Elector left him until the end of the visitation. - Riedtesel was the
churf. director in Weimar.

5\) \"Zehren\" - Zehrung, costs. The Erl. Briefw. has added a question
mark to this word.

**1246** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1335. 1335. 1337. **1247**

**No. 1335.**

(Wittenberg.) 26.1) November 1528.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther sends him letters from Augsburg, complaining about his
challenges; also von Brück \"s presence in Wittenberg.

Handwritten in Gotha, Cod. A, 1048, fol. 3b. Printed in Aurifaber, vol.
II, p. 3955; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 405, with the date: \"November
30,\" and also in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 28. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1139.

> To his exceedingly dear brother M. Philipp Melanchthon, the
> exceedingly faithful \[man\] in the work of Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I am sending letters here, which are
addressed to you as well as to M. Lucas 2) and have lain with me for a
long time; the Chancellor 3) will tell you the other. You shall tell
your Lucas that here are gloves and a black cap, sent from Augsburg with
other things; if he should find in his letters to whom they should be
given, let him write it. For we have received what is ours, but I have
not wanted to open his letters. My temptation has afflicted me today,
please, pray for me as I pray for you, that my faith may not cease in
this sighting. We honored the chancellor in the Saxon manner; your
family is healthy, and we all are. My Käthe greets you reverently and
wishes your return. ^4)^ May Christ be with you and may you also
remember me, amen. May all our people be with you in good health. On the
day after Catharine \[Nov. 26\] 1528.

> Your Martin Luther.

I wanted to send the letters of Erhard from Holstein so that you would
remember to help him elsewhere. I see that we are all becoming spiteful,
but Christ be ours and with us, amen.

1\) See the last note to No. 1206, where we proved that *altera post*
should be resolved by \"the day after\", not by: \"on Monday after\".

2\) Probably Lucas Edenberger from Edenbergen near Augsburg, who had
gone to the Electoral Court as an educator in May of this year.

3\) Chancellor Brück, who was in Wittenberg around this time, and
perhaps took this letter with him together with the letter No. 1332,
which he had to receive from Luther according to the order of the
Elector (No. 1339) and to deliver personally.

4\) Melanchthon was on the visitation.

**No. 1336.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of November) 1528.

**To Michael Stiefel in Lochau.**

Luther expresses his joy about Stiefel\'s marital happiness and
apologizes for not being able to come to the Schoesser\'s wedding in
Lochau.

Printed by *Buddeus, p.* 60; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 405 and in Erl.
Briefw;, vol. VII, p. 29. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1141.

Grace and peace! I am very happy, my dear Michael, that you like your
wife and children so much, and that she loves you; Christ keep this
agreement on both sides forever. By the way, you may tell the castle
that I can in no way be present at his wedding, because there is no day,
no hour free. I had hoped that we would be in the neighboring Schweinitz
at that time and thus could steal half a day for his honor, but the
business of the visitation has grown in such a way that the whole way we
had planned is thrown over. Therefore, you will excuse, not my good
will, but my distress. And greet your Eva with the fruits ordered to
you. In the evening, having received your letter. 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1337.**

> (November 1528.)

**To Balthasar Thüring, pastor in Coburg.**

Postscript to a letter that does not exist.

The original is in Coburg, in the Haus- und Staatsarchiv. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 151 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 30.

Also, dear Mr. Baltzer, the good man Er Johann desires, 5) that after
the investiture, if it could be, he would be allowed to move in again
quickly, because he is in need of food, and has not yet filled his
dinglein, so that he can bring out his wife easily; he would like not to
let much food go, so that he would not be annoying to the Franconian
\"squire\" and squires, so that they should put so much on him first.

5\) Cf. no. 1283.

**1248** Letters from the year 1528. no. 1338. 1339. 1340. **1249**

**No. 1338.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. December 1528.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther asks him to exhort the Zwickau council to refrain from
intervening in matrimonial matters, since the Elector has reserved them
for his office.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol. 29. Printed in Aurifaber, vol. II,
p. 396; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 406 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.
30. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1140.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> Bishop of Zwickau, the servant of the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! I beg you, my dear householder, to suffer
this act of your council until the prince has decreed otherwise; but you
may privately and publicly ask that they henceforth do nothing of the
kind, because the prince refers all difficult marriage questions to his
office until a certain form is established, as the instruction given to
the visitators expressly contains, as you will see; therefore you will
admonish them that they, for fear of your prince, henceforth avoid such
examples. You will have given them credit for it once, but they do not
want to give cause to accuse you again. I am glad that you have been
relieved of the office of a visitator for the sake of your Zwickauers.
There is nothing new with us. Only pray for me; call upon Christ with
petitions and in Him be at ease. December 2, 1528.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1339 .**

Weimar. December 2, 1528.

Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

The Elector asks Luthern to copy the answer drafted for Duke George with
the changes made and to send it back. (Cf. No. 1332.)

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, fol. 30. Q.
Printed in Burkhardt, p. 151 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 31.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! After we have
sent you through our chancellor, Doctor Brück, when he was in
Wittenberg, a copy of a writing which you should have given to Doctor
Wenceslaen Linken, which copy was sent to us by our cousin, Duke Jörgen,
and next to it

to make your answer to it and to send it to us, as he brought us your
answer and read it out. Since he then reported to us that you had
submitted the same answer for alteration, we have made a small change in
it, but to the extent that it is not contrary to your writing and
opinion, but that it also contains and maintains the same, only that it
is described with a few other words, so that our cousin may not easily
be induced to write and dispute further. And so that such an answer is
your handwriting, it is our gracious request that you rewrite it in your
own hand according to the copy enclosed, seal it with your seal 1) and
send it to us by this messenger, and we will then have it immediately
made out to our cousin and written next to it. In your gracious opinion,
we do not want you to do this, and do us a gracious favor. Date Weimar,
Wednesday after Andreä \[Dec. 2\] Anno 1528.

**No. 13 40.**

(Weimar.) 4. December 1528. 2)

Chancellor Brück to Luther.

Brück reports that in the meantime a letter of Link to the younger
prince has been received, for the sake of the letter matter, and asks
whether under these circumstances the answer given to the Elector (and
thus to Duke Georg) should remain.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, H, fol. 30. Q. Printed
by Burkhardt, p. 152 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 32.

My kind, quite willing service before. Venerable and highly respected,
favorable dear Doctor and Godfather! My most gracious lord writes to you
3) for the sake of the answer, concerning Duke Jörgen, as you will hear
from S. F. G.\'s letter and will know how to keep to it. However, I do
not want to keep your honor from the fact that Doctor Wenceslaus Link
has now written to my gracious young lord 4) for the sake of the same
matter.

1\) On the second original mentioned in No. 1332 is Luther\'s seal, on
which the rose is only indistinctly visible, but above it the letters M.
L. are all the more clearly visible. (Seidemann, \"Lutherbriefe\", p.
35.)

2\) According to Burkhardt, this time determination is *in tergo*.

3\) According to this, it seems as if the previous letter of the Elector
was sent to Luther only two days later than his date laMet, namely at
the same time with this letter. Luther\'s answer for Duke George (No.
1332) was sent to him only on December II.

4\) Duke Johann Friedrich.

**1250** Letters from the year 1528. No. 1340 to 1343. **1251**

> written and reported, in which manner Duke Jörge had his secretary
> Thomassen von der Heide now at Nuremberg with advertisement to the
> council there, and what he gave him in reply, which report I send to
> your honor by order of my gracious young lord here \[Copei\] 1). The
> traitor is said to have been Doctor Scheurl, whom God forgive, for our
> princes have ever shown too much mercy against such and such. 2)
> Doctor Wenzel runs almost long in the answer, to that, that he could
> not have avoided it almost well, because Thomas von der Heide saw our
> handwriting. How your honor now thinks about the previous report that
> the answer should be, your honor will know from your high intellect to
> consider, because for (vir) my foolishness I would think that it is
> again with such an opinion, as also attributed to my lord, and with
> the handwriting of Thomas von Heide. Lord, and to leave it at the
> Drava 3). For if Duke Jörg ever does not want to let up on such a
> warning, what moves him afterwards and is indicated, then he has given
> great cause for it, and wants to keep it highly and have it so. I do
> not want to let this opinion go unreported to Your Honor as my dear
> lord and dear godfather, and I am willing to serve him in any way I
> can. (Weimar, Fridays of Barbary \[Dec. 4\] 1528.)

**No. 1341.**

Milau. 6 December 1528.

**Joseph Levin Metzsch to Luther**

(Regest.)

Metzsch wanted to marry a relative, Catharina, the daughter of Günther
von Bünau zu Elsterberg, which was also permitted by the Elector Johann.
About this marriage, Metzsch had sought advice from Luther, who had
instructed him (in No. 1226) not to seek permission or dispensation from
the bishop in his case. Now new difficulties had arisen, in that the
jurists declared that children produced in a marriage that was
contracted in forbidden degrees without the permission of the pope or
his clergy were to be considered illegitimate according to the law. Now
he asks Luther to send out a short teaching on this matter in print. -
This, however, Luther had already done in 1522 with the \"Sermon on
Marital Life\", St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 598.

Printed in Weller, Altes und Neues, Vol. I, p. 119 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VII, p. 33.

1\) Supplemented by us. Burkhardt remarks: \"Completely illegible word
in your already difficult concept of D.Brück.\"

2\) namely when Scheurl was professor at Wittenberg, 1507 to 1512.

3\) \"Drava\" == threat.

**No. 1342.**

Wittenberg. December 15, 1528.

**To Margarethe N.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2032.

**No. 13 43.**

Schweinitz. December 30, 1528.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About a marriage case and Duke George\'s writing Against Luther, which
will receive their response.

Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 118; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 408 and
by Schirrmacher, Briefe und Acten zu der Geschichte des
Religionsgesprächs zu Marburg, 1876, p. 23 (after a Rostock codex).

Grace and peace in Christ! I very much wish that this would be
determined and decided by the authorities, that if one of the spouses
were lepers, the other would be free, with reservation of the right of
maintenance and the promise of the same for life. I would decide with a
good conscience that such people are free, since also according to the
Mosaic law it is determined that a leper is civilly dead and should be
separated from the household. But if we now want to judge the same, who
will carry it out? who will keep it? since our secular regime sets the
opposite. If he therefore wants to marry at his peril, he may marry
(that is my opinion) with a clear conscience, if everything else is
right. But we do not promise him protection and defense. We concede the
hidden right; from where he obtains the public right, he may see for
himself, since it is not in our power. That is my judgment. There is no
news. I am busy with the visitation. Duke George has written against me;
you will see the news at mass. ^4)^ The same duke has separated himself
from our duke in the joint minting of the coin; likewise, he is breaking
the general agreement 5) of the princes; he thinks

4\) In the New Year\'s Fair in Leipzig in 1529, Duke George\'s writing:
\"What shape we George, by the grace of God, Duke of Saxony 2c. Luther
des gedichteten Bündnisses halben in Schriften unerfindlich angegeben
und darauf unsere Antwort\", was thrown on the market. See St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XIX, Introduction, p. 21.

5\) We do not know what *forum* actually means here. Should it perhaps
refer to the coin association?

**1252**

Letters from the years 1528 and 1529. No. 1343 to 1347. **1253**

and does nothing but the very worst. I beseech thee, beseech Christ with
thy church, that he may cast down or take away this troublesome and
exceedingly pernicious instrument of Satan: for why doth he afflict our
very good Prince, and afflict heaven and earth without a cause? Amen,
Amen. I again come forth against him,^1)^ as you shall see. Pray, pray,
it is time. Fare well in the Lord. At Schweinitz. On Wednesday after the
birth of Christ 1529 \[30 Dec. 1528\].

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1344.**

(Wittenberg.) (Towards the end of December) 1528.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1790, annex, no. 15.

**No. 1345.**

Wittenberg. December 31, 1528.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1816, anh., no.22.

**No. 1346.**

Schweinitz. January 7, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request for the citizen of Mühlhausen, Michael Koch, to be allowed to
settle in the Elector\'s lands.

From the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108.41, printed in the Leipzig
Supplement, p.56, no. 80; in Walch, vol. XXI, 270 ; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p.416 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 60.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! 2) Michel Koch, a citizen of Mühlhausen, has once again asked me
to petition E. C. F. G. on his behalf, after the intercession he desired
to receive in Mühlhausen did not succeed.

1\) By the writing \"Of secret and stolen letters\", St. Louis edition,
Rd. XIX, 518, No. 100.

2\) Here we have deleted a superfluous \"me\".

help the council of Mühlhausen that E. C. F. G., considering his, his
wife\'s and poor children\'s misery, will graciously allow himself to be
taken into E. C. F. G.\'s care. C. F. G.\'s lands and to nourish him
safely, as E. C. F. G. will further hear from his enclosed letter: thus
I have had to take pity on his misery and write to E. C. F. G. on his
behalf. E. C. F. G. will know how to graciously treat him. Hereby
commanded by God\'s grace. Zur Schweinitz, Dornstags nach Epiphan. \[7
Jan.\] 1529.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1347.**

Schweinitz. January 9, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

The Elector had ordered Metsch and Taubenheim, who were among the
visitators of the Electoral District, to accompany Margrave George of
Brandenburg on his journey to Silesia through the Electoral Lands. Now
all visitators ask the Elector to let them stay together, so that the
visitation can be continued. - This request was denied, and the
visitation was interrupted.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. Ji, fol. 55. A 6. 1529.
Printed in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. XX and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 98. The statement there that this letter is
also printed in Spalatin\'s correspondence of Neudecker and Preller is
erroneous.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord Johannsen, Duke of
> Saxony 2c.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince! Your electoral graces are subject to our
owed services: Obedience with will. Most gracious lord! Because we have
been in violation of the blessed work of the visitation at Schweinitz
ordered by your churf. G. and want to move to Herzberg, your churf.
graces have issued an order to us, Hans Metsch and Hans von Taubenheim,
that we accept Margrave Georgen, our gracious lord, at the border and
move from one hostel to the other through your churf. g.\'s lands, where
his princely grace would pass through. Grace would pass through.
Thereupon we have encountered an impediment to our intention, that we
depart, and announce to the one whom we have decided upon

**1254** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1347. 1348. **1255**

must have. For there was no means available to us by which we could have
given both orders at the same time. And yet the utmost necessity of the
order of the church service and the pastoral care of the poor admonishes
us, to the point of pitiful pity from the discovery of dangerous
inaccuracy, to persevere most diligently with the promotion of the work.
And may Your Lordship\'s humble opinion indicate that we hold, believe
and know that Your Lordship could not have ordered a better work than
the visitation, so there is also nothing that can weigh us down about
such work. And after we see that it is to be prevented by all the lists
of the enemy, so it is to Your Lordship our most humble and diligent
request and request that Your Lordship let us, where we are noted in the
work, and by some way others know how to order their business through
other persons, to remain unchallenged with each other. For where one way
allows us to be separated, we worry about one cause over the other and
so much that we would not want to come to it again in a long time. Thus
many souls would be missed, whom we hope to counsel by means of divine
grace. Your Lordship will graciously note our letter for the best. We
are indebted to Your Lordship for this in all loyalty. Date Schweinitz,
on Saturday after Epiphaniä *Dni* \[9 Jan. \] *Anno eiusdem* 1529.

> E. churf. G. unterthänige gehorsame Martinus Luther, Doctor. Hans
> Metzsch.
>
> Benedictus Pauli and House of Taubenheim.

**No. 13 48.**

(Wittenberg.) January 15, 1529.

**To Martin Görlitz, pastor in Braunschweig.**

Luther thanks for a gift of beer and reports his writing against Duke
George and the Catechism.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B. 24. n, fol. 180 and in *Cod. Rostoch*.
Printed in Innocent News, 1720, 894; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 125; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 417 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VII, p. 42.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1142.

> To the highly venerable brother, Mr. Martin Görlitz, the faithful and
> wise overseer of the church at Brunswick.

I was happy and grateful to receive your very pleasant and agreeable
letter, my dear Martin, not only because of the kindness it showed me,
but much more because of the news that it indicates that your church,
the work of our Pomeranus, is doing well. May Christ strengthen what he
has worked in all of us, amen.

I have written to Doctor Levin von Emden 1) and may you also thank him
for me many times over. Your Torgau beer has been well used and drunk
with such praise 2) as never before with me. For it has been reserved
and served only for me and the visitators, who could not praise it
enough above any they had ever tasted. But I, as a very fine farmer,
have never thanked you and your Emilie, indeed, as I am a householder
who does not care about things, I have forgotten and no longer knew that
it was in my cellar until my servant drew attention to it anew.
Therefore, even now I say great thanks for this certainly useful and
pleasant gift, and that for your fortune is very large and. too much.
Greet all your brothers, especially your Emilie and your son, namely the
exceedingly lovely Hind and her beloved Deer. May the Lord bless you and
make you grow into many thousands, both according to the seed of the
spirit and of the flesh.

I bravely answered Duke George, which I believe you have already seen,
so that his flatterers and worshippers would not become too confident,
hopeful and boastful. Now I am busy making the catechism 3) for the
unlearned peasants. You and yours pray diligently for me, and be well in
Christ. Given on January 15, 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

1\) Levin von Emden from Magdeburg was Stadtsvndicus of Braunschweig.

2\) Erl. Epist. : lute instead of: *laude*.

3\) This refers to the Large Catechism, which appeared in April; the
Small Catechism did not come out until May.

**1256** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1349. 1350. 1351. **1257**

**No. 13 49.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around mid-January?) 1529. 4)

**To Spalatin.**

From the visitation.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, 201. and in Cod*. Jen*. a, fol. 221. Printed by Buddeus, p.
80; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 424 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VII, p.
44. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1197.

> To his extremely dear brother, Magister Georg Spalatin, the faithful
> and completely sincere servant of God in the Gospel.

Grace and peace! We also wish to know what you are doing at the
visitation and what progress the matter has, my dear Spalatin, and it is
to be wondered why you are silent about it when you write. We command,
where it is necessary, a contribution; although it is only small, it
helps somewhat the poor priests who have two yokes (oxen) and arable
land; moreover, we strictly demand offering money (*offertorium*) from
each one. Incidentally, the appearance of the church is very miserable
everywhere, since the peasants learn nothing, know nothing, pray
nothing, do nothing but abuse freedom, neither confess nor communicate,
as if they had become completely free from religion. For thus they have
neglected their papist things, they despise ours, so that it is
frightening to contemplate the administration of the papal bishops. The
rest Bruno will tell you. Greet Eberhard and all the brothers, and pray
for me wretched man and sinner. Christ be with you.

Martin Luther.

**No. 13 50.**

Weimar. January 18, 1529.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector commands Luther to refrain from writing and pressing against
Duke George and to subject his other writings to the conventional
censorship.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, H, fol. 30. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 155 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 45.

1\) This letter, which De Wette has dated: \"Perhaps in February\", the
Erl. Briefw. in the middle

Our greeting before. Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! We inform you
that the Reverend Prince George, Duke of Saxony, our dear cousin, has
now had his dear councillors 2) here with us, and complains about the
booklet that you have recently issued against him 3). Because this is
something sharp, and it should be considered where such booklets should
be made and printed more, that it wants to bring about unfriendly will
between his love and us, moreover, that it is not useful, now from the
alliance, because we therefore with some, Our request is that you do not
print anything concerning our cousins or other princes and persons,
unless you have sent it to us beforehand and we have agreed to print it.
^4)^ But in other matters, in which you deal with Christian doctrine,
you will know how to abide by the order that went out from the former
Duke Friederich of Saxony, Elector, our dear brother blessed, that
nothing be printed unless previously overlooked by the Rector and some
others of our university. We did not want to leave this undisclosed to
you, and in all of this we offer you our complimentary opinion. Date
Weimar, Monday after Antoni \[18 Jan\] Anno 1529.

**No. 1351 .**

(Wittenberg.) January 21, 1529,

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther recommends the licentiate Premsel and the physician Ebeling
Alemann. From his writing Wider Herzog Georg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten, 1720,
p. 895; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 126; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 418 and
in Erl. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1143 (not 1113, as the Erl. Briefw.
has printed from De Wette).

January, because Bruno Brauer, the administrator of Brisger\'s house in
Wittenberg, delivered this letter, and on Jan. 20, Rörer writes to Roth:
\"Give my best regards to Mr. Spalatin (who was in Zwickau for
visitation these days), and tell him that I sent everything he asked of
me last week through our Bruno.\"

2\) namely the marshal Heinrich von Schleinitz zum Sathan (== Saathain)
and Wolf von Schönberg, Amtmann zu Meißen.

3\) Here we have deleted a superfluous \"itself\".

4\) The bailiff and the council of Wittenberg were also ordered in a
separate mandate to urge the printers to observe this regulation.

**1258** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1351. 1352. 1353. **1259**

The Alemann 1) are returning to us, my dear Amsdorf, and we thank God
that the plague not only died out, but was also so mild. My Käthe had
collected cress to send to you, but it is thwarted by the cold that has
set in; she will send at another time, if she can. Now I ask one thing,
that you send it in my name. The licentiate Premsel is finally trying to
practice his art; he has asked me to recommend him to you. I would have
done the same for Ebeling Alemann if I had not been prevented by chance.
But you will expend all the more effort and diligence for the good and
quiet man, as you know. However, he is seeking employment as a physician
in your city, and will go there if he can obtain it through you. Answer
me what you have arranged.

I believe you have seen Duke George\'s booklet against me and mine
against him. Our people also judge me to have treated this extremely
tyrannical enemy too unseemly and harshly, but I let it seem to me that
I have let him, who deserved much greater things through his manifold
rages, get away with a lot. It is written that the cause of the
Landgrave at Worms 2) stands a little better due to the efforts of our
Chancellor, praise and thanks be to God. I ask that you pray to the Lord
for me, and strongly urge your church to pray, because Satan is roaring,
raging and racing and attacking us from all sides. In Christ you are
well. January 21, 1529.

> Your Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1352 .**

Cassel. January 23, 1529.

**Otto von Pack to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 433, no. 842.

1\) Thomas, Ebeling and Heinrich Alemann; they were inscribed in
Wittenberg on January 13, 1528.

2\) In Worms on Dec. 30, 1528, the disputes between the Swabian League
and the landgrave, which had arisen as a result of the Pack quarrels,
were settled amicably through the mediation of Prince Frederick of the
Palatinate.

**No. 1353.**

Wittenberg. January 30, 1529.

**To the City Council of Memmingen.**

Luther recommends Johann Schmelz, who is studying in Wittenberg,
expresses his joy that the city has accepted the Gospel, and warns
against the red spirits.

This letter was first published by Joh. Georg Schelhorn from the
autograph, which is in the Memmingen archive, in the Reformation History
of the City of Memmingen, p. 139; from it in the Leipzig Supplement,
p.57.In Walch, vol. XXI, 272; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 419 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 61. From another (alleged) original at
Hildburghausen in the Meyer collection (formerly in the possession of a
Patrician family from Nuremberg) reported in the Deutsches Museum, vol.
I, Jena 1842, p. 336, by Ludwig Bechstein, who assumes that the letter
was written to the council of Nuremberg; then in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 56, p. XIX (as to the council of Nuremberg) and by De
WetteSeidemann, vol. VI, p. 99. - Since we consider the original at
Memmingen to be the real one, and since we find the readings of the
other original worse, we give the text according to the former.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, prudent, dear gentlemen! Johannes
Schmelz,^3)^ your relative, who is held here in the studio by E. E., has
asked me for this writing to E. E., after God has graciously counseled
your praiseworthy city with His holy Gospel, to admonish E. E. to keep
faithfully to it, and to diligently guard themselves from the erroneous
spirits. Although I am now well assured that God, who has begun such a
work with you, will also keep and preserve E. E. without me and without
my admonition, I have not despised Johann\'s request, nor have I
refrained from showing my will and service to E. E.; for it is truly, as
it now stands in the world, my greatest joy to hear where a city has the
divine word pure and diligently with it. Therefore my heartfelt prayer
is in God, the Father of all miserable people, that he may strengthen
and preserve you and all who have his dear word by his Spirit against
all the evil spirits and, as they are called, mad saints, whom the devil
now sends out everywhere, so that E.E. and your subjects may be found
pure, active, fruitful and blameless in his word, in his day and in the
future, amen.

3\) Schmelz is usually called M. Memminger. He died at the beginning of
1539 as schoolmaster at Grimma.

**1260** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1353. 1354. 1355.

**1261**

Please also, E. E. want to help us to do this with diligent prayer and
constant attention, so that we may all remain in faith and quiet in
peace. May Christ our Lord and Savior give us his blessing and grace,
amen. Please hold such writing in favor of me, and E. E. Johann Schmelz,
as he is truly honest, and by God\'s grace shall become a great man, for
the comfort and improvement of many people, amen. May God\'s grace be
with E. E. for the blessed regiment, Amen. At Wittenberg, on the
Saturday after St. Paul\'s conversion \[January 30\] 1529. Martinus
Luther.

**No. 1354.**

(Wittenberg.) January 31, 1529.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

Lament over the raging of the enemies of the gospel. About a northern
light. About one of Luther\'s illnesses.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Goth*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1720, p. 896; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 127 ; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 420 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 50. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1144. This evidence is missing in De Wette and in
Erl. Briefw., which relied on De Wette at all and also printed his
incorrect proofs (cf. no. 1351).

Grace and peace in Christ! That our tyrant 1) is furious, we also learn
from elsewhere, although there no Faber admonishes; but the more he
afflicts, the more the diligent prayer of a good man is necessary. 2)
For under the papacy we were not used to praying, since no one noticed
that Satan kept his own in peace; it was all a game and a joke. But now
that he has been stirred up by the stronger one, the

1\) \"The tyrant\" is Satan; the \"from elsewhere\" will refer to Duke
George; the one whom \"Faber admonishes\" is King Ferdinand, who, at the
instigation of Faber, his court preacher, had tightened the mandate of
August 20, 1527, by a decree of November 16, 1528, \"for the
exploitation of the new, damned, seductive and heretical teachings\" in
his hereditary lands.

2\) The preceding words: *quamquam Fabro nullo monente; quanto magis
urgente, quo magis opus est optimi viri sedula oratione* Walch
translates: \"if also no blacksmith said, how much more, since he\'s
treibet? and must therefore the honest man pray the more\'\". The
previous editors have taken it the same way, as their interpunction
shows, for they have a comma before *quanto* and a colon after
*urgente.*

comes upon thu \[Luc. 11,21. f.\], he rages and rages earnestly, and not
without cause, for he suffers much from us through the deprivation of
his weapons. Therefore let us be confident; he that is in us is greater
Jn. 4:4.\], who hath said, and saith yet \[Jn. 16:33.\], \"Be of good
cheer; I have overcome the world: in the world ye are afraid, but in me
ye have peace.\" Amen.

In our region there was a great northern light, by which the whole night
was illuminated, on Saturday after Epiphany \[Jan. 9\], at the ninth
hour, and it has been seen in many areas. What it means, God knows. It
is said to us \[Jer. 10:2\], \"You shall not be afraid of the signs of
heaven.\" The wicked may watch what they despise. I have been suffering
in my head for more than eight days; I am troubled by dizziness and a
dull sound; whether it be weariness or a temptation of Satan, I know
not. Pray for me, I pray that I may be strong in faith. Christ be with
you mightily and a sweet comforter, Amen.

I have received and handed over the Polish tablets (*tabulas*) and the
gilded letters. All our brothers greet you. On the last of January,
1529, Martin Luther.

**No. 1355.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. February 1529.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

Luther apologizes for his silence and invites Agricola to come to
Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rattzenb*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 96; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 421 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. Vll, p. 51.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother Johann Agricola, the
> faithful and diligent educator of the youth at Eisleben.

Grace and peace! Caspar Müller 3) reported to me that you are surprised
about my silence on your letter,^4)^ in which you gave me an account of
your sermon in Altenburg. But I believed for sure that you understood
sufficiently that I did not dislike your account. For otherwise

3\) Mansfeld Chancellor.

4\) No. 1303.

**1262**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1355 to 1358.

**1263**

I am guilty of nothing less than that I did not admonish you; since I
have not even raised any suspicion against you by the pleading of
others, I would suffer even less that this should happen through your
own letter. By the way, the fact that I write less often is due to the
fact that there is no necessity or useful reason for writing, and I am
otherwise already busy and overloaded with many things, and since I also
have a headache from time to time, I am somewhat negligent. This same
Caspar has also given me hope that you will come to us this Shrovetide;
but if you want this, it must happen next week. For on the eleventh we
will leave immediately to resume the work of visitation. ^1)^ Farewell
and greet Elsa and the little son together with the daughters. My Käthe
greets you respectfully, who, if God is gracious, will perhaps enter
childbirth after Easter. 2) Pray for us. On the first of February 1529.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1356.**

Wittenberg. February 1, 1529.

**To the Zerbst City Council.**

Luther sends Henry of Lemberg as a preacher.

The original is in the city archives at Zerbst. Printed in Sintenis\'
Denkschrift, p. 45; from it in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. 181 and
in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 100.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Zerbst, my favorable
> dear gentlemen and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! Your mayor,
who also spoke to me of your command on that occasion, has now again
asked me for a preacher to be sent to your city of Zerbst. So I have
spoken to the letter-writer Er Henrich von Lemberg and urged him to
accept such an office. He has consented to this and has joined your city
at your request. May E. W. try him and, if he is willing, accept him.
Please forgive me, E. W.

1\) Due to Luther\'s illness, this did not happen.

2\) Magdalena was born on May 4.

will let the same be ordered to her, as it is due, well knowing
Christian, both with quite entertainment and need. For I am willing to
serve E. W. and the whole city. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At
Wittenberg, Monday *prima Februarii* 1529.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1357.**

(Wittenberg.) February 12, 1529.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther thanked him for his favorable opinion of the writing of Wider
Herzog Georg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*, and in *Cod. Goth*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1720, p. 897; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 128; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 422 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 52. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1145.

Grace and peace! You have pleased me extraordinarily by your verdict on
my booklet against Duke George. For all of them unanimously condemn me
and do not care what he has sinned against me; they look at me, but at
him as if he were innocent. I do not show them your letter because they
want to condemn you also with me. I have been persuaded not to answer
your tyrant henceforth, because he himself also testifies that he does
not want to touch me henceforth. Extraordinary things are said here
about Ferdinand\'s tyranny and oppressions. Pray for me with yours that
the Lord may strengthen me and not leave me in the hand of Satan. May
the Lord Jesus uphold and bless you, Amen. February 12, 1529.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 135 8.**

(Wittenberg.) February 13, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Of the visitation; of the establishment of the church service; of
Luther\'s health conditions and of his writing Wider den Türken.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Francisceum*, Ms. 26, fol. 29 b. Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p.
97; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 129; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 422 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 53. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1369.

**1264**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1358 to 1361.

**1265**

> To the venerable brother in Christo, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> exceedingly faithful bishop of the church in Zwickau, his superior.

Grace and peace in Christ! I am extremely pleased, my dear householder,
that the visitation of yours has been accomplished so happily by the
grace of God. It is to be hoped that all the rest of the church\'s
necessities can be arranged in the same way in time.

The litanies are sung in the church in Latin and German; perhaps the
notes or the manner of both will be published. The fasts, the
excommunication and other important ceremonies will follow in due time,
although there are already enough for the beginning.

I have suffered from dizziness or from the head so far, except for what
the angel of Satan puts into work. You ask God for me, that He may
strengthen me in faith and His word.

Your Duke George I will no longer answer.

About the war with the Turk, I hope to publish a booklet 2) in a short
time; it would have already appeared, if the first sexters had not been
lost through the negligence of the servants; therefore, it was difficult
to \"find\" the train of thought and the first draft again; that is why
it has been delayed so much. My Käthe greets you respectfully, as do D.
Jonas and Philippus and all of us. We fear that Pommer will hardly
return before Pentecost, because his wife is expecting her birth around
Easter. Christ be with you, Amen. February 13, 1529. Yours, Martin
Luther.

**No. 1359 .**

Coburg. February 19, 1529.

**The visitators in Franconia to Luther and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

The preachers at Hildburghausen, M. Joh. Birnstiel and the Vicarius
Andreas Menser, have in their preaching

1\) The Erl. Briefw. reads after the original: *gravitatis ceremoniae*,
Schütze: *civitatis*; De Wette: *quaaedam tales*.

2\) \"On the War Against the Turk.\" St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 2108.

They have been quarreling with each other, making themselves unpopular
with the people and causing division in the congregation, so the
visitators have seen fit to remove them both. Now they are asking Luther
for a suitable preacher to be appointed there.

The original is at Coburg in the Haus- und Staats-Archiv. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 156 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p.55. -
Improvements: \"that they both have [nothing]{.underline} to improve\".
Instead of: \"über Last\" read: \"Ueberlast\".

**No. 1360 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 28, 1529.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Of Melanchthon\'s and Agricola\'s journey to the Diet of Speier, and
other news.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 98; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 423 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 57.

I believe that you know that a month ago the wife of Clsaus\^
Bildsenhauer\^ died, as is believed, from lack of marital duty.
Philippus has gone with the prince to the Imperial Diet in Speier, M.
Eisleben is called to the same; he goes with the same our prince. You
let your church pray, that is a worthy and necessary thing. Ferdinand is
deprived of Hungary, and, since he has been defeated by the voivode, he
has to fear the Turk, who, as they say, is attacking Germany in three
places with an enormous armament. Your bishop will perhaps be one of the
popes after this last one dies (according to my divination). I believe
that the last day is here. Fare well in Christ, and do not cease to pray
for me miserable ones. Sunday Oculi \[28 Feb\] 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1361**

(Wittenberg.) February 28, 1529.

**To an unnamed person.**

About a marriage case.

Printed in Schleußner, Anfänge des protestantischen Eherechts, in
Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte, VI, 413 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 57.

Grace and peace in Christo. Good, good friend! On the question of
marriage, this is my good opinion: I do not advise in any way that the
journeyman should divorce his wife.

**1266** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1361. 1362. 1363. **1267**

but to keep her in marriage, even if she was given to him against his
father\'s will or against the law of the pope. For although a child
should not be free against his father\'s knowledge, if it comes to this
and so far that the son sleeps with another\'s daughter, or gets her
pregnant, or is involved in the marriage, then the father\'s authority
has been too long outside, and the other\'s harm to his daughter is not
to be suffered. Father shall be father, if it is without harm and
disadvantage to another. Thus, according to the Pope\'s law, I do not
regard this marriage differently than if one impregnates a maid, because
this woman is free before God and may not be the wife of the first
husband, even though she is innocent as the deceived one, *et sic
titulus ille vel casus ille de ea, quae prius per adulterium polluta
est*, 1) has neither place nor reason here. And Summa, even if there had
been ten errors in this, because the things now come to light that the
former husband has a wife, she is free, and this other man\'s lawful
wife, and shall keep her, because before God he cannot leave her now.
Hereby commanded by God. Sunday Oculi \[28 Feb\] 1529.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1362.**

(Wittenberg.) March 1, 1529.

To the visitators in the Franconian district, Hans von Sternberg from
Callenberg, D. Nicolaus Kind, pastor at Eisfeld, and Paul Bader, Kastner
at Coburg.

Luther has not been able to find a pastor for Hildburghausen in a hurry,
but hopes to send them a pastor before Easter.

The original is in the Coburg House and State Archives. Printed in Georg
Paul Hoen\'s Coburg Chronicle; in Christian Schlegel\'s *init. reformat.
Coburg*; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 57; in Walch, vol. XXI, 273; in
De Wette, vol. Ill p. 425 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 62.

Guad und Fried in Christo. Gentlemen, dear friends, worthy ones, dear
sirs! In the absence of M. Philippi, who went with our most gracious
Lord to Speier to the Imperial Diet, I have read your writing and
request to demand a priest to go to Hildburghausen. Weilen

1\) *Decreti P. II, caus. 31, qu.* 1. (Erl. Briefw.)

but the bot may not wait here, I have not been able to inquire in a
hurry who would be the most suitable for this, because there are quite a
few of them in the country. I have thought to ask Johann Fröschel or
Michael Stiefel, who are not far from us, but I do not know what I will
do. However, there should be no lack of possible diligence, whether I
could muster one or another skilled person, whom I want to send to you
before Easter to Coburg, with God\'s help, whom you then have to try or
accept. There is a shortage of people everywhere, and what can be
maintained here in Wittenberg is reluctant to be taken away. I am
willing and ready to serve you. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Monday after
Oculi \[March 1\] 1529.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1363.**

(Trebsen.) 1. March 1529.

**Nicolaus von Minkwitz to Luther.**

Minkwitz informs Luther that he wants to go to Speier to the Imperial
Diet and is prepared to represent the cause of Wolf Hornung there, who
is therefore to travel with him. He asks Luthern to prepare a draft of a
supplement in this matter.

The original is in the Marburg State Archives. Printed by Kolde,
*Analecta* p. Ill; by Zimmermann, in the

Zeitschrift für preußische Geschichte, XX, 333, and in Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol. VII, p. 59.

> \[To the respectable, highly learned Martino \[Luthe\]rn, my good
> friend, \[for his\] own hands.

My kind service before. Respectable, esteemed, dear doctor, special good
friend! I do not know how to keep you in my good opinion, that I intend
to go shortly near Speier to the present Imperial Diet to attend to my
necessities. Since I am partly aware of the hardship encountered by the
poor journeyman Wolf Hornung (Hornig) from Margrave Jochim, and I am
willing to help and advise him with my utmost ability and understanding,
even though he has not asked me for it, 2) I am therefore

2\) Minkwitz was sued by the Elector Joachim at the Imperial Chamber
Court in Speier for breach of the peace, and could not escape the
summons there. On the other hand, Minkwitz now sued Joachim in the name
of Wolf Hornung before the imperial governor, Count Palatine Frederick,
because of the violation committed against Hornung.

**1268** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1363. 1364. 1365. **1269**

my concern that the said Wolf Hornung, as I am also writing to him
enclosed, will go to me immediately towards Trebsen, that he would ever
be there for the longest time now the next Friday after Dato \[March
5\], \[so\] I will take him with me and transfer him with horses and
food, hoping to God that he shall obtain on his supplications and
requests, also on the demand of my lords and friends, that the Margrave
shall be ordered and commanded by the estates of the realm to let his
wife follow him. But how the first application should be made, I ask you
not to complain and to make a concept of how it should turn out in your
esteem. That I do not know how to behave you in good opinion, and
command you into the grace of God. Dated Monday after Oculi \[March 1\]
1529.

> Please to keep all this secret with you. Nigkel vonn Myngkwicz 2c.

**No. 1364.**

(Wittenberg.)March 3. March 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

The large catechism will soon be finished. The booklet Against the Turk
is in print. Luther complains about his health and proposes Conrad
Cordatus as preacher in place of Paul Lindenau.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
50. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* No. 26, fol. 30.
Printed by Schütze, Vol. II, p.98; by *Strobel-Ranner* ,p.130; by De
Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 426 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 60. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1370.

> To his brother in Christ and Lord, Nicolaus Hausmann, the exceedingly
> faithful bishop of the church in Zwickau.

Grace and peace in the Lord! The catechism is not finished, my dear
houseman, but it will be finished shortly. The booklet against the Turk
is already being printed, and shall, if Christ gives grace, be completed
before Judica \[March 14\] 1). I am almost constantly compelled to work
as a ge

right, and demanded the surrender of the woman and the return of the
confiscated goods. Count Palatine Frederick took up the matter, but
Joachim knew how to drag the matter out, so that Hornung got into great
trouble and on May 6 had to ask the Count Palatine for an advance of
four florins in order to be able to stay in Speier for another eight
days. Finally, the Count Palatine set a date for his trial for June 30
in Regensburg. The trial against Minkwitz continued slowly until the
Court of Appeal declared him eight on Oct. 24, 1530.

1\) However, this writing did not appear until April 16.

sunder to be sick, since Satan is plaguing me, hence I am much prevented
from writing and doing other things, because I must have company, so
that I do not get into danger through loneliness. You pray for me.

Since your Paul has been dismissed, 2) Spalatin has also written that
thought must be given to who should take his place. I have advised that
if you do not have another, then our Conrad Cordatus would be suitable,
for he is a very good, learned man and has been a brave witness of the
faith. Let it be done what pleases the Lord. Fare well and pray for the
future Reichstag. My Käthe sends you her best regards. March 3, 1529,
Martin Luther.

**No. 1365.**

(Wittenberg.) March 7, 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Ueber Erasmus und von mehreren Himmelszeichen, die Luther aus den
bevorstehenden jüngsten Tag interpret.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 285. B. Manuscript in
Wolfenbüttel, Cod. Dolrnst. 108; in *Cod. Rostoch*. and again as from
1530. Printed in the Unschuldige Nachrichten 1720, p. 1063; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 132; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 426 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIl, p. 62. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1150.

> To the most esteemed brother in Christ, Mr. Wenceslaus Link, the
> faithful servant of the Lord in Nuremberg.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have received two letters, my dear
Wenceslaus, which are full of news. But I have begun to despise my Moab
3) and will no longer answer his invectives. Erasmus does what is worthy
of him, that he uses the Lutheran name. Erasmus is doing what is worthy
of him, that he so persecutes the Lutheran name, under which alone he
now lives safely. ^4)^

2\) Soon after the visitation, Lindenau\'s dispute with a party of the
council, headed by Mühlpfort and Roth, broke out again, this time over
the reintroduction of the apostles\' days and the ringing of the church
bells, which Lindenau opposed. Although there were quite a few pending
against him, he nevertheless, tired of the dispute, asked for his
resignation, which was granted on February 27.

3\) Duke George.

4\) Perhaps Luther is aiming at Erasmus\' writing: *Contra quosdam, qui
se falso jactant Evangelicos, epistola Des. Erasmi Rot. jam recens edita
et scholiis illustrata. Ad Vulturium Neocomum dat. Frib. 1529, 8.* See
*Herm. v. d. Hardt, III, 184* (De Wette).

**1270** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1365. 1366. 1367. **1271**

Why doesn\'t he go to his Dutch, French, Italian and English? \"He rakes
mice.\" He tries to prepare a place for himself by these flatteries, but
he will not find it; he will sit down between two chairs. If the
Lutherans hated him as much as they hated his own, then he would indeed
endure Basel with danger to his life. But may Christ judge this atheist
and epicurer Lucian.

With us there is nothing new. Of the apparitions (*visionibus*) praised
in Bohemia there is nothing certain, many deny it. But of the northern
lights that were here, which I also saw on the Saturday after Epiphany
at eight o\'clock in the evening, it is certain that they were seen in
many places as far as the ocean. Moreover, that in December at night
over the main church in Breslau the sky was fiery, writes Hess, and in
your other place two fiery floors (*contignationes*) were seen and in
their center a fiery broom. I think that by these fire signs it is
indicated that the last day is before the door. The empire will fall,
the kings will fall, the popes will fall, and clearly the whole world
will collapse, as a great house that is about to collapse is wont to
begin its fall with small cracks; only that first the Turk, as Ezekiel
\[Cap. 38\] prophesies of Gog and Magog, must be found to boast of his
exceedingly great victory, and be corrupted with his comrade, the pope.
Pray for me a sinner, and greet the Lord Abbot, 1) and command me to his
prayers. Christ give a happy outcome to the birth of your wife. May
grace be with you. On Sunday Lätare \[March 7\] 1529.

> Martin Luther.

I do not want my letters of despair 2) to be printed, because they might
have been overlooked and increased by me before, so that they could come
to light and to the public in a more dignified way. You can therefore
send them back, because I have not kept a copy.

1\) Friedrich Pistorius.

2\) Among these letters is perhaps the one found in the St. Louis
edition, vol. X, 1532 ff, where the section §10 to §16 deals with
despair.

**No. 1366 .**

Wittenberg. March 7, 1529.

**To Caspar Aquila in Saalfeld.**

A short letter in which Luther refers him to the oral reports of the
bearers of the same.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1720,
p. 1066; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 133; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 428 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 63. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1151.

> To Mr. Caspar Aquila, pastor at Saalfeld.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although you are worthy, my dear Caspar
Aquila, that I write you a very long letter, the amount of letters to be
written and other things do not allow for your dignity to be satisfied.
Therefore, give me credit and take my will for the deed. But the place
of my letters, if you want and desire them, will easily be filled by the
rich stock of these men who deliver this letter, who will report to you
in detail what is and is done with us, and you know that they are not
only worthy of faith, but also of all honor and love. See that you pray
to the Lord for me, that he will not leave me in the teeth of Satan.
Greetings from our Jonas, my Käthe and all of us. Fare well in Christ.
Wittenberg, Sunday Lätare \[March 7\] 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1367.**

Wittenberg. March 7, 1529.

**To Balthasar Thüring in Coburg.**

Luther sends one, pastor for Hildburghausen.

Printed in *Schlegel, vita Langeri,* p. 199; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p.
131; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 428 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 64.

Grace and peace in Christ! This man, Johann Weblinger,^3)^ I recommend
to you, my dear Balthasar, whom the

3\) The Erl. The Erl. correspondence assumes \"Wehbringer\" from
Landshut, which is correct, who in De Wette, Vol. V, p. 16, in the
letter of Aug. 16, 1529, is called \"M. Johannes Beybringer\". Likewise
Seidemann in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 702 s. v.

**1272** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1367. 1368. 1369. **1273**

At the request of all, the Lord is now sending him from our midst as a
pastor to Hildburghausen. He is poor, \[from Bavaria\] 1) driven out for
the sake of the Gospel; he had a low salary in the office of a preacher
at the castle. Therefore, you will be right if you make an effort to
reimburse him from the congregation\'s treasury for the expenses he was
forced to borrow here, so that he does not serve there on someone
else\'s pay. You know our poverty, which is daily exhausted by the
refugees arriving from all sides, so that I cannot provide for all of
them; indeed, if we did not have these refugees and displaced persons
today, we would also lack suitable persons. I hope that the papists will
also feel this lack soon, since so many preaching places have been done
away with and the best people have been driven away. I beg you to pray
for me and to exhort your church diligently to pray for this Diet and
for all the affairs of Germany, because Satan is loose, raging and
raging. The grace of God be with you, Amen. Wittenberg, Sunday Lätare
\[March 7\] 1529.

**No. 1368.**

(Zwickau.) March 7, 1529.

**The Council of Zwickau to Luther.**

The council asks Luthern for a preacher in place of Paul Lindenau, who
had been dismissed.

The original is in the Zwickauer Rathsarchiv, Conceptbuch 1527 to 1529,
fol. 257 b. Printed in Buchwald, Wittenberg in der Reformationzeit, p.
56 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 65.

Our kind services before. Venerable, Respectable and Esteemed,
Especially Favorable Sir and Friend! From our preacher at Our Lady\'s,
Paul Lindenauer, we have been petitioned in a few different days and
have been told, among other things, how it would be burdensome and
against his conscience for him to proclaim what our most gracious Lord,
the Elector of Saxony 2c, has left behind him, the councilors and
visitators who have recently been here, and who have been sent to

1\) The Erl. Briefw. presumes: *e Bavaria*; the other editions offer:
*Carnaria* (Carniola); Strobel conjicirt: *Carinthia* (Carinthia).

In the place of his Lordship, he ordered us to hold such meetings in the
church and not otherwise, for reasons that some articles should be among
them, against which he had previously preached; and for this reason he
asked us to give him a favorable leave, which we then did, because
otherwise he would have disobeyed our most gracious Lord. Order. But
since we need another preacher in his place, so that the murmur that
exists because of his departure may be quieted, we are asking E. A. W.
very kindly, E. A. W. would be so helpful to us and help us at your
place in Wittenberg or otherwise according to E. A. W.\'s wishes. A.
W.\'s opportunity, 2) that we be provided with another preacher who
would be pious, skillful, peaceful, and always fit in our present
circumstances. We would like to kindly ask E. A. W., who would like to
be found unburdened by this, to do this, and we expect the described
answer from our messenger E. A. W., so that we have to act accordingly.
Date Dominica Lätare \[March 7\] in the 29th.

To Doctor Martinus Luther. Rath.

**No. 1369.**

Hamburg. March 8, 1529.

**Bugenhagen to Luther, Jonas, Melanchthon and the Diacones (Mantel and
Rörer).**

About the ecclesiastical situation in Hamburg. He asks for advice on
whether he should make the journey to Friesland. Wish to return to
Wittenberg soon.

The original is in Hamburg at the Stadtbibliothek, Ms. I, fol. 82.
Manuscript in Dresden, *Cod. C* 342, fol. 7 b. Printed in Unschuldige
Nachrichten 1745, p. 316; in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 112; in Kawerau,
Jonasbriefe, vol. I, p. 122; in Vogt, Bugenhagens Briefw., p. 84; in
Mayer, Evang. Hamburg, p. 307 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 66.

> To the highly learned and worthy men, Doctor Martin Luther, Doctor
> Justus Jonas, Magister Philippus and the Deacons of the Word, his
> lords and brothers at Wittenberg.

The grace of God through Christ! I have already written to you three
times, my dear Father, but I ask that you all write to me through this
messenger, each of you that which he knows I care to know. The people
here have already returned to the highest harmony.

2\) \"und rathen\" put by us instead of: \"nit entrathen\".

**1274** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1369. 1370. 1371. **1275**

My order, which was previously handed over to the Council, will be
presented to the people today, so that they can see whether they think
there is anything in it that would be unsuitable here; then it will be
issued. ^1)^ Do not cease to pray for us, we pray here privately and
publicly for you and for the peace of Germany. Advise what is good for
you concerning the journey to Friesland; it does not seem advisable to
some that I go there. However, I have begun to pursue the matter by
letters and sent treatises, and if the Count should urge, I will see to
it that, if it is possible, this pernicious trade is pursued by others.
2) I realize that I have already exceeded my time more than enough, and
the count wants to go to the assembly of princes 3) beforehand. I wish
to see you. The unconquered need of the Gospel still keeps me here; it
has cost many efforts, but, thanks be to Christ, not in vain. But Christ
will lead his work out of here soonest. My wife is already expecting her
birth, God grant that it may go out happily. Greet my Lord Captain, the
Mayor Hohendorf, Benedict Pauli, D. Augustin, D. Stackmann, Christian
Goldschmied (*Aurifabrum*, Döring), the painter Lucas 2c., together with
their wives, except the wife of the Captain. ^4)^ Greet your wives and
families and sons 2c. Our Lord Jesus Christ keep you all. From Hamburg,
1529, the day after Lätare \[March 8\].

> Your J. B. Pommer.

So great an effort did it cost 2c. \[*Virg. Aen., lib.* I, v. 32.\]

But \"a woman when she gives birth\" 2c. \[Joh. 16, 21.\]; I am not
talking about my consecration. Thanks be to Christ. Orally we will say
it.

1\) The church order for Hamburg, which was modeled after the Brunswick
church order, was adopted by the council and the citizens on the
Saturday before Pentecost, May 15; however, it was not printed in
Bugenhagen\'s time.

2\) Count Enno II of Friesland had sent an embassy to Bugenhagen in
Hamburg and asked him to come to Friesland for a short time, to preach
there and to confront the heretics and rebaptizers who were there in
large numbers. Bugenhagen did not go, but sent Johann Pelt and Johann
Timann from Bremen.

3\) to the Diet at Speier.

4\) Hans Metsch was unmarried, but lived in a lewd relationship. Compare
Tischreden, Cap. 21, Z1. St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 611.

**No. 13 70.**

Weimar. March 12, 1529.

**Duke Johann Friedrich zu Sachsen to Luther, Jonas, Hans Metsch and
Hans von Taubenheim.**

(Regest.)

Luther and Hans Metsch, because they cannot get away from other
business, are relieved of the office of visitators, and \"in their
place\" the bailiff of Bitterfeld (Sebastian von Kötteritzsch) and the
pastor of Colditz (Wolfgang Fues) are appointed as visitators to finish
the visitation. - This order was issued at the request of the captain of
Wittenberg, Hans Metsch, who had reported on February 8 that the
visitation could not be finished yet, because he and Taubenheim had been
prevented by the escort of Margrave George of Brandenburg (see No.
1347), but Luther had not been \"vhast gesundt\" for more than fourteen
days. In the opinion of Brück, Pauli and Melanchthon, who were in
Wittenberg at the time, it did not seem at all likely that Luther would
be used for the visitation, since during Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s
absence more than 100 students had left Wittenberg. The presence of the
captain there was necessary because of the construction of the
fortifications. In passing, Metsch noted in his petition that not much
more was left of the 60 florins granted for the visitation.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. Ji, fol. 55 a. A.
6. 1529. 2. printed by Burk

hardt, p. 158 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 68.

**No. 13 71.**

Wittenberg. March 13, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther consoles Hausmann because of the annoyances he encountered in
Zwickau, again recommends Conrad Cordatus, sends the German Litany, and
recommends to the Freibergers his writing against the Bishop of
Meissen\'s mandate.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, Na.
51. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* fol. 316; at Gotha in
*Cod.* 186 and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 108. Printed by *Buddeus*, x. 60;
by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 429 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 69.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1147.

> To the in Christ venerable man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the faithful
> and quite loud bishop of the church at Zwickau.

Grace in Christ and peace, not which the world gives, but the Father of
mercies in secret. My dear househusband, you comfort me, as you are a
faithful brother in Christ, so comfort yourself instead of mei

**1276** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1371. 1372. **1277**

ner gratitude, the LORD JEsus, Amen. I know the kind of people who are
in your parish. But be faithful and strong until death, and you will
receive the unfading crown when our Arch Shepherd comes. He that
despiseth, let him despise at all times; he that is unclean, let him be
unclean at all times; he that is ignorant, let him be ignorant at all
times. Follow me,\" says the Lord, \"what is it to you where those
remain who will not listen? Thus the word of the 22nd Psalm must be
fulfilled \[v. 7.\]: \"I am a worm and not a man, a mockery of men and
contempt of the people,\" and \[Ps. 69, 9.\] \"unknown to my mother\'s
children,\" and \[Ps. 31, 12.\] \"a reproach to my kinsmen.\" Blessed
are you, since you perceive these testimonies about you.

Your council has not yet written to me. ^1)^ Looking in every direction,
I see no more suitable man for you than the Cordatus, a learned,
serious, wise and godly and sedentary man. About that Paul of yours I
wonder why he may have refused to obey the decrees of the prince and the
visitators. I fear that he is dealing with some monstrosity. Christ will
help us, who has begun his work in us.

The German Litany comes to you, which seems very useful and salutary to
us. Yes, the melody, which is sung by the boys in the middle of the
church on Wednesday after the sermon, has an extraordinary effect on the
people. For we sing the Latin melody in the choir on Saturday after the
sermon in a different melody, which is not yet printed.

The book against the Turk will be finished around Palmarum.

To your Freibergers 2) I cannot write anything more useful in the matter
of the Sacrament than my last booklet against the bishop\'s to

1\) Luther had therefore not yet received Letter No. 1368.

2\) Nicolaus Hausmann was from Freiberg, and his brother Valentin lived
there. Through him, the people of Freiberg (under Duke Heinrich of
Saxony, the evangelically minded brother of Duke Georg) may have
recovered from Nic. Hausmann Raths.

Meissen Mandate,^3)^ especially the last quatern H. For many reasons it
seems to me not advisable to write more. It must be prayed, because in
this piece, as in the whole matter, we are not fighting with flesh and
blood, but with the evil spirits, who, even because they are convicted,
do not give way to the victorious truth; therefore, according to the
apostle\'s counsel, they must be let go, as perverse people and who have
condemned themselves \[Tit. 3, 11\]. Christ\'s grace and Spirit be with
you, amen. Pray for me. Wittenberg, March 13, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 13 72.**

(Wittenberg.) March 15, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Of Magdeburg affairs; of the Diet; of the Turk; that Luthern\'s
visitation was taken away 2c.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Gothan*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 8; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 134; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 430 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 72. German
in Walch, BV. XXI, 1149.

Grace and peace! We have received the money. By the way, we wrote the
other day that you should come to us, which you did not mention in your
letter, as if you had not received the letter; therefore, we do not
expect you before Easter.

I have not seen Fritzhans, nor do I know if he is here, but I will soon
find out. After the two schoolmasters, and if you should order any other
things, we will gladly look around and give an answer. What the matter
of Fritzhan is, will perhaps become clear when he shows himself.

With regard to the Reichstag, I have good hope, nor could a concilium do
much harm if it came about, although it is neither probable nor credible
to me that it will happen.

The Turk threatens to break in; I fear that he will be the Reformer,
sent through

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1344 ff. The passage referred to is
found ibid. col. 1390, § 107 ff. Cf. No. 1289, where this writing is set
\"early Sept. 1528\".

**1278** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1372 to 1375. **1279**

the wrath of God. I am deposed from the office of visitation, and this
work is being hindered by Satan with extraordinary artistry, but I hope
that it will be resumed as soon as possible. I will also 1) do what I
can for the virgins in Plötzke. Longicampianus 2) has died; after
fervent, terrible and unbearable suffering, he has gently passed away
through the wonderful mercy of God. Pray for me, a sinner, my dear
Amsdorf, and be well in Christ. Given on March 15, 1529.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 13 73.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around mid-March) 3) 1529.

**Alk Hans Metsch, city captain of Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 288.

**No . 1374.**

(Wittenberg.) March 21, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther sends him a letter from the Duke of Holstein in which he requests
that the Wittenbergers cooperate in getting Amsdorf to go to Holstein to
work against Carlstadt and Hofmann and their followers.

Handwritten in the oock. Uogtood. Printed in Innocent News 1720, p.
1067; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 135; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 431 f. and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 74. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1152.

Grace and peace in the Lord! From this letter, my dear Amsdorf, you will
see what the Duke of Holstein desires from us for your sake. But because
I believe that it is neither safe nor godly for you to be torn away from
Magdeburg so suddenly, it does not seem to be advisable, and it must be

1\) We have adopted the conjecture of De Wette, *etiam* instead of
*enim.* - The monastery of Plötzke is located in the district of Belzig;
during the visitation, the nuns declared themselves ready to accept the
new doctrine (several of them already had Lutheran books), although they
wanted to remain in the monastery, except for 6 or 7.

2\) Professor of mathematics.

3\) This approximate time determination results from the letter of
Menius to the Duchess Sibyl, which is dated: Gotha, March 8, 1529.

He can be served in another way. However, I send the letter for the sake
that you may show it to your stones and blocks in the council, and stand
as if you were urged, and you want and need to know whether they can
perhaps be moved in this way to return to reason, and to be careful that
they maintain schools and raise the children well. I beg you very much
to do this with the greatest possible appearance of seriousness, and if
they are so good, you may hardly be held back by great entreaties. For I
doubt whether they will grieve over your calling away. Fare well. I
believe you know that Longicampianus has died, and Marcus Schart^4)^ has
also died in Hesse. Farewell, on the day of Palmarum \[March 21\] 1529.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 13 75.**

Weimar. March 21, 1529.

**Duke Johann Friedrich to Luther and Comrades.**

Order to convert an Anabaptist, Hans Sturm in Zwickau, if possible, or,
if this is not possible, to give an expert opinion on his punishment
with the help of the captain of Wittenberg.

The copy that was sent to the Zwickau City Council is in the Zwickauer
Nathsarchlv, Acten, Hans Sturm betreffend. Printed in Kolde, *Analecta,*
p. 113 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 75.

By the Grace of God Johann, Hansfriedrich 5) 2c. Our greeting before.
Venerable, worthy, highly honored and respectable, dear devotees,
advisors and faithful! To the Highborn Prince, Lord Johansen, Duke of
Saxony, Elector 2c., our dear lord and father, subjects, the Council of
Zwickau, have, in the absence of his. Gn. a few days ago a trade,
concerning Hansen Storm, 6) a

4\) See No. 174.

5\) In the prints: \"Johan Hansfridrich\", without a separating comma.
But Duke John Frederick, as is clear from the following, left off this
letter by order and \"in place of his lord fathers\", John, the Elector.

6\) Hans Sturm, a cloth shearer from Freistadt near Linz in Austria. At
first he was imprisoned in the castle in Wittenberg, where Luther often
visited him, interrogated and instructed him. Since he could not be
brought to recantation, he was finally taken to the tower at Schweinitz,
where he died. See St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 1070, Tischreden, cap.
37, § 99.

**1280** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1375. 1376. **1281**

We have received a copy of the verdict from the Anabaptists, who were
imprisoned by them for this reason, with a list of his testimony, and
have then ordered the Council \[that\] they should put the story into
question and send it to Leipzig to be discussed beforehand, ^1)^ They
have now written to us, sending us a copy of the verdict, and have asked
us to inform them what they should do about it, as you will see from the
documents and copies in our possession.

After we have had misgivings about the Leipzig verdict, we have ordered
those of Zwickau to bring the aforementioned Hansen Sturm to Wittenberg,
and to place him in the custody of the captain there, Hansen Metzsch,
and to deliver and hand him over to him, and this is our gracious
request in place of our lord father: Because the judgment is affected,
among other things, on the grounds that the storm is to be answered to
the scholars of divine Scripture 2) \[whether\] he might be repelled
from his error by the same, you shall, when he is brought to Wittenberg,
require the said storm before you at several and as many times as you
deem convenient and necessary, and use all diligence to see if you can
turn him away from this error by means of divine help and the Holy
Scriptures, and that he publicly confesses and recants it at Zwickau, as
you would then, if he is moved to do so, make him a note as to what form
he should take in recanting, considering the causes, as you may judge;
If, however, you could not bring him from his error through your applied
diligence, then, upon the consideration of our captain at Wittenberg,
all of you should come to an opinion as to what punishment should be
meted out to Sturm and what form he should be dealt with in the future,
and also put this in writing and send it to us. In the meantime and
until further notice, the captain there shall keep the storm under lock
and key, for it seems credible to us that many people there are secretly
attached to this error, for which reason it is to be moved to impose the
punishment in particular, so that further trouble may, as much as
possible, occur and be prevented by divine grace. In your gracious
opinion, we do not want to deprive you of this.

1\) In the manuscript and in Kolde: \"zuuor sprechenn\"; in Erl.
Briefw.: \"zu vorsprechen\".

2\) That is: handed over.

and do it as a gracious favor to our Lord Father and to us. Dat. Weimar,
Sunday Palmarum \[March 21\] Anno 29.

> To Doctor Martin Luther and other theologians, also deans and doctors
> of the Faculty of Law at Wittenberg.

**No. 1376.**

(Wittenberg.) March 29, 1529.

To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.

Amsdorf made good use of the call to Holstein; Luther invited him to the
wedding of Bruno Brauer.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1720,
p. 1066; in *Strobel-Ranner*, 136; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 432 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 76 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1156.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It pleases me very much that you have tried
your boulders 3) in such a way and have found them so contrary to
expectations. I will certainly, since I got this opportunity, write to
them roughly and confidently, and remind and admonish them to promote
the sciences and studies. You do what you do and push for this very work
as much as you can.

By the way, the bridegroom Bruuo^4)^ has instructed me that I should
inform you of the day of his wedding, namely on Wednesday after
Quasimodogeniti \[April 7\], and invite you to the same in his name. It
will also be on Monday after Quasimodogeniti the bride or rather the
wife in my house, my Gersa of Quosse. 5) If now my Käthe should give
birth at the same time, you would certainly become poorer,^6)^ if all
this coincided. Therefore arm yourself in any case, not with iron or the
sword, but with gold and silver.

3\) *saxa*, the Nathsherren of Magdeburg, compare No. 1374. Walch
translates: \"that you have so tried your stones, and next to faith so
found\".

4\) Bruno Brauer, whose first wife had probably died of the plague in
late August or early September 1527.

5\) Seidemann remarks on this in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 453, note 8:
\"Presumably it is to be read: *Qusse* or *Queisse*. The von Quaz, Quaß,
Quassow.\"

6\) namely by wedding and godparent gift. - Here Walch translates: \"so
you would get into poverty, if it would break with everything\", and
makes the remark: \"*conciderit*, i.e. the wives, so with him logiren\".

**1282**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1376. 1377. 1378.

**1283**

and a money bag, because we will not let you go free without a shun.
There is no news from Speier yet, but you will hear everything verbally.
Fare well in Christ and pray for me. On Easter Monday \[March 29\] 1529.
Martin Luther.

**No. 13 77.**

(Wittenberg.) March 30, 1529.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Recommendation of the Cordatus. About a marriage case.

The original is in Gotha, *Cod*. X 122, fol. 34. Printed in Aurifaber,
vol. II, p. 3326 (as from 1527); in *Buddeus, p.* 61; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 433 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 78. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1035(after Aurifaber) and Col. 1153 (after Buddeus).

> To the in the Lord highly beloved brother, M. Georg Spalatin, the
> extremely faithful bishop in Altenburg, his highly esteemed
> \[friend\].

Grace and peace! Here comes the Licentiate Cordatus, preacher at
Zwickau, my dear Spalatin, and delivers this letter to you; he is a man
who is worthy that you talk to him, not to praise other things. The
matrimonial case sent to us will follow soon; in it we have given
judgment for the second husband, and condemned the first, fugitive
husband, also according to the decrees of the pope. For we have begun to
read and examine also the papist laws, in which we see that not even
they themselves look to their rights or care about them, and we are
surprised at the first judgment that has been passed by ours. However, I
have decided to avenge the ingratitude of the peasants and the mob in
such a way that, if those who have to do with any matter are not godly,
I will refer them entirely to the officials and let the dead bury their
dead. Therefore, I would also have referred this woman of yours to the
officials and the lawyers, if she had not, according to your testimony,
been a godly woman.

1\) Here, too, the Erl. Briefw. reprinted from De Wette: \"Walch, XXI,
1033\" and, like the latter, did not quote the duplicate.

deserves to enjoy the freedom of the gospel, even though she herself
later attained the same according to the Pope\'s law. For I do not want
the swine and dogs to be worthy of the freedom of the gospel, and that
only the timid and godly may enjoy our happiness. Otherwise, those will
abuse the Gospel the most, to whom it is fitting to be subject not only
to the pope, but also to the furies of hell.

You may read a great and good chapter to M. Eberhard, because he accuses
me of not having answered your questions or letters. You may do the same
against yourself, if he has this outrageous complaint from you, because
through your Käthe, you both are either playing a game, or you have been
deceived either by love or by the rule of your wives; I remember quite
vividly that I have always answered you, even so much that the amount of
the answered may have become burdensome to you. Farewell and pray for me
poor sinner. Easter Tuesday \[March 30\] 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 13 78.**

(Wittenberg.) March 31, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther recommends Cordatus, who has been called to Zwickau as a
preacher.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in Gotha, *Cod.* 397, fol. 33.
Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 99; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 434 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VlI, p. 79.

Grace and peace in Christ! Behold, the comrade of your care and the
participant in your work, the licentiate Conrad Cordatus, is undoubtedly
a faithful and good man, and I hope that he will not only please you,
but also benefit the people. Although the wild rabble may not like him
very much in the beginning, they will realize afterwards what a man he
is. man he is. By the way, Christ comforts you in all your temptations.
For thou art the leader of the people whom all the gates of hell hate:
what is it to wonder if thou art touched by any part of so great a
hatred?

**1284**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1378. 1379. 1380.

**1285**

Yes, it is a wonderful and great miracle that we are not devoured by it,
nor given to its teeth to rob, who are so small, little and weak, so
that the great miraculous works of God in us are sufficiently visible to
those who have eyes to see that we, since so many and so great enemies
rage, exist as such and so great people, however small we may be.
Outwardly enemies, inwardly Satan plagues us among the children of God.
But Christ, who reigns, truly triumphs even in us who are weak, and for
those who are troubled, 1) he is mighty and sure, and will finally carry
out us who suffer tribulation in his day, amen. Christ will tell all
things more widely in and by the mouth of Cordatus. Fare well and pray
for me a sinner. On the day after Easter Tuesday \[March 31\] 1529.
Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 13 79.**

(Wittenberg.) April 8, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Reply to a letter from Hausmann about Cordatus, and consolation because
of his fretfulness.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
52. Handwritten in Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26. Printed in
Schütze, Vol. II, p. 100; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 136 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 80. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1371.

> To your husband, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, who is to be highly honored in
> Christ, the extremely faithful servant of God at the Gospel in
> Zwickau.

Grace and peace! Your Lord Stephen 2) gave me your letter, my dear
householder, which was very dear and pleasant to me, 3) especially
because it was full of hope that the service of our Cordatus in the
preaching ministry would be a prosperous one, and indicated that

1\) Instead of *perturbatur* in the editions, we have assumed with the
*Cod. Rostoch*. perturdatis assumed.

2\) The town clerk Stephan Noth in Zwickau had been offered the
pastorate in Colditz by the visitators, and he probably traveled to
Wittenberg for that reason to consult with Luther about it. He remained
in his previous position.

3\) In the original: *chariss. jucundiss.,* which Schütze and De Wette
have added to *charissimas jucundissimas,* the latter with the note:
\"perhaps *charissime* is to be read\". The Erl. Briefw. offers
*chariss\[ime*\] *jucundiss\[ime\]*. We have assumed the former.

you like the man. May the Lord Jesus bless you both, who have been well
afflicted so far, that you finally come with joy and bring your sheaves,
whose delicious seed you have sown so long with tears and sorrow \[Ps.
126:6\], Amen. For so it must come to pass that God makes everything out
of nothing, out of desperate things quite certain, out of despised
glorious, out of shame the highest praise, out of sin righteousness, out
of death life, so also out of your sorrowful householder a joyful and
grateful son. For it is He who comforts the lowly and afflicted, says
Paul \[2 Cor. 7:6\].

I thank you for your sincere love, that you are not unmindful of me with
comfort and prayer. Christ will reward you again abundantly.

Except for this, we have no news. This storm that you sent has not yet
appeared before my eyes. From what he has said, I suspect that there is
something wrong with the man\'s mind, or that he is being driven by the
raging Satan. Therefore, there is little hope that he can be set right
with words. May the Lord have mercy on him, amen. Muenzer\'s poison has
not yet been eradicated. Farewell and pray for me. Thursday after
Quasimodogeniti \[April 8\] 1529.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 13 80.**

Wittenberg. April 9, 1529.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

Luther wished him luck as he took up his preaching post in Zwickau and
encouraged him to cheerfully take up the fight ahead of him there.

Handwritten in Gotha, *Cod.* 186 and in Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 163.
Printed by *Buddeus, p.* 63; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 437 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 81. German in Walch vol. XXI, 1154.

Grace and peace in Christ! I am glad, my dear Cordatus, that you have
entered your preaching ministry safely. But it pleases me that this
exceedingly savage people is angry with you. ^4)^ You will have to put
an end to this wickedness of the

4\) Cordatus, who was even more vehement than his predecessor Lindenau,
had already indulged in outbursts against the Zwickauers in his
inaugural sermon, thus turning them against him.

**1286**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1380. 1381. 1382.

**1287**

Finally overcome the world and Satan through your patience and humility.
Christ is in the habit of laying weak beginnings and weak foundations
for His own, so that He may mock wisdom and the carnal mind through His
weakness. I would not have wanted you to be received with applause and
rejoicing from the beginning. For, dear God, how much danger would that
have brought you! How much strife and battle against your flesh and
Satan would it have exposed you to; of course, you would never have
gained a share in the victory, since you had not fought in any cause,
and also you would not have been able to exercise the power of grace and
the spirit, and therefore you would never daily become greater than you
are. Therefore, Christ has given you both work and struggle (so that you
would not bear less fruit as an idle and unpurified vine), so that you
would work diligently in words, suffer valiantly in struggle, and learn
to devour words, gestures, and mockery with a completely eager spirit.
You pray diligently for me poor sinner. Fare well with your Christina.
Wittenberg, Friday after Ambrosii \[April 9\] 1529.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1381.**

(Wittenberg.) April 13, 1529.

**To Gerhard Aecker, Augustinian at Osnabrück.**

Luther promises him that he will take care of a young man. From an
earthquake 2c.

Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1756, p. 297; in *Strobel-Ranner*,
138; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 101; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 437 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 82.

> To the venerable man in Christ, Gerhard Hecker, 1) your truthful
> theologian, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Joyfully and gratefully I received your
letter, esteemed man, which was exceedingly pleasant to me for the sake
of your pure and pure

1\) Gerhard Hecker from Bielefeld, since 1502 in the Augustinian
monastery in Erfurt, a teacher of Luther and friend of Längs, was three
times provincial in Thuringia and Saxony, later in Osnabrück, where he
was active for the Reformation already in 1521, although he remained a
monk. He died in 1536 at a ripe old age,

The unity of the mind against the teachings of God. May Christ keep us
in this unity of His Spirit until the day of glory, undefiled by the
uncleanness of the unholy spirits which Satan has sent against us into
the world to deceive the unbelieving and unthankful, amen.

I will help the young man whom you, venerable father, have recommended
to me as much as I can, although there is a very large number of poor
people in our very great poverty. But Christ is rich enough. I commend
myself to your prayers, holy man of God, because I am a sinner and
exposed to many devils in great weakness. May the Lord Jesus be with
you, amen.

We have not yet received any news from the Imperial Diet at Speier.
However, there is a rumor of a very great earthquake in Carinthia and
Istria, which devoured towns, cities and landscapes and broke the St.
Marcus Tower in Venice into four parts. If this is true, these
monstrosities are forerunners of the day of Christ. April 13, 1529,
Martin Luther.

**No. 13 82.**

Weimar. April 13, 1529.

**Duke John Frederick of Saxony to Luther.**

Luther receives the order to examine Paul Lindenau about his teachings
before he is confirmed as preacher in Elsterberg.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ll,* p. 74, No.
59. 15. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 160 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.
83.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! Our dear
faithful, the von Bünau of Elsterberg, have now informed us by means of
a preserved document how they have accepted Paul Lindenau, who was
previously at Zwickau, as a preacher, with the attached request that you
hear from it. Now we have received all kinds of reports about his
impropriety with the doctrine and other things in Zwickau, as we do not
doubt that you have also received several writings and reports about him
and are aware of them. Therefore, we give them, those of Bünau, the
answer and order them to report to the above-mentioned Ern Paulo that he
is

**1288**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1382. 1383. 1384.

**1289**

Within 14 days after the date, he shall be brought to you, interrogated
and examined. If a preacher of many names should present himself to you,
you should let him hear what you have to say about his doctrine and
other matters, and especially that he should let himself be heard in
Zwickau: \"he would know such as the visitators of the place have
decreed, and not to preach against that which he had taught before,
would also be against his conscience, therefore he departed from those
at Zwickau\", and interrogate and examine him thereon, and if you find,
If you find that he should or should not be accepted, approved or
confirmed as a preacher, you should inform us of your advice and
concerns as to how to proceed, including the von Bünau document, and
send it to us, after which we will have to show ourselves and be heard.
In our gracious opinion, we do not wish to hold you to this, and you do
this to please our gracious father and us. Date Weimar, Tuesday after
Misericordia Domini sI3. April\] Anno 29.

**No. 13 83.**

(Wittenberg.). April 14 (1529).

To Justus Jonas.

Luther tells Jonas, who is on a visitation, about his sickness and how
things are in Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Gothan*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1720, p. 1065; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 139; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p.441 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 85. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1155.

Grace and peace! I received three letters from the visitator Jonas, none
of which I could answer. It is good that you look into the midst of the
kingdom 1) of Satan, so that you can see at the same time how far the
kingdom of Christ is. During the whole time you have been away, I have
been plagued by a very severe and almost fatal catarrh, I have not been
able to whisper or make a sound, but I have also not been able to cough,
so that I despaired of the return of the voice, and the end is not yet
here. There are many others suffering from the same ailment, but not to
the same extent as I, be it null that I am suffering from it through

1\) We have worked with the *Cod. Rostoch*, the Innocent News and
*Strobel-Ranner* assumed in *media regna* instead of *in medio regno*.

2\) the adulterated malmsey that I drank to please Amsdorf, or that I
made it so worse by persistent preaching after the lungs were tired.
Thus, the school lies dormant and inactive. Since the voice of theology
has been removed from the chair,^3)^ I will put Cruciger in its place.
In the meantime, Pomeranus has been appointed,^4)^ and has gone to the
Duke of Holstein to fight with Carlstadt, which makes me very angry. But
they say that Carlstadt fled frightened and I don\'t know what he
pretended. 5)

We do not hear anything from Speier yet. Pomer\'s wife had a miscarriage
or gave birth to a dead fruit that died in childbirth itself. I have
written that he should return immediately. The people of Hamburg are
trying to keep him forever, for they wanted to give us such thanks for
our love. Your house is safe,^6)^ also since I am not safe nor a healthy
visitator. What do you ask me in these clear cases? but see my opinion
in this note. Greetings to me all gentlemen visitators in Christo, and
He be with us and will be with us, Amen. Given the 14th of April. Martin
Luther.

**No. 13 84.**

(Wittenberg.) April 19, 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

About Luther\'s state of health; news from Wittenberg 2c.

Handwritten in an old copy in private possession; in Copenhagen, Ms.
1393, fol. 164; in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 215 and in *Cod. Gothan*. 451.
printed in *Buddeus*, p. 63; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 442 f. and in
Erl.

2\) *sophisticato*. The Erl. Briefw. raises the question, \"but what is
*sophistacatum*?\" Here it will be: to add medicines to. In English, *to
sophisticate* means to adulterate.

3\) Luther was ill, Jonas on the visitation, Melanchthon at Speier on
the Reichstag, Bugenhagen in Holstein to fight Carlstadt and Melchior
Hofmann.

4\) namely instead of Amsdorf. Cf. no. 1374.

5\) Carlstadt left Holstein even before the Flensburg Disputation, which
took place on April 8, and went to East Frisia.

6\) Walch translates *Dominis salva*: \"The house saves after all.\"

**1290**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1384. 1385.

Briefw., vol. VII, p. 86 f. Only the first mentioned manuscript (which
is reproduced in the Erl. Briefw.) seems to have been made according to
the original, while all other redactions distort the text badly, partly
by omissions, partly by taking sentences from the previous number.

> To the most reverend Father in Christ and Lord, D. Justus Jonas,
> Archbishop 1) of Saxony, the faithful servant of Christ and his
> ever-honoring superior.

The grace of God be with you, amen. I thank you for praying for me, my
dear Jonas. For I am the one who is most in need of your godly prayers.
Certainly, if it is an apostolic gift to fight with the devils and to be
frequently in mortal danger, then in this respect I will naturally be
either a Peter or a Paul, however the other gifts are not so apostolic,
but belong to robbers, tax collectors, pimps and sinners. 2) I have
begun to cough and whisper a little again, but I cannot speak yet. I
hope for improvement. The admonition is not necessary. When I get well,
I will visit your house. Your wife with her mother visited me, wanting
to promote some cause, I don\'t know which, through my mediation; I did
what I could. My father, my brother, the brother\'s wife and the
sister\'s husband, the father of these boys, are with me; 3) they have
an extraordinary desire for you. My Käthe is still walking around. The
wife of Capellan Johann has happily given birth to a little daughter.
The wife of Judge Teuschel was buried the day before yesterday, the wife
of the barber (*Balborinna*) Andreas lies hopelessly low, the doctors
are pronouncing her dead. 300 German proverbs of Eisleben have come out
with rich interpretations. You write about the terrible ingratitude of
the peasants. But it must be

1\) \"Archbishop\" here is not a joking expression of Luther, but a word
in earnest for Jonas as visitator, as he otherwise often dubbed the
pastors as \"bishops\".

2\) In Latin: *sed latronenses, et publicanenses, et meretricenses
peccatorensesque*. Presumably, this refers to the letter that Luther
received from Jonas.

3\) The brother is Jakob Luther, the husband of the sister will be Georg
Kaufmann, whose sons Cyriacus, Fabian and Andreas were inscribed later,
1530 and 1533, in Wittenberg.

**1291**

that word, Hebr. 11, 38, will be fulfilled: \"The world was not worthy
of them. \"Yes, indeed, the world is not worthy of these men \[the
preachers\], therefore they must kill them by hunger and thirst, where
they cannot do it with the sword. \"It is right.\" Greet all your fellow
bishops respectfully. Fare well in Christ. April 19, 1529.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1385.**

(Wittenberg.) April 19, 1529.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Intercession for a student, for further support.

The original is found in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 57, no. 83; in Walch, vol. XXI,
274; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 443 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 66.

> To the illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord Johann Friedrich, Duke of
> Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious
> Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! The
present letter pointer, He Conrad Leimbach, from the monastery
Müncherode, has now three years to the studio of my G. H., Duke Johanns,
Elector, E. F. G. father, 24 fl. Now he would like to study here for
another year, moreover, he has not been able to produce either clothes
or books so far. Because I feel that he has not been here in vain, and
that we may use him as a good pastor, as we need more and more of such
people every day, my humble request is that E. F. G., if it can be done,
will 4) have such money graciously handed over from the monastery\'s
property this year, or from what it has given so far. He indicates that
the last year was given by Lic. Blanken, but the latter has no further
order to give him. E. F. G. will know how to graciously keep it, because
it is not badly invested. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. April 19, 1529.

E. F. G. subservient

Mart. Luther.

4\) Added by us.

**1292** Letters from the year 1529.

. No. 1386. 1387. **1293**

**No. 1386.**

(Wittenberg.) April 23, 1529.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

Luther reports on the interrogation held with Paul Lindenau, and
requests that he be confirmed in Elsterberg.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ll*, p. 74. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, \'p. 58; in Walch, vol. XXI, 275; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 444 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 67.

> To the illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord Johann Friedrich, Duke of
> Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious
> Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! Paul
Lindenauer, a preacher in Zwickau, has come to me to be interrogated by
order of E. F. G.\'s order to be interrogated. So I found that the
greatest cause of his willing departure from Zwickau was that the
discord between him and some others was growing, and he sought ways and
means to avoid it. Thus it came about that after the visitators had left
for 14 days (as he reported to me), an order was issued to re-establish
the two things, namely the weather ringing and the celebration of the
apostles\' days, to which, as necessary things, he did not want to bind
his conscience, and thus accepted the same reason to change. And I also
think that there are some in Zwickau who were glad of his request to
leave, and have hurried to do so, although it is not bad that he is
gone, if the discord could be quieted. Because the city gives him such
good testimony, and the visitators have let him stay, since they were
present, and now he himself has cleared the discord, and such two pieces
do not have much of a chance, and have been left free in the book of the
visitators: I consider it good that E. F. G. has left the same. F. G.
let the same Paul zur Elstern thus remain, so that the evil mouths would
not be given further room to chatter, as if one pursues the wretch for
the sake of trivial things, his repugnants for strength and defiance;
considered, that, where he does not want rightly

E. F. G. is more powerful at Elsterberg and can be expelled more easily
than at Zwickau. I humbly put all of this to E. F. G.\'s attention.
Christ, our Lord, grant E. F. G. his spirit to do his good will, amen.
April 23, 1529.

E. F. G.

subservient

Martin Luther.

**No. 1387.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. May 1529.

**To Andreas Kaugisdorf in Eilenburg.**

Luther asks him to help his colleague to take over another parish as
soon as possible.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*; in *Cod. Jen*. B 24, n. fol. 184 and in
*Cod. Gothan*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 9; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 140; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 445 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 89. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1158.

> To Mr. Andreas Kaugisdorf, pastor at Eilenburg, his brother.

Grace and peace in Christ! I will help the woman you recommended to me,
my dear Andrew, as much as I can, if she can find a position for
herself. Again I ask you to help Nicolaus Foranens, 1) your fellow
servant, so that he leaves for the other parish as soon as possible. For
it is to be considered that now is the most convenient time to dispose
of property and fields along with the other domestic matters, especially
since it is said that his people have another in his 2) place. For I
have no one else so quickly with such a small income. Therefore, they
may accept what is offered. He has served them long enough, more than
half for nothing, though he was worth his wages as a laborer. Farewell
and pray for me. The first of May 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

1\) *Foraneus* == Märker (De Wette).

2\) Instead of *eum* we have assumed with the *Cod. Rostoch. eju*
assumed. - By populares will be understood his previous parishioners.
Walch\'s translation is incomprehensible.

**1294**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1388. 1389. 1390.

**1295**

**No. 13 88.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. May 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About a marriage deal. Melanchthon\'s return from the Diet is expected.
Luther has resumed his teaching activities, although he is still
suffering.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Goth*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 10; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 141; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 446 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 90. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1159.

> Mr. Nicolaus Amsdorf, pastor in Magdeburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! See, there you have the order, full of which
you write that it was ordered to you by me, my dear Amsdorf: Do not
believe what this faithless bridegroom has reported to you. I have
completely approved of your opinion, and sent him back to you, even with
displeasure, namely that he prove to you that the engagement is void
(for that is what he claimed), or that he marries her, or remains
eternally unmarried. This was my opinion. Well, if it is as you write,
he must be forced to marry her or be punished with perpetual celibacy.

We do not yet have anything certain about the Reichstag either. We are
expecting Philipp Melanchthon\'s return any day. My catarrh and cough
have barely begun to restore my voice. Yesterday and today I read about
Isaiah, but half hoarsely. Pray for us. Given May 4, 1529. Yours, Martin
Luther.

**No. 1389.**

(Wittenberg.) May 5, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf.**

Luther asks him to be godfather to his daughter born the day before.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in the Unschuldige Nachrichten
1721, p. II; in Walch, vol. XXI, 1160; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 141; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 447 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p.
69. - The beginning and end of the letter are written in Latin, the
intervening request for patronage in German.

To Mr. Nicolaus Amsdorf.

Grace and peace in Christ! The last letter of that sophistical
(*captioso*) brew

I wrote the letter I addressed to you in the presence of my Käthe, who
immediately began to writhe and feel pain, and about the third hour
after I wrote the letter, she gave birth to a healthy little daughter.
The Lord has blessed us so abundantly that she gave birth happily; to
Him be glory forever and ever, amen.

Therefore, what I did not dare to do in your presence, now that you are
absent, I now bring forward with these words: \"Respectable, worthy
Lord! God, the Father of all graces, has graciously given me and my dear
Kethen a young daughter: so I ask your dignity, for God\'s sake, to
accept a Christian office, and to be spiritual father to the same poor
heathen, and to help her to holy Christendom through the heavenly
reverend Sacrament of Baptism.\" So you shall be the catechist 1) of my
daughter. Heinrich Dichlensis, the vicar of the provost, will meanwhile
take your place. The Lord be with you. The 5th of May early, Anno 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1390 .**

(Wittenberg.) (May 5) 1529.

**To Margaretha Göritz in Leipzig.**

Luther asks her to be Pathin with his little daughter.

Manuscript in Gotha, *Cod.* 402; in Wolfenbüttel, *Extravag*. 72, II,
fol. 92 and ibid. there, Aug. II, 10, fol. 172 aa. Printed, without an
address, in all editions of the German Tischreden, cap. 17, § 16 (with
the exception of the St. Louis edition, where this passage is referred
to); German also in *Bindseil, colloquia, tom*. II, p. 187, Latin in
*Rebenstock, colloquia, tom*. II, fol. 131 d (also without the name of
the addressee); in the *appendix* to the Leipzig edition of the
Tischreden of 1581\', sheet Pppp iij; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 373; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 448 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 69.

The Magister Göritzin. 2)

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, virtuous woman, dear friend! I ask
you for

1\) \"Catechist\" == Pathe.

2\) She was the daughter of the Leipzig city councilor Christian
Aurogallus. Her husband, M. Joh. Göritz, had attended the funeral of D.
Joh. Specht, who died without communion, in Leipzig in 1533, and was
therefore investigated. Then he turned to Wittenberg. Later, after Duke
George\'s death, he became a judge in Leipzig.

**1296**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1390. 1391. 1392.

**1297**

For God\'s sake, God has given me a poor young pagan woman from my and
my dear Kethen\'s womb: you should do so well and help this poor pagan
woman to become a Christian and become her spiritual mother, so that
through your service and help she may also come from the old birth of
Ada to the new birth of Christ through holy baptism. This is what I want
to do again, to earn for you. I hereby command God, amen. I myself was
not allowed to go out into the air. ^1)^ 1529.

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1391 .**

Weimar. May 5, 1529.

**Duchess Sibyl of Saxony to Luther.**

She reports that her husband, Duke John Frederick, has left Speier and
inquires about the condition of Luther and his family.

The original is in Königsberg in the von Wallenrodt Library. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 161 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 91. As a curiosity,
we reproduce here the letter according to Burkhardt in its entirety.

By the grace of God Sybylla Herczochynne of Saxony D.G. dear wife.
Vnsern gunstygen grus zuvor\" erwerdyger vnd hochgelarter lieber
andechtyger. Out of Christian love, we do not want to save you from the
fact that on the day of your death \[4. We do not want to tell you, out
of Christian love, that we have learned about our most beloved Lord and
God on May 4, which we have heard with all our hearts, and we have not
heard anything else from him, than that our dear Lord and God, with a
healthy laybe from Speyer, was taken away on the last Wednesday \[April
28\]. April\], which was not eight days ago, and his grace had granted a
gracious abbacy of the king, which our here and our mark declared, that
our here and our mark would give God the almighty before it in our
brethren, which we also highly regretted. All praise, glory and thanks
be to the eternal God, who will fill your nights and call upon you. This
we could not do for you out of Christian conviction, so that you should
also be my wife, praise and thanks be to God, that it has come to such a
woman. Also, we would like to know, in a completely Christian way and
with pleasure, how you are doing together with your dear wife, and that
you are all still well informed about what we were grateful and highly
honored for.

1\) According to this last sentence, Göritz must have been in Wittenberg
at that time.

to hear from you. We also declare that God will grant you and your loved
ones all the graces according to his divine will at all times, that you
will always consider us as your dearest friends, and that you will
always be the protectors and protectors of the eternal Almighty God, and
that you will be treated with respect above all else. Date Wymer on
Mytwochen yn der chrutze wochen \[5. May\] ym 29. yar. We ask you not to
be angry with us for the sake of our cry, but we do not want to be angry
with you.

**No. 1392.**

(Wittenberg.) May 6, 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther thanks for a gift and reports all kinds of news. -

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Gothan*. Printed in Innocent
News 1721, p. II; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 142; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
448 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 93.

Grace and peace in Christ.\" The clock you gave, my dear Wenceslaus, has
arrived and, perhaps tired from the journey or unaccustomed to the new
lodging, has rested at times, but it seems to resume its course with
time. I say thank you; poor me, I have nothing to give back. For the
books which we have recently published, I believe, have long since
reached you, and they are such that they are not worthy of the name of a
gift. For they are old things that come forth again in another form.

The Lord has increased my family with a little daughter, Magdalena; the
mother is healthy and happily delivered.

The Diet has ended again, but almost without fruit, only that the
scourgers of Christ and the tyrannies of the soul have not been able to
direct their fury. It is enough for us that we have obtained this from
the Lord, because we cannot hope for anything from the concilium, of
which it is said.

There is with me a man who comes from Venice, who assures that a son of
the Doge (*Ducis*) of Venice is at the court of the Turk; so far we are
fighting against the Turk that even the Pope, the Venetians, the
Frenchman have become Turks publicly and impudently.

**1298** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1392. 1393. **1299**

are. Yes, he says that recently there were 800 Turks in the French army
at Pavia, of whom 300 returned home safe and sound, and tired of this
war. These monstrosities, I thought, were unknown to you because you did
not write anything about them, but they were written and told to me with
these circumstances, so that I believe them to be true. The middle of
the night is thus at hand, in which the cry will be heard \[Matt.
25:6\], \"The bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him.\" Pray for me
and be well with yours, and greet all of ours. May 6, 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1393.**

(Wittenberg.) May 6, 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

A letter with all kinds of news.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*; in *Cod. Goth.* and in part, as part of
the letter to Jonas of June 5, in Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 153.
Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 172; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p.
143; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 450; in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 94 and
(in part, as in the Copenhagen Manuscript) in *Buddeus*, p. 74. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1163.

> To the Lord Justus Jonas, Doctor, and Archbishop of Meissen and
> Saxony.

Grace and peace in Christ! Surely I see that you are men, because you
dare to treat this Loren, 1) like this. Caspar Müller has written almost
the same about the Reichstag, and we are expecting Philip. 2) I have had
a little daughter, as Taubenheim is wont to say; the mother is so far
healthy and cheerful, as if she had suffered nothing. Christo

1\) Lorenz Werder, an Anabaptist from Torgau, who was defiant against
the visitators and Luther. He invoked a free concilium, the Emperor\'s
decree, and filed a complaint with the Elector. Because he made improper
speeches in beer halls, he was put in the Beckerthor Tower. On May 10,
he was released, but with the condition that if he did not renounce his
error, he would have to leave the Elector\'s lands within two months. -
According to Lauterbach, Tischreden, Cap. 37, ? 101, St. Louis edition,
vol. XXII, 1071, \"Master Lorenz\" and \"a goldsmith\" are two different
persons who were caught in the same error, not just one, \"an Anabaptist
goldsmith,\" which the Erl. Briefw. offers.

2\) Melanchthon arrived on the same day. See *Corp. Ref.*, Vol. I, 1063,
Note 2.

be praise and honor. The well-known Jakob Ziegler, 3) a man of great
name (I do not know if you know him), has sent a man to me from Venice,
whom he has accepted as a brother,^4)^ whom I have with me until Philip
returns. From him I have heard that the son of Andreas Gritti (*Criti*),
5) the Doge of Venice, is not only commander of a Turkish army at the
court of the Turk, but is also in charge of the internal furnishings of
the bed,^6)^ and (as the latter says) the Venetians, the Pope, the
Florentines, the Frenchman have completely and publicly accepted the
Turk as a confederate. O monstrosities! Yes, at the last siege of Pavia,
7) he says, the French had 800 Turkish horsemen in his army, of whom 500
were slain, the rest returned home. See what the world thinks of God! At
the same time he sent the history of Clement VII,^8)^ when I read it.

3\) Jakob Ziegler from Landau in Lower Bavaria (his year of birth and
death are unknown) lived as a young man in Moravia, then moved to
Leipzig, where he published his *libri V adv. Waldenses in* 1512. Then
he spent longer years in Italy, where he lived especially in Rome,
Ferrara and Venice in contact and friendship with the most important
men. In 1540 he was a professor of theology in Vienna, which he left for
fear of the Turks, perhaps also because he was considered suspicious of
Lutheranism. He went to the Bishop of Passau, Count Wolfgang of Salem,
who was himself considered a secret follower of Luther, where he
probably died.

4\) *Fratrem sibi adoptatum*. According to Schelhorn, Ergötzlichkeiten,
vol. II, p. 278, Martin Richter, who signs himself at the end of a
Zieglerian book, *Directio summa rerum, which* exists only in
manuscript: *M. Mar- \'tihus Richterus a Rebiczio, Jacobi Ziegleri
Landavi frater selectus, scripsi, absolvique XI. Cal. Sept. a. 1532.
Argentinae*.

5\) Ludwig (eig. Aloisio) Gritti, a natural son of the Doge, who was
born in Constantinople when Andrew was envoy to the Turkish court.

6\) Perhaps == *cubicularius*. Of which *Lonicerus* says*, chrohic.
Turcor. 1584, I, 131: Officium ipsorum est, thalamum imperatoris
mundare, lectum sternere, prunas camino imponere. Quinque eorum noctu in
cubili imperatoris excubant\.... Vocantur Assonglandari, q. d. dilecti
et gratiosi imperatoris filii*. He himself, having gained the favor of
the sultan, had himself called Bogogly, i.e. son of the prince.
(Kretschmayr, Gritti, in Archiv für österreichische Geschichte, 1896,
vol. 83, p.11.)

7\) In September 1528.

8\) This history of Ziegler, which goes back to 1526, was not printed,
but only circulated several times in manuscript. From such a manuscript
it was published by *Schelhorn, amoen. h. eccl.* II, 287.

**1300** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1393. 1394. 1395.

**1301**

I was afraid at that very hour that the sky would fall in. In short, the
day of Christ is at the door, he cannot forgive. Another thing at
another time.

Your Hans is safe and sound. The construction of your wall is
progressing slowly, as Master Hans has been prevented by unexpected
business.

I ask you, if parishes are unoccupied, would you appoint Joachim Hund
and Wolf Holzwart, because they are biting their nails. One is from the
Mark, the other, who has the female with the torn face, has been sent
back to me from Cronschwitz. Show it to me and I will describe them in
more detail. Farewell and pray for me. I am reading on Isaiah, but I
have not yet preached, since the catarrh, which is so persistent, has
not yet been sufficiently conquered. Christ be with you. Given the 6th
of May 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1394.**

(Wittenberg.) May 12, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks the Elector to call Bugenhagen, whom the Hamburgers wanted
to keep completely, back now, since he can no longer be dispensed with.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. O, p. 153. HHH. 1. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 58, No. 85; in Walch, vol. XXI, 276; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 452 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 70.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Mr. Johann Pommer, our pastor, has written to me from Hamburg, how
he is preparing to come here again, and has already sent his avenger
some way ahead, but those in Hamburg are holding him so tightly that he
cannot leave; and further indicates how the said Hamburgers intend to
ask E. C. F. G. that he should remain with them forever. To which I
answered him that he should prevent the Hamburgers from doing so; for we
did not intend to allow this, nor did we hope that our good deed would
be done by them in retaliation. Thereupon he wrote to me again and asked
to request a letter from E. C. F. G., in which he would be requested by
E. C. F. G. again to

again to Wittenberg, so that he could prove that his home affairs were
not his business. Accordingly, my most humble request is that E. C. F.
G. graciously send us such a letter to request him: we also wanted to
send letters to the university and the council, and request him, because
the school has been so torn apart long enough, and because, praise God,
much new company 1) comes here daily, especially from Saxony, we cannot
advise Mr. Johann Pommern to go so long. E. C. F. G. will know how to
graciously prove himself in this. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. May 12,
1529. Luther.

**No. 1395 .**

Weimar. May 18, 1529.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Response to the previous letter.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 153.
HHH. 1. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 162 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.
99.

Our greeting before. Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! We have read
your letter with notification of what he, Johann Pommer, pastor of
Wittenberg, has written to you from Hamburg, and since we note that
those of Hamburg are planning to ask us to let the said Pommer remain
with them for the rest of his life, we send you a letter to this effect,
addressed to the aforementioned council of Hamburg, and we are sure that
they will not endure it, as we have also written and ordered the
Pomeranian to rise there and come back to Wittenberg. In our gracious
opinion, we do not want to restrain you, and we are graciously inclined
to you. Date Weimar, Tuesday in the Whitsun holidays \[May 18\] Anno
Dom. 1529.

Notes.

Since we also have no doubt that our protestation, 2) which we made at
the Imperial Diet held at Speier, will now be printed at Wittenberg, we
request that you send the same protestation, where it is printed, to the
reported Pomeranian, so that it may be posted and reprinted in Hamburg
and the surrounding area.

1\) Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth., lib.* II, p. 121a: *juvenes*.

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 301 ff, no. 820.

**1302** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1396. 1397. 1398. **1303**

**No. 1396.**

(Wittenberg.) 2t. May 1529.

**To the City Council of Memmingen.**

In response to the rumor that Holy Communion had been abolished in
Memmingen, Luther issued this warning letter.

The autograph of this letter is in the Memmingen Archives, from which
Joh. Georg Schelhorn first made it known in his Reformation History of
the City of Memmingen, p. 137; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 58, N0. 86;
in Walch, vol. XXI, 277. in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 453 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 71.

> To the honorable, prudent gentlemen, mayor and council of Memmingen,
> my favorable gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace from Christ. Honorable, prudent, dear gentlemen!
Although I am concerned that this writing of mine would be unnecessary,
and also unfruitful, yet because your pious city child, M. Leo, 1) wants
to go out, and desires such, I have not wanted, on God\'s good advice,
to entrust and ask E. E., in these cruel louses and erroneous
separations. For I have learned that with you the Mass or Sacrament has
been completely taken away and laid down as an unnecessary or free
ceremony, which I am extremely sorry to hear, and which is also
terrible. For Christ did not command his word and pen that we should or
should not do it. Now this sacrament is Christ\'s gift and word, as his
last will and testament, as no one can deny: therefore E. E. has to
worry about a great wrath against your city, that Christ\'s word and
testament is considered nothing at all among you. Oh, dear sirs, wake
up, and look on the bright side, such presumption will not do, and may
happen that we all have to repay you, since God is in favor of it. I
don\'t know what to do, so I am saddened by such evil cries from your
nobility. May the Father of all mercy turn his wrath away from us and
give us to do according to his Son\'s word and command. This, alas, is
what Satan finally meant when he first attacked this sacrament, namely,
that he wanted to abolish it completely and cut off Christ. O dear sirs,
add to this before it becomes still worse. The devil, so far let in,
will not rest until he has made it worse.

1\) Leo Albrecht.

makes. Be warned, beware, dear friends! It is time, it is need. Christ
help and counsel you, amen. May 21, 1529.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 139 7.**

(Wittenberg.) May 21, 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Recommendation of an expelled Scotsman. The translation of the Book of
Wisdom is in print.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, *Helmst*. 285, B. Handwritten in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed in Litterar. Wochenbl. (Nürnberg 1770) II, 371; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, P.145; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 102; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 459 (with the wrong date: \"May 25\") and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 100. Only the last paragraph in *Buddeus* p. 65 and thereafter
German in Walch,vol. XXI, 1163 f.

> To the venerable man in Christ, Mr. Wenceslaus Link, preacher at
> Nuremberg, his superior.

Grace and peace in Christ! Here is a Scotsman, my dear Wenceslaus, whom
I commend to you. Exiled from his homeland and banished for the sake of
the Word, he wanted to go to you and has requested this letter from me
to you, whether he could be advised in any way. He seems to be of
respectable origin among his own and well versed in scholastic theology
and excels in it. If he could speak in our language, it would have been
easy to make use of his work. You do now as it is proper for us to do.
We would have kept him in our poverty, but he had causes that moved him
to do otherwise.

We translated the Book of Wisdom, since Philip was absent and I was ill,
so that I would not be idle; it is already in print, overlooked with
Philip\'s help. For it is to be marveled at how nothing at all is what
Leo Jude translated at Zurich, perhaps at Zwingli\'s behest. Fare well
in the Lord and pray for me. May 21, 1529. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1398.**

Wittenberg. May 22, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther warns the Elector of a new alliance that the Landgrave is said to
have made with several cities.

**1304**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1398.

**1305**

> A contemporaneous copy is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, fol. 94,
> No. 40. Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 59, No. 87; in Walch,
> vol. XXI, 279; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 454 and in the Erlangen
> edition, vol.54, p. 72.
>
> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Elector, and Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen,
> my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Among other things, M. Philippe has brought me this newspaper from
the Imperial Diet, telling me how a new alliance 1) is to exist,
especially between M. G. Landgrave of Hesse and several cities; which
does not move me a little, since I was burned the year before, when God
delivered us from the dangerous alliance by a miraculous grace. And
although I hope that God will protect us, and E. C. F. G. His spirit and
counsel to guard against such and such an alliance from now on, I did
not like to write about it to E. C. F. G. because of other worries and
the compulsion of my conscience, as I know and have experienced that one
cannot appear to the devil and his lusts sufficiently and too
diligently. Christ, our Lord, will grant it through our prayers that,
even if the landgrave continues (before which God will also be gracious)
with his covenant-making, that C.F.G. will not allow himself to be
entangled and bound in it; for we cannot think of all the evil that will
follow from it.

> First of all, it is certain that such a covenant is not made out of
> God, nor out of trust in God, but out of human wit, and to seek human
> help alone, to defy it, which has no good reason, and may bear no good
> fruit, is considered unnecessary; for the Papist crowd is not so
> capable, nor has so much heart, that they should start something, and
>
> 1\) On April 22, the Landgrave and the Elector of Saxony, the latter
> at the urging of the former, had concluded a \"special secret
> understanding\" among themselves and with the cities of Strasbourg,
> Nuremberg and Ulm for joint defense when attacked for the sake of the
> divine word. Because of this alliance, a convention was held at Rodach
> on June 7, 1529. See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 522 ff.
>
> God has already defended us against them with good walls of His power.
> Thus, such an alliance does not create anything more than that the
> enemy is caused to make an alliance as well, and perhaps, as a defense
> and protection, they would like to do what they should leave well
> alone. Moreover, it is to be feared, and perhaps all too certain, that
> the landgrave, where he has formed such an alliance, after it is a
> restless young prince, may not keep quiet, but, as happened before the
> year, may find a reason not only to protect, but to attack; and it is
> not divine that we place ourselves in such a position, when no one is
> yet hunting or seeking us.

On the other hand, the worst thing is that in such a covenant we must
have those who strive against God and the Sacrament as the more wanton
enemies of God and His Word. This is the worst thing that we must have
in such a covenant those who strive against God and the Sacrament, as
the more wanton enemies of God and His word, by which we would have to
take upon ourselves their evil and blasphemy, so that no more dangerous
covenant could be made, to defile and dampen the Gospel, and to condemn
us body and soul; this, unfortunately, is what the devil seeks. If it
will not be otherwise, then God help that E. C. F. G. leave the
landgrave, and be separate, as I hear that my Lord Margrave George said
and does. Our Lord Christ, who has so far helped E. C. F. G. without the
landgrave, even against the landgrave, will probably continue to help
and advise.

Thirdly, in the Old Testament God has always condemned such covenants of
human help, as Isa. 7, 4-7; 8, 12, and says \[Cap. 30, 15\]: \"If you
remain quiet and trust, you shall be helped\", for we are to be children
of faith in God, in right confidence. But if we have covenants, He will
send them to us without our seeking and worrying, as He promises Matth.
6: Do not worry, all these things shall come to you, if you seek first
God\'s kingdom; and St. Peter says: \"Cast all your cares on Him, for He
cares for you\"; and Isaiah: \"Who are you to fear mortal men?\" The
landgrave, who was once so grievously wronged, is not to be trusted,
especially because no change has yet been made in him, nor has he
repented or suffered.

**4306** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1398. 1399. **1307**

I have humbly attributed this to E. C. F. G., in the hope that Christ
has already done this better and more in E. C. F. G.. C. F. G.\'s heart.
We ask and want to ask, and also want to be heard, that God, the Father
of all graces, will advise us, and keep E. C. F. G. safe from all
cunning attempts and requests of the devil, amen. E. C. F. G. graciously
accept my letter. Wittenberg, May 22, 1529.

> E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1399 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 25, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Expert opinion on how a noble abbot who would like to leave the
monastery should behave.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 285d; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 464; in the Altenburg edition, vol. I V, p.
559; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 20; in Walch, vol. XXI, 281;
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 456 and in the Erlanger, vol. 54, p. 75.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The respectable, highly respected Doctor, Gregorius Brück, has
indicated to me how E. C. F. G. would like me to express my concern
about the request of the Abbot of N.,^1)^ so E. C. F. G. asks for advice
as to how he should behave, because he, by order of the Holy See, is to
put on the cap again for more than a year 2c.

On this would be my submissive objection, as I have used for myself so
far against all outgoing personell, that in E. C. F. G., there are still
some people who are not able to advise or tell someone to leave the
monastery or to change his religion. For since such matters concern God
and the conscience, God\'s Word and the Scriptures, which teach us what
each one should do and refrain from doing, are not only given by way of
advice, but also by way of commandment. Therefore, no one may ask me
whether he should do this or that; but let him see, examine his own
conscience.

1\) According to the inscription in the Journal von und für Deutschland,
1785, where p. 431 f. our letter is printed after a bad copy, the abbot
of Fulda; thus John III. (of Henneberg) 1521-1541.

know what he will or may believe and do. I cannot advise him, nor can I
tell him; for in the event that I advise him, or tell him, and he is
uncertain of the matter, and does it in doubt or in a wavering
conscience, then I make myself partially responsible, and would be
entirely the cause of such sins against God.

But it is not a small sin to do something out of doubt or unbelief (that
is, against the first and other commandments); for God wants faith and
not doubt. But who will assure me that he believes? Would that St.
Philip\'s Apost. 8 \[vv. 36-38\] did not want to baptize the eunuch, nor
did he command or advise him to do so, but when he himself desired and
said that he believed in Christ, he gave him baptism on the basis of
such faith.

The abbot\'s situation is also different. For who knows whether he
already believed that he was strong and firm enough in faith to endure
future temptations? For we read in the Scriptures, and experience it
daily in ourselves, what the devil and all the world does against the
right faith, and even brings about, and there is no end nor measure to
persecution and temptation. If the abbot should get an evil conscience,
as happens to many, and should find himself guilty, or should come
across misery, poverty, unhappiness, driving, or some other accident,
and should not be able to suffer such things, and should finally think
and strive back again, as now many do and have done, it would be much
better to leave it alone now.

Therefore, no one can advise nor be called, each one must be his own
master, counselor and helper, according to the divine word, and truly
belongs to a man and heart that may stand chivalrously. E. C. F. G. have
well experienced what the pious princess, Duchess Ursula von
Münsterberg, has suffered over this. For it is especially hard to do to
high persons full of great dominion, and quite bad, indeed not to be
advised by anyone.

For even if they might bring enough good with them in time or find it
elsewhere (which is hardly possible for their status), it is to be
feared that they might not bear the disgrace, contempt, hatred and
disfavor that they would both experience from that part and among ours.
Let them then

**1308** Letters from the year

. No. 1399. 1400. **1309**

And who can advise them, since they do not choose to do and dare what
the devil and the world do and want to do to them? And who can advise
them, if they do not choose to do and dare what the devil and the world
do and want to do to them?

But this is what I wanted to advise, because all things are now in the
balance, and no one knows where God will let the all-stroke go, that the
abbot also suspends his things; perhaps God might so direct that all, or
at least many monasteries should be opened, and he would thus come out
without disgrace and journey, and with a fair amount of provision. But
if they were not opened, it would remain in the above-mentioned manner,
that he would have to examine himself, and take his conscience to
counsel, and dare on God what he wanted to do, and on no man\'s counsel.
For nothing good would come of it, nor would it last, since he who may
not venture on God and God\'s word or counsel, and yet wants to venture
on man\'s counsel, is an idolatrous, unbelieving heart, which trusts in
man rather than God, and certainly intends nothing good, nor will it
accomplish anything good, for which I would certainly give no cause nor
counsel to anyone.

Finally, I think that because the abbot, of high rank and birth, can
nowhere be so well provided for as in the monastery, he should be
advised more to stay inside, since in the monastery he would not only be
well provided for, and would remain in good and honor without disgrace,
but could also create much more good than outside. For outside he can
help no one, but mair must help him, and would still have to be of low
standing and despised. But in the monastery, he would have everything in
his hands, could help many, and in time weaken the monastery atrocities
and let them perish, and thus help many consciences to truth and
freedom; as the pious princess, the abbess at Gernrode, 1) and many
other prelates do.

For if he is serious about having the gospel and serving God, he cannot
serve better than to do as now said,

1\) Gernrode, a women\'s abbey in the Anhalt region (Bernburg).
Elisabeth von der Weida was abbess 1504-1532.

It does him no harm to his conscience that he remains inside, because he
remains inside to help overthrow the abominations and promote God\'s
word, which he cannot do outside. If God wanted me to be such an abbot
or prior over a monastery, I would advise the matter much better than if
I were outside, and I would chase the devil away in his own color and
with his own nature.

But if the abbot complains that he cannot marry, I would rather advise
him to take a secret wife, and nevertheless, as I said, because it is
neither a disgrace nor a custom among the papists to have wives, until
God the Lord sends otherwise, as he will do shortly; for the matter
cannot stand in this way for long. Hereby the abbot would be safe and
provided for, and should not complain about his friendship, since St.
Paul also punishes those who are burdensome to others, and neither work
nor accomplish anything for it 2c., 1 Thess. 2 \[v. 9\].

This time I have shown this in haste, at E. C. F. G.\'s request. Command
E. C. F. G. hereby to the Father of all grace and mercy. Date May 25,
Anno 1529.

E. C. F. G. subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 400.**

(Wittenberg.) May 28, 1529.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends a pastor and his matter to him. About the works of
Melanchthon and Luther\'s translation of the Book of Wisdom.

The original is in the Weimarisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, 199; in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 21 and in *Cod. Rostoch*.
Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 65; in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 174; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 460 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 103. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1165.

> To the highly esteemed man, Georg Spalatin, pastor at Altenburg, the
> faithful servant of Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have decided 2) to send this man, who has
given you this

2\) The Erl. Briefw., which reproduces the original, offers: *statui,*
but has not noted De Wette\'s variant: *statuit.* Also Walch has read
statuit and brings the note: \"*hunc virum statuit*, is an oversight,
since Luther had about the head full\".

**1310** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1400. 1401. 1402. **1311**

my letter, my dear Spalatin, with a certain pastor in your vicinity. He
has asked me to recommend him to you. Therefore, I ask, if you are able,
that you help him in this matter when he asks for your help.

Incidentally, we are indeed quite well here, as befits Christians.
Everything that has been brought from the Imperial Diet, I believe, is
already known to you. Philip greets you respectfully. He has something
against the Sacramentarians under his hand, 1) likewise about the
epistle to the Romans, about which he is now also reading. I translated
the Book of Wisdom while I was idle because of my hoarseness; it will
soon go out in a better form than it is in the Latin and Greek
originals. Farewell and pray for me. May 28, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1401.**

(Wittenberg.) May 28, 1529.

To Gerhard Wilskamp in Herford.

Short response to a letter received along with gifts.

First in German in Walch, Vol. XXIII, Zusätze, p. 35. Walch considers
this letter to be originally written in German, and therefore wants it
to be placed in Vol. XXI, 286. But it is in Latin in Luppe, in
Seebode\'s Neuer krit. Biblioth. für das Schul- und Unterrichtswesen.
1823, vol. I, issue 2, p. 244; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 461 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 104.

> To the faithful servant of Christ, the Lord Gerhard, the lamp 2) of
> Xanten, my exceedingly dear \[friend\] in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! My servant had thrown your letter among all
kinds of papers, my dear Gerhard, so that when I wrote and the messenger
suddenly wanted to leave, he could not deliver it to me again. That is
why I do not fully understand what you had written, since I thought that
I could see your letter again. Because, to put it briefly, I felt that

1\) This will probably be the writing that appeared only in 1530:
*Sententia veterum aliquot scriptorum de doona Domini* (*Corp. Ref.*,
Vol. XXIII, 731), which he revised after the Marburg conversation.

2\) Cf. no. 1315.

Your heartfelt love for me is expressed in that letter, which is also
indicated by the gifts. By the way, to the sister who sent the gift, I
again give this sealed book. But I would like to know which books you do
not have that are printed here, I would certainly send them to you very
gladly. You, as you do, pray for me and all my house, and I will do the
same, for I ascribe much to your prayers. Fare well in Christ. May 28,
1529 Martin Luther.

**No. 1402.**

Wittenberg. May 28, 1529.

To Jakob Montanas in Herford.

Luther speaks highly of Erasmus, thanks him for gifts, and offers to
send books.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 451 and 185. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p.
103; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.461 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 105.

To Jakob Montanus from Speier.

Grace and peace in Christ! What you write about Erasmus, who foams at
the mouth against me, my dear Jacob, I know well enough from his letters
and have seen it in them. He does not publish a book in which he does
not express the inability of his mind or rather the pain of the wound he
has received. But I despise him and will not dignify the man with any
further discussion, but if I write something that concerns him, I will
deal with the matter myself. I will only think of Erasmus as if I were
speaking of a third person, condemning his opinion rather than refuting
it. For the man is exceedingly frivolous, who completely ridicules all
religions, after the manner of his Lucian, nor does he write anything
seriously, except when he writes revenge and harmful things.

Here we are all well, which we attribute to your prayers. I thank you
for the gifts which your love for us shows; I would again send books, as
I promised before, if I knew which ones or which you lacked, but these,
which have recently been published, I send. Fare well in Christ, and,
what you do, pray for me, Wittenberg, the 28th day of May 1529. Mart.
Luther.

**1312** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1403. 1404. **1313**

**No. 1403.**

(Wittenberg.) May 28, 1529.

**To Matthias Drzewicki, Bishop of Leslau.**

Luther thanks him for a kind letter and gift.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B 24, fol. 180 and in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed
in Innocent News 1721, p. 174; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 146; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 462 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 105 f. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1166.

> To the venerable Father in Christ, the Lord Matthias, Bishop of
> Gdansk, 1) his superior to be highly honored in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Venerable father and man to be revered in the
Lord! It is wonderful how I was moved joyfully and sweetly in the Lord
by the receipt of your letter together with the pork ham, since I
realized that you, who are already weakened by old age, 2) are taken and
enlightened by the Gospel of Christ before the day of death. I consider
this grace of God to be completely miraculous, since I know how the
great ones of your class tend to resist the word of God. The Lord Jesus,
who has begun his work in you, will also accomplish it. This I ask and
desire, amen.

Therefore, just as you, venerable father, desire to see me, it would
again be a great delight to me in Christ to see your venerable gray
hairs, who confess Christ in this crowd of hostile great ones, from whom
they dare to deviate. Of course it would not be right for me, 3) nor
would I be free to travel there. But may the Lord give it, who can bring
us together, even if only once; he strengthen you according to his
mercy, venerable father, and keep you, amen. May 28, 1529. Yours, Martin
Luther.

1\) In the text: *Gadensi*, instead of: *Gdanensi*. Gdansk is the Polish
name for Danzig. He called himself Bishop of Gdansk because this
belonged to his diocese, and Leslau, his episcopal see, was an
insignificant and unknown place.

2\) Already in 1503 he was Bishop of Premysl, since 1513 of Leslau,
became Archbishop of Gniezno and Primate of Poland in 1531 and died in
1535.

3\) King Sigismund I had forbidden Lutheranism in Polm.

**No. 1404.** May 29, 1529.

**Anarg von Wildenfels to Luther.**

He asks Luthern to assign Wolfgang Calixtus as a preacher to
Cronschwitz.

The original is in the Weimar Archives as a supplement to Luther\'s
letter to the Elector of July 14. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 163 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 107.

Grace and peace through Christ our Savior. Worthy and esteemed dear Lord
and Brother! After your Mr. Wolfgang Chalickus \[Cholecker, Calixtus\]
ordered to Cronschwitz to see how it \[had\] a form, I summoned him to
me, because I noted that he was well versed in preaching the divine
word, and asked him to go there, because I hoped that he should
accomplish something enough by the grace of God. Although he has shown
me many shortcomings, I have done so much with him that he gave me this
answer: you are his lord and father, whatever you do with him, he will
do obediently. Therefore my request to you is very friendly: If he is in
need of anything, I will give him advice as far as I am able, and show
myself brotherly toward him, for I hope to God Almighty that he will do
much good by the word.

He also reported to me how great disorder was in the monastery; I
advised him to report this to you article by article, that you had
reported it to my lord and asked his C. F. G. that it be changed. I have
advised him to report it to you in articles, that you have reported it
to my lord and asked his C.F.G. that it be changed, and especially that
the preacher be provided with a proper dwelling together with his
salary, so that he may not look into the hands of the nuns. For those
who have been there before have kept the nuns like dogs; if it should
happen to the pious, well-versed man, I would be heartily sorry. If you
would seek this from my lord, his lordship If you were to seek this from
my lord, his C.F.G. would otherwise order it more recently. Please be so
kind as to let this man come here, you shall see, God will grant grace
that something good will be accomplished through him. I hereby command
you, together with your spouse and children, to the Almighty, who will
give us all his divine grace and peace, amen. My hand. On the Saturday
after Trinity (Thrienithatis) \[May 29\] in the 29th year.

A\[narg\], H\[err\] zu W\[ildenfels\].

m**. pp. sspt.**

**1314** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1405 to 1408. **1315**

**No. 1405.**

(Wittenberg.) May 31, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf.**

Luther recommends the preachers of Goslar to him.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Innocent News 1721, p. 175; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, x\>. 147; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 463 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 108. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1166.

Grace and peace in Christ! There is nothing new with us that you do not
know. I have sent these servants of the word of Goslar to you, so that
they may tell you the state of the church in Goslar; these, I pray, you
will hear graciously and let them be commanded to you. They seem to me
to be good and righteous, and worthy of the favor of godly people. But
it is also yours to know such things and to be told of them, since you
first laid the foundation of godliness there and did not build on it
without happiness. Then it will encourage the godly and timid people
when they become aware of our agreement and joy in this matter. At the
same time, it will either disgrace or at least hinder Satan with his
tools. Therefore, receive them favorably with a friendly face and
comfort them with the mercy of Christ. For those who are so fearful of
aversions and so anxious for harmony can only intend the best in Christ.
Christ keep you and keep you well, Amen. On the last day of May, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1406.**

Wittenberg. May 31, 1529.

**To the congregation of St. Jakob in Goslar.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 374. - There the address is missing: \"To
the honorable, wise, dear gentlemen and friends in Christ, the
parishioners of St. Jacob in Goslar, in general and in particular. Line
4 read: as I am able; line 10 instead of: before read: indeed.

**No. 1407.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of May 1529.)

**Luther\'s Concerns to the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 518, no. 864.

**No. 1408.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early June 1529.)

**Think piece.**

Concerns things to be done at the visitators.

From a copy in *Cod. Dessav. A* by H. Lindner in the Theologische
Studien und Kritiken 1835, Heft II, p. 358; also in the Erlanger
Ausgabe, Vol. 56, p. I,XXIII and in De Wette-Seidemann, Vol. VI, p. 101.
In the manuscript is written four times in the margin: \"Ist
ausgericht\" by apparently another hand and imitating Luther\'s
handwriting.

Martin Luther memo.

To Torgau.

To Grimma.

In memory of the visitators of Grimma, Magdalenen Staupitzen is to be
given a little house of the monastery for the rest of her life, 1) in
honor of and thanks to her brother D. Johann Staupitz.

\[In the monastery he is to visit Clemen, who is obstinate against the
Gospel, and he is appointed 2) to deal with some secret dealings
together with Magistro Rode, the mayor, on Duke George\'s part and the
adversary.

\[At Colditz a house is to be hereditary to the priest, likewise to the
good old man He N. Stogheim, as I diligently indicated to H. Doctor
Jonas.

\[Here in Torgau, to talk with the common caste:

\[In order to maintain the cantor\'s office and the divine, praiseworthy
art of music, it is desired to pay a small sum of money from the common
treasury for an organist and about one fl. for paper and writing, for
sang books, and to love and support the poor chaplain, who in former
times earned his living here in pestilence and all hardships, now in
Hans Feil\'s house, also with a tax from the common treasury.

Whether a village priest of ours has enough supply of 30 or 40 fl.
according to the example of Margrave Georgen?

1\) This gives us the approximate timing, because as we see from
Luther\'s letter to Jonas of June 15, this was also already aligned at
that time.

2\) \"appointed\" in the call, notorious.

**1316** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1409. 1410. **1317**

**No. 14 09.**

Wittenberg. June 5, 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Of filling a parsonage; of providing for a certain Simon, and lastly
news.

In some manuscripts and prints, this letter is welded together with the
one to Jonas of May 6 (No. 1393); a large piece is omitted, while
another is inserted; thus in *Cod. Gothan*. 185, fol. 3 and in Ms. 1393,
p. 153 in Copenhagen. In Buddeus, p. 74 and Walch, vol. XXI, 11891)
likewise. - Complete in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 216.
Printed in Schütze, vol. Ill, p. 164; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 468 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 113.

> To Justus Jonas, Inspector of the churches at Meissen.

Grace and peace in Christ! With the letter to Reifenstein for your
Laurentius 2) it happens as you wrote. 3) By the way, as you recently
wrote and we had asked that Joachim 4) be sent to you for the parish
near Colditz, we have come to a different opinion, because he, who
speaks in Saxon dialect, seemed to us to be less suitable for the place,
which we did not think of before, especially because in the meantime he
has received the position in the castle, in which he followed Mr.
Nicolaus, who had left for Silesia and preached in your place. Thus he
remains here until he is called to Saxony. Now there is something else.
This Simon, who delivers this letter, was deposed by the bishops of
Thuringia or rather freed at Kreuzburg, in fact without any great fault
on his part, but more through the hatred of this hard people, so that
peace would exist in the place, and he was highly recommended to me by
Frederick Mecum, although he was already well known to me before. For he
is well versed in teaching, also in eloquence among the first. But why
should I praise him who is perhaps well known to you? I now ask that you
praise this one at the

1\) De Wette and the Erlanger Briefw. lack this evidence.

2\) Probably Laurentius Nieder, cf. no. 1297.

3\) Here, the following is missing in Buddeus and Walch up to the middle
of the last paragraph, instead of which the section from No. 1393 is
inserted: \"The well-known Jakob Ziegler\" 2c. - \"Other at another
time.\"

4\) Joachim Hund. Cf. no. 1393.

The provost of Kemberg says that he has a parish in the vicinity of
Torgau, which has been taken care of by the better ones, especially
since he also has a wife, a very good woman, and two children to take
care of; you can certainly use him in any place.

Your wall stands as a wooden one, built by ribs and beams; now it also
begins to become a flesh one, through the bricks. 5) We hope that Pommer
is on his way and will return to us. ^6)^ Yesterday I took in three nuns
who miraculously escaped from Freiberg in Meissen with the help of their
parents. One is a noblewoman of Mergenthal, the other two are daughters
of Freiberg citizens. That Moab 7) is raging, I know that very well.
June 5, at Wittenberg.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1410.**

(Wittenberg.) (Between June 5 and 15, 1529.) 8)

**To Justus Jonas.**

About the affair of Lorenz Werder; news from Carlstadt and complaints
about bishops and princes.

Manuscript in Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 165 and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol.
2l5. Printed by Buddeus, p. 64; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 451 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VIl, p. 97. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1162.

Grace and peace in Christ, who will bless your work and make it prosper,
Amen. As you have asked, behold, Benedict Pauli comes on

5\) Here ends the section inserted from No. 1393 instead of what is
written in our letter.

6\) Bugenhagen did not start the journey until June 9.

7\) Duke George.

8\) In the editions, this letter has the date: \"May 6, 1529\", the
invalidity of which is already doubted by the Erl. Briefw. doubts. It
seems that Benedict Pauli took the letter with him, the *ecce* suggests
his personal presence. It is inconceivable that Luther wrote on May 6:
\"Behold, Benedict Pauli is coming,\" and only on June 15: \"I hope that
Benedict Pauli has come to you,\" and: \"You will learn everything from
Benedict Pauli.\" Furthermore (this has been claimed by De Wette for a
later dating), the matter of Lorenz Werder, of which the first report
will have reached Luther shortly before May 6 (cf. No. 1393), also
requires the course of a longer time, since Luther has learned in the
meantime, as our letter shows, that Werder has sued him and the
visitators before the Elector, and the latter instructs the Chancellor
Brück to inquire from Luther about the whole deal. The letter will, as
we think, have been written shortly before June 15.

**1318**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1410. 1411. 1412.

**1319**

your wish. I, too, if my clumsiness and foolishness should be necessary,
will gladly be ready. \"Master Laurenz Werder has accused us to the
prince with various and great complaints, so that the prince, through
the chancellor, has requested from me \[a report on\] the action and the
things. I have reported as much as I remembered, since I have sent the
more detailed story back to you for your information. Therefore, it
behooves you to keep the story and his words safe, so that if Satan
wanted to do anything, you would be ready to shut him up. He would like
to present himself as blameless and undefiled, but we would like to
present ourselves as defiled and impure.

1\) Carlstadt has settled in Friesland happily and triumphantly \[for a
long time\]. In \[two\] 2) boastful and congratulatory letters, he has
called his wife to him; of course, Satan will bring us new monstrosities
there. Let Christ be our strength, who strengthens us who are weary and
tired. For in truth we are forced to be people like Hercules and Atlas,
so much so that the whole world lies on our shoulders. No bishop, no
prince administers the office, so that the former only takes care of one
church, yes, one soul, the latter only one city, yes, only one house.
All of them are angry to destroy the will of God. You are well and pray
for me. May 6 (?) 1529. Martin Luther.

**No. 1411.**

(Wittenberg.) June 14, 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

News from Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in *Cod. Gothan*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p.358; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 147; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 469 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 115. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1168.

1\) This entire paragraph, up to the final words: *Tu vale etc., is
found with* slight variations from word to word in Luther\'s letter to
Jonas of June 15. We leave it undecided to which of these two letters it
belongs. We do not believe that Luther wrote the same letter with the
same words to the same person a few days later.

2\) \"long ago\" (*diu*) and \"two\" are missing here, but are in the
letter of June 15.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your wall is still waiting for the bricks to
be made in the town hall brickyard, because nothing has come of the
captain\'s bricks, for what reason you will hear orally. To M. Milich we
have engaged Susanna Muschwitz, the sister of Doctor Augustin\'s wife.
Pommer writes that he will come shortly; when he is here, I will be able
to act and work more easily with you in the visitation, if it is
otherwise necessary. Philip is toiling away with the care of the church
and the community, even to the point of endangering his health. You pray
for me and for Christ to crush Satan under his feet. Greetings to all
your fellow bishops. June 14, 1529, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1412.**

(Wittenberg.) June 15, 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

On visitation matters.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 359; in *Strobel-Ranner*, D.148; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 470 and in
Erl. In all these editions, the second part of letter No. 1410 is also
attached to this letter, where it perhaps belongs. We have not repeated
it here.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I like indeed (if^3)^ it belongs so much to
the matter) that this Stephanus is appointed by you as pastor. Also
about Joachim^4)^ I am of no other opinion than you wrote. I wonder,
however, why you report such things to me; does your decree count for
nothing without my advice or consent? 5) I hope that Benedict Pauli has
come to you. May the Lord restore your flock (*choro*) to Kötteritz 6)
and keep you all healthy and well, amen.

3\) In the editions: *nisi*. The first syllable of this word is erased
in the codex, and we have adopted this reading. The sense will be (as
the following also shows): if my expert opinion is so much needed. Walch
offers: \"Where necessity does not require otherwise\".

4\) Dog.

5\) In the editions: *scilicet absque meo consilio aut voto. Nihil valet
vestra ordinatio*? We have combined both sentences.

6\) Kötteritz was ill. The reading ckoro is correct. De Wette assumes:
oro.

**1320** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1412. 1413. 1414. **1321**

I thank you for thinking of Magdalena Staupitz so faithfully. ^1)^ I
will gladly help M. Georg Mohr wherever I can, although I do not know
whether it would be more advisable for him to remain in Borna in a quiet
life than to be transferred to the swarm of peasants elsewhere. Other
things will perhaps be reported by Stephan, although there is nothing to
write about, since you will learn everything from Benedict Pauli. 2)
Pray for us. June 15, 1529, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1413.**

Plasfenburg. June 15, 1529.

**Margrave George of Brandenburg to Luther.**

The margrave asks Luther for advice on how to carry out a reformation in
monasteries and convents.

A copy is found in the Kreisarchiv zu Nürnberg, Ansbacher
Religionsacten, XI, 85. Made known through print by Kolde in Zeitschrift
für Kirchengeschichte, XIII, 322 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 118.

> To the highly learned, our dear special one, Martino Luthern, Doctorn
> 2c.

By the Grace of God George, Margrave of Brandenburg 2c. Our favorable
greeting before. Highly learned, dear special one! Since, by the grace
of God, the Gospel is preached everywhere in our principalities and
lands, and outside of them in several monasteries, which our parents
have been given the protection and protection of by former Roman
emperors, and since many abuses have been stopped in the parish churches
and, on the other hand, a proper divine or church service has been
established, but, in addition, in several monasteries, all kinds of
pontifical abuses are still being perpetrated by the monks. This is the
cause of all kinds of annoyance and opposition among other of our
Christian subjects, which we, as a prince who likes to be a Christian
and do right, want to stop and prevent, and have therefore asked the
worthy, highly learned Mr. Johann Brenzen (Prentzen), ecclesiastical
priest of Swabian Hall, for advice, and have also asked the priest for
advice.

1\) The visitators gave her a cottage from the Augustinian monastery in
Grimma and appointed her as the girls\' schoolmistress.

2\) Here follows the section on Carlstadt already reported in No. 1410.

We have received from him a short advice 3) in writings, as you can hear
from 4) the enclosed copies. And because our mind is set on acting with
brave Christian counsel in such matters, we herewith request you, quite
amicably, to communicate to us your faithful Christian counsel in such
matters in the most conducive manner, and also to give us different
order and measure, or to indicate how we are to conduct ourselves in
these matters, so that the annoying un-Christian abuses may be put an
end to everywhere in our authority as soon as possible, and correct true
worship may be established. For we testify with God that we seek nothing
but God\'s honor, the salvation of our subjects and common Christian
peace, and we do not intend to improve the monastery and monastic
estates at all, and even if we find it in our council to let the useless
persons die and not to take any others in their place, it shall be far
from us to turn such estates elsewhere than, according to your and other
Christian advice, into the best God-pleasing use.

Therefore, we provide that you should and will give us the most thorough
and best advice, and that you will not complain about providing us or a
common reformation of all such monasteries and convents. We want to
reward this amicably, as is fitting, and to this end we owe you and
acknowledge our graciousness. Hereby blessedly commanded by God. Date
Plasfenburg (Blassenberg), Tuesday after Medardi \[June 15\] Anno 2c.
29.

**No. 1414.**

Wittenberg. June 18, 1529.

**To the City Council of Torgau.**

Luther admonishes the council to provide an official residence for the
physicist D. Basilius Axt an official residence.

Printed in Lingke, Luthers Geschichte und Andenken zu Torgau, p. 88; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 471 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 83.

> To the honorable, prudent gentlemen, mayor and council of Torgau, my
> favorable lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! It has been
reported to me by some in Torgau how your Physicus D. Basilius

3\) This advice of June 1: \"Ordnung des Kirchendiensts, so in den
Stiften und Klöstern fürgenommen werden möcht\", is printed in Presset,
*anecdot. Brentiana*, p. 33.

4\) \"ab\" put by us instead of: \"ob\".

**1322** Letters from the year 1529, No. 1414 to 1417. **1323**

I am therefore kindly requesting that an honorable council will make a
promise and ensure that your adversaries are not given the opportunity
to speak ill of you. Write to me as soon as possible, and show
yourselves to be art lovers, so that your Physicus may one day attain a
certain dwelling, because God has gifted you so abundantly that you are
able to do this easily and well. In this you not only help yourselves,
but also give thanks to God and serve Him. May God grant you His grace.
Wittenberg, June 18, 1529, Martin Luther.

**No. 1415.**

(Wittenberg.) June 20, 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther asks him to find an attorney for Wolf Hornung. He complains about
his overload of business.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 360; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 149; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 472 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 119. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1170.

\"Grace and peace in Christ!\" I beg you, my dear Wenceslaus, that you,
you and Osiander, do not leave me with your united efforts, forces and
advice, for it is partly my cause that is at issue, namely: Wolf
Hornung, who delivers this letter, has finally been summoned to
Regensburg, and shall be heard in his cause. For I believe that you know
how the Margrave of Brandenburg violently and impudently abuses his
wife, in that Hornung himself (because he did not want to approve of
this) has been expelled from his house, his children, his property and
everything. The sum is: these quite unseemly things this tyrant is
doing. I poor man have hitherto supported and fed this poor man who is
banished and wretched. \"Let stone and rock have mercy.\" But this I
desire, that he may find with you some lawyer to go with him to Regens

burg and assist the poor. He will pay the costs, you may only help him
to find one. Do in this matter, I beg you, as if it were my matter and
yours. For this is clearly a very great matter of Christ and
righteousness. \"Let one jump in with his feet and throw in with his
fists.\" Fare well and live with all your own in Christ.

You complain in your last letter that I have not answered your
questions. Do not be surprised: if you want an answer, you must write
again and remind me. For I am so overwhelmed with letters every day that
my table, benches, stools, desks, windows, boxes, borders and everything
lies full of breeze, with questions, trades, complaints, requests 2c.
The whole burden of church and community life falls on me, so neither
the clergy nor the authorities direct their office. You at Nuremberg sit
in a paradise and play, because you have an authority that does and
arranges everything, while you are safe and idle. But we are also
plagued with the affairs of the court, which are not at all
ecclesiastical matters. \"Judgment day will and must come.\" Farewell
and pray for me. June 20, 1529.

**No. 1416.**

Wittenberg. June 23, 1529.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

The twofold redaction of this letter, namely the draft and the actually
sent letter, can be found in the St. Louis edition, Vol. XVII, 1932, No.
20.

**No. 1417.**

(Wittenberg.) June 29, 1529.

**To Michael Stiefel in Lochau.**

Luther invites him to come to Wittenberg for a visit.

Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 66; by De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 476 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 124 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1171.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Behold, my dear Michael, here are Wilhelm
Rink, with Magister Eisleben, and Alexander Drach.

**1324**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1417 to 1420.

**1325**

städt and Wolf Heinzen. But since you come to us very seldom, so that I
wonder what you are doing or thinking, I would like, and they would
like, that you come here to us as soon as you have seen this, in order
to rejoice with them in the Lord. Farewell. June 29, 1529, M. Luther.

**No. 1418.**

(Wittenberg.) June 29, 1529.

**To Michael from the streets in Borna.**

Luther asks him to work towards improving the salaries of the preachers
in Borna.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji,* fol. 54b, A 5.1529. 55.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 60, no. 89; in Walch, vol. XXI,
286; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 476 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 87.

> To the honorable and firm Michael von der Straßen, to Born
> Geleitsmann, my favorable lord and good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, favorable, dear Lord and friend! I
am writing this letter to you secretly because I am also compelled by
reason, namely, that I have investigated your chaplain, as is the case
everywhere at Born, because your preacher 1) so nearly desires to leave.
Now you know that he will also get a leave of absence this time, and
after that, since he came to Ludwig, he will again desire from all of
you: I am not a little moved by such unsteady, fickle behavior on your
part in Born, and I am concerned that you will certainly not keep a
preacher in the end. I have also heard from the chaplain that he
nevertheless has 4 fl. a year, the preacher 36 fl.; so I am surprised
that you all at Born do not do otherwise, or think that it is impossible
for a preacher to live on it. Therefore, my diligent request is that you
help me do the best you can, for in the end no good can be said of you
Bornians, and in time you will be blamed for not asking about the
Gospel. I would have written this to the council, but I would have liked
to be reminded and advised of the matter secretly by you first.
Greetings to your vine and grapes. June 29, 1529 . Luther.

1\) Georg Mohr.

**No. 1419.**

(Friedewald.) (July 1, 1529.)2)

**Landgrave Philip of Hesse to Luther and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

Answer to No. 1416: The Landgrave urgently invites them to meet for a
friendly discussion with Oecolampad and his followers in Marburg on
Michaelmas, so that the discord in our religion, \"for the sake of the
flesh and blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,\" can be settled.
The opposing party had already stated that they wanted to appear.

According to the concept found in the Marburg archives, printed in
Neudecker, Urkunden aus der Reformationzeit, p. 95, No. 28; in Bindseil
in the Supplement to the *Corp. Ref.,* p. 49 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 125 f.

**No. 1420.**

(Wittenberg.) July 6, 1529.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther assigns the matter of the pastor in Borna, Georg Mohr, to the
visitators.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Jen*. a, fol. 219. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 66; by De Wette, vol. Ill,
p. 477-and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VlI, p. 127. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1172.

> To the man who is to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin,
> the extremely faithful and fair servant of the Gospel of Christ at
> Altenburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! You sent M. Georg Mohr to me in vain to
obtain the house, my dear Spalatin. For bringing such things to the
court is of no use, since they are rather sent from the court to us
visitators, who administer our office as executors with the fullest
authority. Therefore, everything that the visitators decree becomes a
settled case, and it may not be invalidated, nor, if someone\'s request
has been neglected, made good. Accordingly, it will be up to you, if you
have not yet brought the deal to court, to help this Georg Mohr and give
him this house while you still have the power. There you have my Mei

2\) The concept is without indication of place and time. Both, however,
result from the fact that on the same day the invitations to Zwingli,
Oecolampad, Jakob Sturm and Osiander were written, of which the letter
to Zwingli offers the above date.

**1326** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1420. 1421. 1422. **1327**

ning. Other things at another time, because I am extremely busy.
Farewell in Christ. The 6\'. Yours, Martin Luther.

You will indicate the same for M. George to the other comrades or to
your colleagues, the visitators. I ask this for the human being.

**No. 1421.**

(Wittenberg.) July 8, 1529.

**Luther and Melanchthon to Landgrave Philip.**

Commitment to come to Marburg on the certain: day.

The original is in the Marburg Archives. Printed in Kuchenbecker\'s
*Analect. Hass, Collect.* X., Marburg 1736, p. 406; in *Corp. Ref.,*
vol. I, 1080; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. XXII and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 104.

> To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord Philip, Landgrave
> of Hesse, Count of Katzenelnbogen, Ziegeuhain, Dietz and Nidda, my
> gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord!
Since E. F. G. has received both of our writings and continues to insist
that we come to Markburg, in the good hope that unity will result from
it, we will also gladly and willingly do our part and, by God\'s grace,
appear at Markburg at the appointed time, if we are healthy and alive.
May the Father of all mercy and unity grant His Spirit that we may not
come together in vain, but for good and not for harm, Amen. May Christ
be E. F. G. governor and leader, Amen. VIII. July 1529.

E. F. G. subservient

> *Martin Luther. Philip Melanchthon.*

**No. 1422.**

(Wittenberg.) July 10, 1529.

**To Jakob Probst in Bremen.**

Luther exhorts him not to be weary by the adversities that befall him in
his ministry, but to persevere.

An alleged original is found at Hildesheim in the library of the
*Gymnasii Andreani* (on the back of the title page of a New Testament,
Wittenberg 1540 by

Lufft) with the wrong year 1540.^1)^ Printed by Sim. Musaeus, articuli
de instauratione ministerii.

1561 (in the introduction); in *Lutheri comment. in Joann. ep. cath. ex
editione Neumanni. Lips*. 1708, Octav, p. 197; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
478; in Liintzel, Annahme des Glaubensbekenntnis von Seiten der Stadt
Hildesheim, 1842, p. 160 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 128. German
in Walch, vol. XXI, 1174.

> To the brother Jakob Probst, who is highly esteemed in Christ, the
> extremely faithful evangelist at Bremen 2c.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I understand from your letter, my dear
Jacob, that you are heartily tired and weary of bearing the ungodly
nature that you still see growing and rising from day to day, so that
you are thinking of changing or leaving your place. Beware of doing
that. For if you want to carry only the good, what special thing are you
doing? Do not the tax collectors and sinners do the same? \[Be of good
courage, and undaunted, and wait for the Lord\" \[Ps. 27:14\]. Remember
the holy man Lot, and remember that the apostle Peter foretold and
pictured that all Christians in the last days would be like Lot \[2 Pet.
2, 7\]. Therefore, let us not go out of Sodom nor leave it until an
angel comes from heaven and takes us away \[Gen. 19:15, f\].

The world is a Sodom. In Sodom we have to live and see all the evil that
plagues the righteous souls. But so their end draws near, so the
iniquities of the Amorites become full \[Gen. 15, 16.\], so they bring
upon themselves a swift condemnation \[2 Petr. 2, 1\]. Fare well and
pray for me, a sinner.

Of the Turk it is said for certain that he is in Hungary with an
innumerable army. 2) May the grace of God be with you. Greetings to your
Eva. Greetings from my Käthe. 3) On the 10th day of July 1529. Mart.
Luther.

1\) That this year cannot be correct has been proven by von Bippe in
Brem. Jahrb., XVII, 162. See also below.

2\) On May 10, the Sultan had set out from Constantinople on his march,
on which he came as far as Vienna. - The fact that this event is
reported in almost the same words in the next letter confirms our
assumption of the timing of this letter to Seidemann in De Wette, Vol.
VI, p. 571, Note 10.

3\) This indicates that the letter was written from Wittenberg. This
also serves to confirm the date, because on July 10, 1540, Luther was at
the convent in Eisenach.

**1328**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1423. 1424.

**1329**

**No. 1 423.**

Wittenberg, July 10, 1529.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

A family message and other news.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 562; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 151; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 479 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 130. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1173.

Grace and peace! From your last letter, my dear Amsdorf, I see that mine
has not been handed over to you, in which I informed you that the.
Doctor Teutlebel 1) has become your brother-in-law, and Sophie, your
sister, has become his bride, and also the Princess Catharina agrees and
wishes happiness. For he has returned cheerful and highly idolized, full
of love and favor towards his bride, whom he praises and holds in high
esteem. After these matters were happily settled, he went to his father
to put his affairs in order and to negotiate about the day of the
wedding. He is very worried about this matter, because he says that he
and two others will be married at the court on Martinmas. He says that
this delay is inconvenient both for him and for his bride, and that both
would prefer that the wedding be accelerated outside the court. He will
also come to you to discuss these matters. You know that for lovers a
wedding is difficult and sometimes dangerous. Fare well in the Lord and
pray for me.

The prince returns to Torgau today with the entire court. Carlstadt also
asks again for the grace to return, but not at all humbly
(*semihumilis*). I don\'t know what I should do; I am lamented by the

1\) D. *juris* Caspar von Teutleben, a friend of Luther, was the brother
of the Bishop of Hildesheim, Valentin von Teutleben, an opponent of the
Reformation. He was a docent in Wittenberg and became a churfürstlicher
Rath at the court of Torgau in 1536. His bride, Sophia von Amsdorf, was
court servant of the wife of Duke Heinrich zu Sachsen, Catharina, in
Freiberg. The wedding took place on November 7. At the same time, Anna
von Dieskau was also married to Hans von Rochaw (cf. De Wette, vol. VI,
p. 453, note 9).

wife and children. 2) Mau says that it is quite certain that the Turk is
approaching from Poland and that he has already reached Hungary with an
innumerable army. Wittenberg, July 10, 1529: Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1424.**

(Wittenberg.) July 13, 1529 (?). 3)

**Ordination certificate for Wenc. Kilmann to Passerin.**

Printed in \"Neue Beiträge von Alten und Neuen Theologischen Sachen,\"
1761, p. 285 (year 1539) ; in Seidemann, \"Lutherbriefe,\" p. 55 (year
1539) and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 131.

Wenceslaus Kilmann came to us and presented a credible testimony, which
testified that he led a godly and honorable life, which the witnesses
had recognized and seen in him for a long time. However, since he had
been called to the preaching ministry in a neighboring congregation, in
Paserin, to teach the gospel and administer the sacraments, he requested
ordination from us. We therefore examined his learning and found that he
had a good grasp of the summa of Christian doctrine and that he
diligently studied the prophetic and apostolic writings and accepted the
opinion of the general church of Christ. We have also seen that he has
good gifts for teaching. He has also promised to be diligent and
constant in teaching and to faithfully present the unadulterated
doctrine that our church professes. We have therefore confirmed the
profession of this Wenceslaus, and by ecclesiastical ordination have
commanded him the office of teaching the Gospel and administering the
Sacraments according to his profession, because it is commanded by God
that the churches examine and ordain the ministers of the Gospel, and
place fit governors in other churches, and the synod to

2\) Carlstadt was still in Oldersum in East Frisia; still on August 19,
he sent a request from there to the landgrave to be allowed to
participate in the Marburg conversation.

3\) The year 1539, which is found in the two older prints, is in any
case wrong. Kilmann was inscribed in June 1527 in Wittenberg, and we
find him in 1533 in Passerin as pastor, where he complains in this year
about the old pastor to the visitators. In 1538 he became pastor at
Soldin in the Neumark.

**1330** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1424. 1425. 1426. **1331**

Nicaea has decided godly and with good consideration that churches
should seek ordination from neighboring churches. But ordination is not
to be sought by those who persecute the gospel of Christ; they are to be
avoided as accursed people, as Paul says \[Gal. 1:8\]: \"If anyone
teaches another gospel, let him be accursed.\" Therefore, it is certain
that our ordination is valid by divine authority and according to the
testimony of the Synod of Nicaea. Therefore we commend this Wenceslaus
to godly churches, and pray that the Holy Spirit may govern his ministry
for the upbuilding of the glory of God and of our Lord JEsu Christ and
for the salvation of the church. Given at Wittenberg, July 13, in the
year of Christ 1529.

**(L. S.) (L. S.) (L. S.)**

T)he pastor of the church at Wittenberg and the other ministers of the
gospel at the same church.

Martin Luther.

Johann Bugenhagen, Pomeranus.

**No. 1425.**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks that Nicolaus Hausmann, pastor at Zwickau, be given a
gracious hearing.

The original is found in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108, 41.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 60, No.91; in Walch, vol. XXI,
288; in De Wette, vol. III, p. 480 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 88.

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Chiselt, my
> most gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. The faithful, pious man, the pastor of
Zwickau, Nicolaus Hausmann, has been with me for several days, and has
arranged things concerning conscience. Now he also has other matters
concerning external things, in which he needs E. C. F. G.\'s gracious
advice and help, and so shamefully that he would like to exaggerate E.
C. F. G. with it, and does not like to present it. Is therefore to E. C.
F. G. my

I would like to ask E. C. F. G. to provide him with gracious
interrogations, so that the good man may also come to the end of his
matters; for E. C. F. G. know the man, that he is pious and worthy.
Christ, our Lord and Savior, be with E. C. F. G. always, Amen. July 14,
1529 E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1426.**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks that Wolfgang Calixt, preacher at Cronschwitz, be provided
with pay and housing, and encloses the letter of Anarg von Wildenfels
(No. 1404).

The original is found in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* fol. 108, 41.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 60, No.90; in Walch, vol. XXI,
287; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 480 f. and in the Erlangen Edition, vol.
54, p. 89.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! This Wolfgang Calixtum, which I sent to Crouswitz by order of E.
C. F. G., is to be tried for a short time. I have now been able to go
there again, although with difficulty, considering that not only the
nuns in the monastery, but also the bailiff and the castle, as well as
the noble Lord Onarg von Wildenfels with writings, have highly desired
and requested this of me, in the good hope that he should produce great
fruit, as he has begun, because they cannot praise the man enough. Now
he complains that a preacher is not provided with pay and housing:
therefore my humble request is that E. C. F. G. graciously see to it
that he is provided, as he himself will perhaps continue to show. For as
far as he has allowed himself to be moved, I have also put him off, and
if he could bring the nuns to peace, and please them all, as they write,
the fare would be very reasonable.

**1332**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1426 to 1430.

**1333**

not badly invested. E. C. F. G. will know well how to keep. Hiemit GOtt
befehlt, Amen. July 14, 1529.

E. C. F. G.

subservient Martin Luther.

If E. C. F. G. desires, they may hear for themselves from von
Wildenfels\' letters, enclosed here, how they regard the man.

**No. 1427.**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1529.

**To Conrad Cordatus at Zwickau.**

Luther admonishes him not to become despondent because of the
Zwickauers\' hardness and ingratitude.

Printed in Schlitze, Vol. II, p. 104; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 481 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 133.

Grace and peace in the Lord! And you, my Cordatus, be strong in Christ,
so that you may be able to bear your hard and ungrateful oppressors, and
not lose heart, nor plan to change the place. This challenge will prove
you better than any other has ever done. Remember that the world is the
world, that is, an enemy of the Word of God and an adversary of God.
Therefore, it is wonderful if among the enemies of God some, however few
they may be, are found to be friends of God. The world loves its own,
and precisely because the world despises and hates us, we recognize that
we are not of the world, but chosen out of the world \[John 15:16 ff\].
But you have not yet suffered, nor do you suffer, anything other than
Satan made flesh, who through the flesh, as hindered by a slow
instrument, cannot harm as much as he would like; but I believe to
suffer the devil separated \[from the flesh\] and mighty by his majesty.
Therefore, you act brotherly in comforting me so sweetly and praying
faithfully. So continue and pray for me, as I do for you, that we may
finally be delivered and in the meantime bear fruit in patience for
Christ, amen. July 14, 1529. Greetings to your rib beloved in the Lord.
Yours, Martin Luther.

**No 1428.**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1529.

**To Count Albrecht zu Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1216, no. 145.

**No. 1429.**

(Wittenberg.) July 17, 1529.

**To Christian Bayer, Chursächsichen Chancellor.**

Request response to Carlstadt\'s request for escort.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, p. 367. 183. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 93; in Walch, vol. XXI, 288 f.; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 483 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 91.

> To the respectable, highly respected Mr. Christiano Bayer, Chancellor
> of Saxony, my favorable master and dear godfather.

Grace and peace in Christ. Respectable, esteemed Doctor, Chancellor and
dear Godfather! D. Carlstadt\'s wife has diligently asked me to request
a written escort from M. G. H. for her doctor, who wanted to go in
again, after some appeals from the visitators, which were made to her
beforehand. Now everyone says so badly that I have no hope of acquiring
such escort; therefore my friendly request is that you help me to get an
answer to this request from the Chancellery, so that I may redeem my
faith that I have sought it: if I could, I would earn it again. I, my
faithful Käthe and all greet your dear Heva Barbara, Christiana,
Isabellam, our godmother, kindly. God be with you, Amen. July 17, 1529,
Martin Luther.

**No. 1430.**

Wittenberg. July 18, 1529.

**To Georg Vogler, Chancellor at Ansbach.**

Luther recommends Bernhard Ziegler as a teacher of Hebrew at the college
to be established in Ansbach.

From the Ansbach Archives in Reinhard\'s Contributions, Th. 1, p. 134;
in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 484 and in the Erlangen Edition, Vol. 54, p.
92. Ueberall as from July 18 (see below).

1\) The original has July 17. Luther himself crossed out the last I of
XVIII. (Burkhardt, p. 165.)

**1334** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1430. 1431. **1335**

> To the honorable, prudent Georgio Vogler, Chancellor at Onolzbach 2c.,
> my favorable lord and friend for his own hand.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, careful, dear Lord and friend!
Herewith I am sending you a letter from Magister Bernhard Ziegler; and
because I notice that the wood has already been put to the fire that he
should teach Ebräisch with you, I want to help with this and ask you to
let him be commanded to do so. But I will not leave it with the
reservation, where I can keep him here, because I do not like to let him
come from us, because he is the most learned, most diligent, most pious,
most faithful Ebrew, whom I know, and do not think his peers live much
now. But if he is granted to M. G. H., Margrave Georgen, I will gladly
grant it to H. F. G. as well. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. July 18, 1529.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 431.**

(Wittenberg.) July 18, 1529.

**To Margrave George of Brandenburg.**

Response to No. 1413: How to deal with the monasteries; establishment of
high schools and schools for children. Recommendation of Georg Schlegel
for support.

The original is in the Nuremberg County Archives, Ansbacher
Religionsacten, XI, 93. Printed in Reinhard\'s Beiträgen, Th. I, p. 134;
in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 485 and in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 54, p.
93.

> To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord George, Margrave of
> Brandenburg, Duke of Stettin, Pomerania, Prince of Rügen, Burgrave of
> Nuremberg, my gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! I
have delayed E. F. G. a long time with the answer, although unwillingly;
for at first I was not idle, since the messenger suggested, then I did
not have certain message; E. F. G. will graciously grant it to me. But
now that I have received this He Georgen Schlegel certain Ganges, I
hereby wish to \[indicate\] to E. F. G.,^1)^ what I, together with the
advice and concerns of M. Phi

1\) Luther forgot one word here.

lipps Melanchthon for the best in this matter.

First of all, we consider it good to let the monasteries and convents
remain until they die out; for since the old ones still live in them,
there is not much hope that it would go peacefully where they would be
forced to promote or tolerate such innovations; also, in the end, such
lections and ordinances, which are reestablished from the previous old
examples, would in time again become a barren entity, as has happened so
far. But what one would want to reestablish of such old good order of
church services, that 2) one would do it in the common children\'s
schools and parish churches, where the common man would also come to and
be stimulated, as we do here in Wittenberg and other cities.

For another, it would be fine for the F. F. G. to establish a place (or
two) in the principality for a high school, where not only the Holy
Scriptures, but also law and all kinds of arts would be taught, from
which schools learned people could be taken as preachers, pastors,
scribes, councilors 2c. for the whole principality. And for this
purpose, the monasteries and convents should be ordered to pay an
inheritance, so that they may receive good scholars with honest
salaries: 2 theologians, 2 jurists, 1 medicum, 1 mathematicum, and four
or five persons *per grammar, dialectica, rhetorica, etc..* For where
there is to be a good study, there must not be empty cloisters or empty
monasteries and \"Stiftkirche\", but a city in which many come together
and practice and stimulate and do among themselves. Solitary studies do
not do it, common ones do it, since many give cause and example to the
other 2c.

Thirdly, that in all towns and villages good children\'s schools be
prepared, from which one can \"take and choose\" those who are capable
of high school, from which one can draw men for country and people. And
where the towns or citizens were not able to do so, that one should
donate scholarships from the \"finished monasteries and convents to
obtain some skilful assistants\", so that each town would have one or
two students.

In time, when the common man see

2\) In the editions: \"das man thät\".

**1336**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1431. 1432. 1433.

**1337**

If their sons are able to become pastors, preachers and other offices,
they will probably keep the same ones in school again who now think that
no scholar can be fed.

Whether some scholars, educated in such schools, might come to serve and
hold office in other principalities, and want to be pretended that other
masters\' people would be attracted to them: 1) it is to be considered
that one has no harm to them; for they would undoubtedly promote such
schools and foundations with other princes and people and make favor 2c.
Such I wanted to indicate to E. F. G. according to my little
understanding. May God give His Holy Spirit to E. F. G. to improve all
this and to accomplish His good pleasure in all things, Amen. July 18,
1529.

E. F. G. williger

> Martinus Luther.

I also ask, my gracious lord, if it would please E. F. G., to give
Georgen Schlegel of Gunzenhausen a piece of the prebend that he may
study here with us for a while; for he will become a good pastor or
preacher, as we consider him. So he is also a child of the country 2c.

**No.1432.**

(Wittenberg.) July 19, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther recommends Wolfgang Rappolt to him.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
93. Handwritten in Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 32 b.
Printed in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 152; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 105; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 487 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 136. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1372.

> To the man highly revered in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> faithful and diligent bishop of Zwickau.

Grace and peace in Christ! This Wolfgang Rappolt is leaving us to go to
his Nuremberg, after he has been released by us upon his request. It is
certain, however, that he will address you, but we have not let him go
empty-handed, given our poverty, and would like to see him healthy.

1\) This \"for\" seems too much for us.

The patient could have worn his condition for a longer time if he had
wanted to.

Besides, there is nothing new to write about, especially since I was
uncertain whether you had returned home. Pray faithfully for me, a
sinner, and be well in Christ. July 19, 1529.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1 433.**

(Wittenberg.) July 19, 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther recommends the drunken Wolfgang Rappolt to him for support.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p.36I; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 153; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.487 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 137. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1175.

Grace and peace in Christ! This Wolfgang Rappolt, who came to us before
(if I am not mistaken), recommended by you, I again recommend to you, my
dear Wenceslaus, that he returns to you. For although we wanted to keep
him back, so that we did not burden others 2) as we otherwise supported
him from the ecclesiastical collections: yet he stubbornly set his mind
on changing the air and the place in order to restore his health.
Therefore we let him go, gave him ten florins for carriage and traveling
money, and paid his debts, that we might not leave him empty as he came.
For he says he has relatives at Nuremberg whom he confidently hopes will
support him. Therefore, if your help should be necessary for him to be
taken in either in a hospital or with his relatives, you will be doing a
work of mercy, for we too have kept him in our poverty long enough so
that he did not want to be a burden or a complaint to us, even though we
were willing to continue to feed him out of forbearing love. If it
should be necessary, make use of Osiander\'s service and help. Pray for
me, a poor sinner. July 19, 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

2\) Here we have assumed with De Wette *alios* instead of: *alienos*.

**1338** Brjefe from the year 1529.

No. 1433. 1434. 1435. **1339**

See also that you pray for common peace. Satan is planning a great evil
for Germany through our people, to an unbearable trouble for the gospel.

**No. 1434.**

(Wittenberg.) July 29, 1529.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Ask for a refuge for the fugitive pack.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 106; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 488 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 138.

Mercy and peace! Behold, my dear Amsdorf, we offer the poor and exiled
D. Otto Pack to your mercy, because we fear that it will happen that
Duke George will look for him among us. Therefore, we believe that he
will be safer in Magdeburg; you want to cooperate in this, because in
this man, God is served. But we know that you will do everything. From
him you will hear the whole tragedy. July 29, 1529. Yours, Martin
Luther.

**No. 1435.**

Wittenberg. July 31, 1529.

**To Johann Brismann in Riga.**

Luther consoles Joh. Brismann, who was struggling with difficulties,
tells him about the Marburg conversation and complains about the
Landgrave\'s restless spirit.

The original is in Königsberg in the Wallenrodt Library. Printed by
*Andr. Vogler*, No. 7; in Erläut. Preuß., Ill, 202 (incomplete); in
*Acta Borussica,* I, 803; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 154; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 490 (with the wrong date: August 2) and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 139.

> To Mr. Johann Brismann, the faithful and sincere servant of God at the
> Gospel in Riga 1) in Liefland.

Grace and peace in Christ! Finally, a certain and reliable messenger has
come to you, and more than a messenger, Johann Lohmüller, the syndicus
and envoy of your city, my dear Brismann, so that I can

1\) At the request of Wilhelm, the brother of Duke Albrecht of Prussia,
Brismann left Königsberg for Liefland in October 1527 and remained there
until June 21, 1531. Conditions there, especially in Riga, were
difficult because the cities were trying to gain political independence
from the Teutonic Order and the archbishop.

I would have no excuse if I did not write to you. First of all, I thank
the Lord for calling and guiding you there; then I thank him for the
fact that some people like you and others do not like you. For so it is
also with us, that false brethren trouble us more than the adversaries,
and we are only now compelled to learn what it is that St. Paul so often
complains about false brethren. Since they were not able to do anything
before us and without us, they now live up to the praise of their
progenitor: \"He that eateth my bread treadeth me under foot. But since
even the Lord Christ, and before him the prophets, and after him the
apostles, were compelled to suffer such people, who are we that we
should refuse to be conformed in the same likeness to Him whom we
preach, since even they, the people of an exceedingly tender heart, were
no less moved by the very burdensome and ignominious likeness of the
agonies, so that Christ clearly indicates this pain Matth. 18:6, where
he judges the perpetrators of the offense with such a terrible sentence
that a millstone is hung around their neck and they are drowned in the
deepest part of the sea. Therefore remember the psalm of consolation and
exhortation, which says \[Ps. 27:14.\] \"Harvest thou the LORD, be of
good cheer, and do not fear, and wait for the LORD.\" Dear Lohmüller
will report everything about me and, as an eyewitness, everything that
is going on with us.

The Landgrave of Hesse summoned us to Marburg on St. Michael\'s Day in
order to attempt a union between us and the Sacramentarians. After we,
Philip and I, had refused for a long time and resisted in vain, we were
finally forced by his impetuous urging to promise that we would come,
but I do not yet know whether the journey will go ahead. We have no good
hope, but stand in the suspicion that everything is full of pitfalls, so
that they may carry off the honor of victory, as we see that in the time
of Arius such meetings always did more harm than good, and the glorious
Arians continued to spread theirs. Osiander of Nuremberg, Johann Brenz
and others have also been called, but they very much refuse to come.

**1340**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1435. 1436. 1437.

**1341**

Whatever may happen now, pray for us that Christ may govern it for our
salvation, Amen.

Furthermore, we have no news, only that the English disease 1) is feared
everywhere, and began to put some in fear here; but by God\'s grace this
fear has subsided. I am somewhat healthy in body, but weak in spirit,
suffering in faith like Peter. But I am still sustained by the prayers
of the brethren, that I may not succumb. I commend myself to your
prayers, and ask that you stir up and urge your churches to pray for the
course of the Gospel and for worldly peace.

That young man in Hesse is restless and heated in his thoughts. The Lord
has protected us in the last two years from two very great
conflagrations, by which the whole of Germany would have been set on
fire, because God would not have had mercy on us and would not have
defended us with his mighty and wonderful hand and would not have
destroyed the attacks. Thus we have more danger from all sides than from
the adversaries. And the bloodthirsty Satan, who has murder and
bloodshed in mind, does not yet rest; therefore we must pray diligently.
Greet your rib and admonish it in my name that it may patiently endure
your journey abroad. Let her read the history of Sarah and Rebecca, and
rejoice after the example of those, that she is worthy of it from God
for the sake of the Word, and she will have peace and honor. We hope for
the same rewards as those, and yet we do not suffer the same with them.
Christ be with you, amen.

Greetings to all brothers, especially to the old companion Andreas
Knopken, the faithful servant in Christ. Wittenberg, the day before the
first of August, 1529. Martin Luther.

**No. 1436.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. August 1529.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

Luther consoles Cordatus in the sufferings that the orientation of his
office entails. - The letter seems to be only a fragment (De Wette).

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 106; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 489 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 143.

1\) The so-called English sweat, which had been introduced by ships in
Hamburg.

Grace and peace in Christ! But see, my dear Cordatus, with how true
signs Christ shows that he loves you, since you are so detestable to
these beasts that you even carry out your work for yourself at the risk
of death. But he who loves you will also preserve you, as he has
preserved you until now, against the will of the gates of hell. But this
is my prediction, that if it does not change in this cave, I will
experience in you what Christ says \[Matth. 10, 23.\]: \"If they
persecute you in one city, flee to another.\" Fare well in the Lord.
August 1, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1437.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. August 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther consoles the househusband about his poor success at court, and
reports about a writing that the latter thought to have left behind in
Wittenberg.

Manuscript at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26 and in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 563; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 156; in Schütze, vol. III, p.165 (as to Amsdorf);
in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 489 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 143.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1176.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, your
> extremely faithful bishop of Zwickau, his superior.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu! Although you have not complained to me,
my dear Nicolaus, I have learned from elsewhere how my intercession with
the prince has been of no use to you; but be strong, God will also put
an end to these things. 2) The court is the seat and the camp of the
devil, although the prince is very good. Perhaps this knight, the
donkey, was to blame, and that one, yours, the friend of this one. If
they will not see to it that it will be different, I will advise and
help you to shake the dust from your feet and leave Zwickau and wander
elsewhere, you and Cordatus at the same time. I will remember Paul; in
the meantime, just hold your breath and be people like Atlas with this
perverse and evil generation.

The notes of Cellarius on Isaiah

2\) *Virg. Aen., lib.* I, v. 199.

**1342** Letters from the year 1529. No. 1437 to 1440. **1343**

you did not leave here. Because since we carefully searched everything,
we did not find them anywhere. Perhaps Johann Cellarius will be there
himself soon, traveling through there to his profession, 1) and will
greet you. He does not yet know that the notes are lost; perhaps they
would like to be found in the meantime. The Lord be with you always, and
pray for me poor sinner of Christ. My Käthe greets you respectfully. On
the first of August, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1438.**

(Wittenberg.) August 5, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Cover letter for Johann Cellarius.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Manuscript at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum*, Ms. 26 and in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p.564; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 157; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 492 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 144. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1177.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> extremely faithful bishop of the church at Zwickau.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Here comes M. Johann Cellarius, my
venerable Nicolaus, whose Isaiah you have either lost or found again.
For I have reported it to him, and you continue to talk with him, and
there is no need to write much, for you have his living voice, which
will better tell you everything that is going on here. I believe that my
last letter has been delivered to you, in which I asked that you be
strong in bearing the malice of devils and men. \"When the rope holds
hardest, it gladly breaks.\" The Lord be with you, Amen. August 5, 1529.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 1439.**

(Wittenberg.) August 10, 1529.

**To Martin Glaser.**

Luther wishes him happiness with his family and his adherence to pure
doctrine, and exhorts him to carry out his ministry steadfastly and
faithfully.

Printed in *Crenii animadvers. philol. hist*. Ill, 143; in De Wette,
vol. III, p.492f. and in Erl.Briefw., vol. VII, p. 145. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1177.

1\) to Frankfurt a. M.

> To the brother to be highly honored in Christ, Martin Glaser, the
> exceedingly faithful servant of Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have been talking about this for a long
time and have been searching for it, my dear Martin, where in the world
and in which place you were staying, but no one has been able to tell me
for sure, except through this letter of yours. But I rejoice and wish
you happiness that the Lord has given you a wife and blessed you with
children, but most of all that he keeps you free from all defilement of
spirit in these confusions of doctrines and sects, and healthy in the
teachings of Christ. Therefore, that you may be thankful for this divine
and greatest gift, I beseech you for Christ\'s sake that you may be
strong and steadfast in the ministry you have taken upon yourself, and
that you may not be guilty of letting the multitude either of sects or
of ungrateful men overcome you through weariness and compel you to take
upon yourself another work. From day to day the ministers of the Word
are becoming fewer, especially those who are not corrupt, so that in a
short time there will be a lack of shepherds everywhere and the churches
will stand desolate if the Lord is not our helper. But pray for me, a
sinner and a weak brother. Give my love to your rib. Christ be with you
with his blessing, Amen. August 10, 1529.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1440.**

(Wittenberg.) August 13, 1529.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther asks him to support the new pastor in Colditz, Augustin Himmel.

The original is in Gotha, *Cod.* 122, fol. 135. Handwritten in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed in *Buddeus*, v. 69; in Innocent News 1721, p. 714; in
*Schlegel*, *vita Spal.* , p. 24; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 493 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VIl, p. 146. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1178.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, M. Georg Spalatin, Bishop
> of Altenburg, his brother who is extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Here comes to you M. Augustin, who was in
Colditz an

**1344**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1440. 1441. 1442.

**1345**

will be a neighboring pastor. But because he will come as a poor man
into an empty house, he is forced to borrow everywhere, so that he can
get over the first year and live without outside help. With my
meagerness, I will lay out something, but because this is not enough, he
also wanted to use your advice, whether you could help him to borrow
something from you. I do not like to burden you with these things, and
yet the brother\'s need forces me to do what we do unwillingly, and I
know that you do not resent this. Therefore, I beg you, if you can
benefit the man, do it; he will faithfully return it. For it is well
known to you that he is godly and faithful. The Lord be with you, amen.
August 13,^1)^ , 1529. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1441.**

(Wittenberg.) August 17, 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Request for care for the new pastor in Oelsnitz, and news of the death
of Melanchthon\'s son.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 564; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 158; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 494 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 147. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1179.

Grace and peace in Christ! This man, whom you have appointed pastor in
Oelsnitz, my most esteemed and dear Jonas, I wanted to have come to you
as a witness with this letter of mine, since he had already decided to
complain to you that he has nothing to live on; and he does work, but
without pay. Therefore, see to it that he does not die of hunger,
whether he is to work there only temporarily or forever. In fact, he
seems to me to be little and not very deeply learned. In addition, there
is the challenge of hunger, which could perhaps drive him to madness,
for he does not seem to me to be of a steady mind.

To our Philip the Lord gave his son George last Sunday \[Aug. 15\].

1\) In the original: XIII *Augusti*, but in Spalatin\'s inscription:
XIII *Cal Aug.* that is, July 20. Either Spalatin or Luther was
mistaken.

nominal. You can imagine how much trouble and worry we have to comfort
this person, who has a very tender and sensitive heart. It is to be
wondered how hard this death of his son is for him, since he has not
been exercised by such a case before. You pray for him as much as you
can, that the Lord may comfort him, then write him a letter of comfort
according to your oratory. You know how important it is that this man
live and be healthy. We all grieve with him and are sad, except for
yours, which concerns myself and happens daily. But the God of the
humble and afflicted is not yet down, though He is very and ever weak.
Another time, when the sorrow has settled down to some extent. Farewell
and greet your fellow bishops reverently in the Lord. On Tuesday after
the Assumption of Mary \[Aug. 17\] 1529, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1442.**

(Wittenberg.) August 17, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Thanks for gifts, namely of clothing.

The original is in the church library of St. Jacobi in Freiberg. Printed
in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 291b; in the Jena edition
(1566), vol. IV, p. 466b; in the Altenburg, vol. I V, p. 561; in the
Leipzig, vol. XXII, p. 555; by Walch, vol. XXI, 289; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 495; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 95 and, according to
the original, in the Mittheilungen des Freiberger Alterthums-Vereins,
1866, issue 5, p. 495.

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my
> most gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have long been remiss in thanking E. C. F. G. for the gifts and
the clothes and robes he has given me. But I will humbly ask E. C. F. G.
that E. C. F. G. not believe those who offer me as if I were in want.
Unfortunately, I have more, especially from E. C. F. G., than I can bear
in conscience; as a vain preacher, it is not my place to have abundance,
nor do I desire it.

**1346** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1442. 1443. 1444. **1347**

That is why I also feel all too mild and gracious favor to E. C. F. G.,
so that I am immediately afraid; because I would not like to be found
here in this life with those to whom Christ says: \"Woe to you rich, you
have lost your reward\" \[Luc. 6, 24\]. Moreover, to speak worldly, I
would not like to be burdensome to E. C. F. G., as I know that E. C. F.
G. has so much of giving, that she may have nothing left to such a
state; for too much tears the sack.

Therefore, although it would have been too much to wear the
liver-colored cloth, so that I may be grateful to E. C. F. G., I will
also wear the black skirt in honor of E. C. F. G., although it is too
delicious for me, and if it were not a gift from E. C. F. G., I would
never be able to wear such a skirt.

Please, therefore, ask E. C. F. G. to wait until I myself complain and
ask, so that I will not shy away from asking for others who are much
more worthy of such graces than I am. E. C. F. G. does too much for me
without that. Christ will and shall graciously and abundantly repay it;
this I ask from the bottom of my heart, Amen. August 17, 1529. E. C. F.
G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1443.**

(Wittenberg.) August 21, 1529\....

**To Spalatin.**

Luther speaks out about two legal cases in which his judgment had been
requested.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. X, 200; in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 220 and in *Cod. Rostoch*.
Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 70; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 496 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 148. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1182.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the
> faithful servant of the Lord at Altenburg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It does not seem necessary to me, my dear
Spalatin, that my judgment be demanded in the matter of Georg Coecus, 1)
since you, as

1\) Perhaps this is the marriage case of the blind (*Coeci*), which was
mentioned in No. 1333.

I hear that you have the judgment of our Philip; why do you not carry it
out? Then I hear only the one party; no judgment must come from the
mouth of a man.

I believe that in the case of Lindener 2) this offense does not
sufficiently justify guilt for a divorce, but one must ask and certainly
investigate whether he is incapable of performing the marital duty to
the wife; this would cause a right to divorce. By the way, in what way
the offense should be punished is not for me to prescribe. Farewell and
pray for me. August 21, 1529.

I would have written more expansively, but I was uncomfortable. Martin
Luther.

**No. 1444.**

(Wittenberg.) August 22, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

About an economic matter of the church in Hildburghausen.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. N, fol. 108. 41. Printed in
the Leipzig Supplement, p. 61, No.94; in Walch, vol. XXI, 290; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p.497 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 96.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Most noble, highborn prince, most gracious
lord! They are the heads of the common estate of Heilpershausen, and
indicate how they have been ordered by the Visitatoribus to change the
unseemly interest, and to buy lying grounds: thus they have bought a
farm in Meder 3) for 1100 florins, which is in fief from E. C. F. G.,
have asked me for this interpellation, that E. C. F. G. wants to grant
such a fief to the same poor fund, as they will indicate further. Now I
know nothing

2\) According to Bossert, Luth. und Würtemb., p. 66, it is Hieronymus
Lindener from Schwäbisch-Hall, Melanchthon\'s famulus, then for a time
with Chyträus in Rostock, recommended by Melanchthon to Brenz in 1559.

3\) Seidemann notes in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 583, note 4: \"Instead of
\'Merder\' seems to be read: Melder, Meeder.\" See there p. 680 s. v.
Meeder.

**1348**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1444. 1445. 1446.

**1349**

They say that the knight\'s service will not be taken away, nevertheless
remain on other estates, as before, only that the feud would be taken
away, for which they are willing to reimburse E. C. F. G.. I do not know
how to refuse such a request to E. C. F. G., because both the council
and the priest 1) have asked me in writing. E. C. F. G. will graciously
show themselves in their undertaking, which I believe they mean well.
Christ be with E. C. F. G., Amen. 22 Aug. 1529.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Mart. Luther.

**No. 1445.**

(Wittenberg.) August 26, 1529.

**To Joseph Levin Metzsch in Mila.**

Expert opinion on the extent to which the despisers of the Gospel are to
be tolerated.

Handwritten at Zwickau in the Rathsschulbibliothek, vol. XXXVI. Printed
in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 482 b; in the Altenburger, vol. I V,
p. 704; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 556; in Walch, vol: XXI, 1976
and in the Erlanger edition, vol. 54, p. 97.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1686. There, the address is missing,
which is already given in the Eisleb. Edition: \"To the strict and firm
Joseph Levin Metzsch at Mila, my favorable master and friend.\" - Col.
1687, line 2 reads: teacher instead of teaching. - The \"pastor\" is
Thomas Löscher; the \"letter to him\" the following number.

**No. 144 6**

(Wittenberg.) August 26, 1529.

**To Thomas Löscher, pastor in Milan.**

An opinion on the treatment of the despisers of the Gospel.

Manuscript in the Zwickau Rathsschulbibliothek, vol. XXXVI; in
Wolfenbüttel, Cod. 20,5, fol. 209b and ibidem *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol.
15 b (with the date May 21, 1530); in Copenhagen, Ms. 1893 (May 3l,
1530; address: *Thomas Tescher*) and at Dresden in *Cod. Kummer*, p. 280
(incomplete, without address and

1\) The parish priest at Hildburghausen is Johann Weybriuger. See No.
1366.

date). Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 30 (with the wrong date 21 May
1530); also by *Buddeus*, p. 75; by De Wette, vol. I, p. 326
(accidentally placed in the year 1519; everywhere with the wrong name
\"Tescher\" instead of \"Löscher\") and, with correct address and date,
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 150. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1358
(from the year 1519).

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother Thomas Löscher, pastor in
> Milau, the faithful and sincere servant of the word.

Grace and peace in Christ! Concerning what you write about those
blasphemers, my dear man in your Lord, this is my opinion: As no one
must be forced to faith and gospel, so under the same authority they are
not to be allowed to blaspheme, but they are to be called, heard and
listened to, and if they cannot give an account, even if they do not
want to believe, they are also to be forced to be completely silent, and
a plantation of sedition is not to be cultivated. For whoever wants to
contradict, let him do so publicly, and either publicly or in particular
he shall be restrained by the authority of the authorities. This is what
we do and advise. From this you will already see that those under the
same authority are by no means to be permitted to do in the church what
you write. For this is the hissing of the serpents that flee the light.
Therefore, bring them to the light, so that they may either conquer or
be defeated. By the way, since the Ten Commandments and the Catechism
also teach things concerning worldly rule and stewardship, and this must
be preached very often, they must be forced to attend the sermons from
which they may learn worldly obedience and the duties of stewardship,
whether they believe the Gospel or not, lest they be a source of offense
to others by despising the teachings of worldly rule and stewardship
alike. For if they wish to live among a people, they must learn and hear
the laws of that people, even against their will, not only for their own
sake, but also for the sake of their children and their servants. Christ
will teach you other things; in him you will be well. August 26, 1529.

Martin Luther.

**1350** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1447. 1448. **1351**

**No. 1447.**

(Wittenberg.) August 27, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

About the English plague, which is said to prevail in Zwickau and the
surrounding area, and which is also feared in Wittenberg.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 565; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 159; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 499 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 151. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1182.

Grace and peace in Christ! I did not want to let this messenger go to
you empty, without a letter from me, my dear Nicolaus, although I had
nothing great to write. They say that the English plague is raging in
Zerbst and with you. Many think that it is also with us, but I do not
believe it. Our captain has made himself ill through his imagination,
although no other evil has appeared than his thoughts. For if these were
the right beginnings of this disease, I would have had them more often
in these last three years and more, for I also sweated that night and
woke up with fear, and thoughts also began to torment me; if I had given
in to them, I would have lain down,\" just as others have already lain
down and tormented themselves. I write this so that you may admonish the
people with me, that they should not be so fainthearted and not contract
the disease by their thoughts, which is not yet there. For we have
roused many, as it were by force, who had already lain down to sweat, as
Aurogallus, Bleikard, 1) D. Brück, M. Christian and others, who now tell
us with laughter that they might still be lying down if they were not
induced to get up. Not as if I thought that this disease was to be
despised, but because a distinction must be made, since we seem to fall
into it more through imagination and fear than in fact and through
infection, and imagination brings about the fall, and the movements of
the mind act on the body. By the way, pray for me, sinner, and if your
guest is still there, greet him in my name. May the Lord Christ be with
you, Amen. August 27, 1529. Yours, Martin Luther.

1\) Sindringer, Doctor of Laws.

**No. 1448.**

(Wittenberg.) August 29, 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link.**

About the English plague.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 716; in *Strobel-Ranner*, i\>. 160; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 499 f.
and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 153. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1184.

May the grace of God be with you, my dear Wenceslaus! The rumor of the
new plague, which is called the English one, compels me to write to you.
But see to it that you do not believe easily, and do not let your people
be frightened. In this matter, many trivial things are carried about,
both about us and about others. The booklet about the remedy against
this disease, which has been published, 2) is the cause that many, when
they begin to sweat, immediately believe through the added fear that
they are afflicted with it, \[even those,\] 3) who have never sweated.
In Magdeburg, 800 or 1000 have begun to sweat in this way, but all have
recovered, except those whom the violence of the heat, which is aroused
by this force, has killed without illness, namely 20 or 30. And now they
see how fear has done its mockery with them. Thus I have delivered many
with us, and even myself, by driving out this fear, and now there is the
highest peace, since by the grace of God none has died yet. It delights
Satan to frighten and make us fearful in this way. Therefore, advise
yours not to be afraid, and if anyone should be troubled by this
imagination, he may sweat if he pleases, but not more than the
constitution of his body can bear. The situation is different if the
right illness should occur, for, as I hear, these cannot be saved by any
remedy at all. The others, who are afflicted by imagination and fear,
will come back badly, unless they have

2\) The title of this book is: \"A regiment of those who fall by God\'s
decree into the new sweating plague. Wittenberg 1529.\" 8. (De Wette.) -
Regiment == medical prescription.

3\) Inserted by us to give meaning.

**1352**

Briese from the year 1529. no. 1448. 1449. 1450.

**1353**

cannot bear the fierceness of such a long-lasting heat. You are well in
Christ and pray for me. August 29, 1529, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1449.**

(Wittenberg.) August 29, 1529.

**To Johann Brenz in Schwäbisch-Hall.**

Luther refuses to make any changes to Brenz\'s commentary on Amos. He
advises him not to go to Marburg for discussion.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 108; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 500; in
Hartmann and Jäger, \"Brenz,\" I, 439 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.
154.

> To the brother to be highly honored in Christ, Johann Brenz, the
> faithful and sincere servant of Christ in Schwäbisch-Hall.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your prophet Amos, venerable and highly
famous Brenz, has been handed over to me, and I have read it in its
entirety. Far be it from me to change or add anything in this work. I do
not want to be a master of the holy scriptures; God only wanted me to be
a student to some extent. The one to whom you have given it, is
deliberately postponing the publication; I do not know what tricks of
the printers he fears. But he will publish it, unless he despises me,
who urges him to do so. 1) If only God would that Christ would continue
in you and complete his work.

By the way, what you write about the meeting in Hesse, to which you were
called, you also judge correctly that nothing good tends to spring from
these fraudulent meetings of the churches of God. Therefore, I ask you,
if you can, do not attend, nor promise to attend if you have not already
made a promise. 2) We have resolutely refused from the beginning, but
since this young Hessian Macedonian was so troublesome to our prince, we
have been forced to give our pledge, but in such a way that

1\) The appearance of the Commentary on Amos was delayed for a whole
year.

2\) Brenz had already promised the Landgrave his appearance in a letter
of July 19, and in response to a further invitation of Aug. 24, he
repeated this promise on Sept. 10.

we indicated two or three times with many words that there was no hope,
no fruit, nothing good to be expected, but everything worst was to be
feared. But he insisted. We, however, promised to appear, if he also
invited other, and even honest papists,^3)^ as witnesses against these
future boasters and glorified saints. Now it will be of use to us if you
do not come. And although I very much desire to see you, I would rather
do without this private comfort than enjoy it with common danger. Christ
keep thee and multiply thee for his glory. Pray for me, a sinner. August
29, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1450.**

(Wittenberg.) August 31, 1529.

**To the Riga City Council.**

Luther gives news of the activity of the Riga envoy Joh. Lohmüller and
approves the city\'s contract with the archbishop.

Copy (by Lohmüller\'s hand, not original) in Königsberg in the State
Archives, Schiebt. XXIII, No. 85. Printed in Taubenheim, Einiges aus dem
Leben des M. Joh. Lohmüller, Riga 1830, p. 23; in Festschrift der
Gesellschaft für Geschichte und Alterthumskunde der Ostseeprovinzen.
1866, p. 19; in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 115; in Ripke, Einführung der
Reformation in den baltischen Provinzen. 1883, p. 63 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 155f.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, prudent, dear lords and friends! I
have heard from M. Johann Lohmüller, your city\'s syndic and dispatched
embassy, in matters concerning your city, now on account of the
archbishop,^4)^ all the efforts and diligence he has made, and I have
seen the decency he has brought about, which he has shown to me along
with M. Philippo and others, and I have asked him to give a testimony as
to what we think of it, as he will continue to report to your prudence,
so that F. F. may be certain of his faithful, diligent direction. So we
consider that such decency has been almost good for six years, and that
we are equally

3\) The landgrave did not allow himself to be drawn into this.

4\) The archbishop granted the city of Riga a six-year reprieve,
starting July 30, during which time the gospel was to be freely
proclaimed and the archbishop\'s sovereignty over the city was to remain
unhindered (Kolde).

**1354** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1450. 1451. 1452. **1355**

I am surprised that he could have made it this far, and if he had asked
us for advice before, he would have become much narrower and weaker.
Therefore, my friendly request is that you and the congregation put up
with such an action and be careful that such decency is kept for your
good, and God, who started it so well, will bring it to completion well,
if we ask with diligence. Much water will pass these six years; when the
day comes, so comes the council, and it is not easy for the bishop to do
something, because both emperor and empire have enough to do. One can
see what both kings of Hungern and Dennemarck have to do; so I have also
seen how the said M. Johann Lohmüller of the Duke of Prussia has written
letters for you, ordered and delivered them well and finely, so that, if
God wills, there shall be no need. I have informed E. F. of this, in
order to give cause for peace and comfort to you. Christ our Lord be
with you all, Amen. August 31, 1529, E. F.

willing Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 451.**

(Wittenberg.) (August or September) 1529.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Of an applicant for a parish and of Melanchthon\'s continuing mourning
for his son.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. and at Dresden in the 6oci. 8olZ6r. 0
351, fol. 56d. Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 73; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
501 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 157 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1187 f.

> To Doctor Justus Jonas, Archbishop of Meissen.

Grace and peace in Christ! Send on and take it firmly to heart, my dear
Jonas, that I will immediately send back to you all who come to me, be
they bellies 1) or spirits, who seek parishes, among whom I also send
this one. You will see what kind of people he is. To me

1\) Walch has given *venres* by \"winds\".

he seems suitable for the field or the plow, or at least similar to a
sexton, unless dll find something else (for the mind can deceive me and
be hidden). Do what you are used to do.

Philip is still in mourning. We stand by this man, as we are obliged to
do. God would rather that all *Timones* 2) were forced to suffer this,
so that they would be humbled, since they do not know, out of hope in
their wisdom, how much better your only public person is, even a sinful
and weak one, than many, yes, even than many lukewarm ones of people
like Jerome, Hilarion, Macarius, who live for themselves (*privatorum*),
and meanwhile boast us the ceremonial and celibate saints, who all in a
heap are not worthy to untie the laces of even one Philip, yes (that I
am glorious), even you, even Pomeranus, even me. For what have those
people done, either the saints living for themselves, or all the
husbandless bishops, that could be compared to One Philip\'s Year, yes,
even to the One Book on the *loci communes*? But now was not the place
for these complaints; we will talk about it orally once. Be well, and be
a holy enemy of the rude and of all the saints living for themselves,
and take care of the publicans, that is, the public saints sinners
(*sanctipeccatores*), and pray for me. 1529.

> Martin Luther.

**No.1452.**

(Wittenberg.) September 9, 1529.

**To Count Albrecht von Mansfeld.**

At the count\'s request, Luther gives his verdict on the dispute that
had arisen between Agricola and Ludwig von Passavant over Agricola\'s
booklet of German proverbs, which the latter had dedicated to Agricola.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 483; in the Altenburger,
vol. IV, p. 704; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 22; in Walch, vol. XXI,
292 f.; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 502 and in the Erlanger edition, vol.
54, p. 98.

2\) Timon from Athens, a contemporary of Socrates, known for his hatred
of men.

**1356** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1452. 1453. **1357**

> To the noble, well-born Lord, Lord Albrecht, Count of Mansfeld and
> Lord of Schrappel and Heldrungen, my gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Gracious Sir! In response to E. G.\'s current
letter about the booklet that Magister Eisleben has sent out of German
proverbs, and what the three princes, Würtemberg, Hesse, Brunswick, E.
G. and brother and cousins have written about it, what my opinion is
about such a booklet, I do not want to give E. G. my thoughts. I will
not hide my thoughts from E. G., that I am immediately surprised that
such three princes trouble E. G. with it; for if Eisleben had sinned a
little in his booklet, he would have been amply and well paid for by
Ludwig von Passavant\'s poisonous, evil, cunning booklet, so that such
princes should have been satiated. I do not want to defend M.
Eisleben\'s things now, as little as I want to hinder, yes, even
encourage him to let more German proverbs go out; but I want E. G., as
my dear born sovereign, that M. Philipsen\'s and my aforementioned
Ludwig von Passavant\'s booklet weighs heavily on us, and may the hour
come when I would also play with him the art that he plays with us
inside; nor would we have provided that such a booklet should be allowed
to go out in Hesse. But God preserve them, that they only do not let
such booklets go out more. We understand German, too, but we will
continue to watch what they want to do. I am probably disturbed that M.
Eisleben has so humbly answered for himself, and yet should suffer such
shameful little books. I humbly wish to report this to Your Grace at
such a request, for I am prepared to serve Your Grace. September 9,
1529.

E. G. williger

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1453.**

(Wittenberg.) September 9, 1529.

**To Count Albrecht von Mansfeld.**

Luther sends with the previous letter the draft of a justification
writing for Agricola.

The locations are given at the previous number.

Gracious Sir! I have put the sealed letter 1) in such a way, if it
pleases Your Lordship to let it be read, or even to send it away, so
that the three princes should notice my opinion, and mean that they have
offended us with the booklet as much as Agricola 2) has offended the
said princes, so that they get a conscience, and do not press so
cynically on the poor man. They court with the booklet, God help that
they spoil the dance, amen. But as Agricola should put the answer to E.
G., I give on E. G. improvement this form:

Firstly, because HM the Archduke of Austria, together with the Swabian
Confederation, has condemned, punished and chased away the reigning
prince not only in word but also in deed as an unpleasant tyrant, and
still boasts and uses this every day, it is not my place to revoke my
writing, since I have done nothing more than write in word what they
have committed in deed, and which is still based on a right. If I should
now recant, I would have to condemn the high king and lord, and set
myself up as a judge between the Würtemberg and that part, which neither
in the conscience of God nor in the eyes of the world would suit me.

As long as he does not carry out his cause, neither he nor anyone else
has the right or power to forbid or prevent me from keeping up with that
part; for how would he do so if I were turned toward that part? Then he
would have to suffer and let me go unpunished for speaking and writing
as my part speaks and does, just as he had to suffer from the part of N.
3). Therefore, (with leave) all three princes have offended themselves
too much in this, that they not only condemn that part with a free
judgment, if they are not judges of it, but also demand execution of
such an outrageous judgment from E. G., which both of them have done.

1\) This is the previous letter, with respect to which Luther left it up
to the count to let everyone read it, or to send me away to the
complaining princes.

2\) Instead of the names, \"N. N.\" and \"N.\" are found in the
editions. We have inserted the names after Schelhorn, Ergötzlichkeit\],
Vol. II, p. 331.

3\) Perhaps by Ulrich von Hütten in his *orationes in Ulrichum
Wirtenpergensem, opp. ed. Böcking, tom*. IV.

**1358** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1453. **1359**

Pieces are made insufferable, both before GOlt and the world.

For where E. G. should punish me, she also reached too high, and
presumed with the deed to be the judge of His Majesty and the Swabian
Union, to condemn the latter, and to justify Duke Ulrich, which would
undoubtedly not only bring E. G. into great suspicion of sedition, but
also make her publicly guilty before God and the world with a seditious
deed, since God is in favor of it. But because I do not invent anything
new on him, nor do I lie (as they accuse me with knowing untruth^1)^ ),
but speak the same that is imposed on him by that part in fact, and
still justify myself: then he can no more to me, than that he must
reckon me under that part, and rightly or properly neither judge me nor
punish me, because he has rightly overcome and punished that part;
because he has such calumnies not from me, but from that part, from
which I also have it.

Now he cannot force me to condemn that part for his sake; and if I
wanted to do it, I could not. But it is the same as in the schools,
where the bacchants, 2) if they do not like to take revenge on the
schoolmaster, then they call a poor boy. So the duke wants to take
revenge on me, a poor man; because he cannot do so, he stabs, injures
and blasphemes such a powerful king and ruler under my person, who are
still unconvicted and he still unjustified 2c. But if once I would take
off my person, and represent that person, whom he injures by me, he
shall perhaps become aware, who would have blasphemed or praised the
other.

But I assume that he would already be found innocent of all things and
guilty of that part; but because he has smelled himself so horribly on
me through Ludwig von Passavant\'s 3) lying, blasphemous, shameful
booklet, he would have already lost all right to demand further
punishment from me, *secundum leges*.

1\) \"zeihen\" put by us instead of: \"show\". (Analogous is: \"rebuke\"
instead of: \"rest\").

2\) \"Bacchants\" is the name given here to school helpers, i.e. those
pupils who, if not in knowledge, were nevertheless advanced in age.

3\) A nobleman from Duke Ulrich\'s retinue who was staying with the
landgrave at that time together with his lord.

Therefore, once again, their intentions and requests to Your Grace are
unreasonable and against all justice; for this booklet, with the most
impudent, poisonous, and insulting lies, reproaches me and my company,
who are nothing else, nor can they be interpreted, than D. Mart. and M.
Philip, together with their peers; yet the dishonorable villain and poet
of the booklet knows well that we are the most famous in all the world,
who have written and acted so diligently against sedition and for the
supremacy, and, God willing, such a shameful blasphemous mouth and pen
of ours shall be struck once, and his desperate malice shall not be
given to him.

And if I should speak rightly of sedition, then these three highly-named
princes would be right seditionists in this piece, that they drive E. G.
and demand to practice seditious pieces and deeds, namely to set
themselves up as judge over this matter with physical punishment on me,
to condemn that part and to justify this part. That is to say, to seek
rebellion and misfortune, so that if the liar and blasphemer had looked
at his beam, he would have forgotten my splinters.

From all this I hope E. G. sees reason enough that I must not nor can
revoke, and E. G. must not nor can punish me. G. should not nor can
punish me, but because it has turned out that way that I have become
that part with my booklet, I must remain with the same part until the
end of the matter. So E. G. must also let things go and stand like this
until this part is found innocent by judges to whom such a finding is
due, and not according to the finding of the three princes, who may be
suspected here as part and parcel, and not be judges.

In addition, if I recanted, I would first and foremost be the right
rebel and arch-villain, as the one who thereby condemned Royal Majesty
and the Swabian Union. Maj. and the Swabian Confederation, which would
not befit me, and in addition the Passavant\'s cursed book of lies 4)
confirmed, with

4\) The title of this book is: \"Ludwig von Passavant Verantwortung der
Schmach- vnd Laesterschrifft so Joh. Agricola Eyßleben genannt, im
Büchlein Auslegung Teutscher Sprüchwort, gegen etliche Ehrenleute vnd
besonders den Durchl. Hochgeb. Fürst vnd Herr Vlrich Hertzog zu
Wirtenberg, without some Vrsache in print.\" Without place and year,
4-3/4 sheets in quarto. It appeared around August.

**1360** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1453. 1454. 1361

of all dishonor, which he puts D. Martinus, Philipps and my society as
an evil-doer, and would therefore have to be partially responsible for
all of his misdeeds and malice, committed in the aforementioned booklet.
Likewise, E. Gn. would also be guilty of such everything, if they
punished me according to their srevelu judgment. I hope, however, that
they will leave E. G. alone with this, and rather punish those
themselves, by whom they are provoked and led to inflict such evil acts
and abominations on E. G.. Please E. G. 2c.

What E. G. should do against Eisleben, you may well hear my opinion from
such a form. What does Duke Ulrich want to do to him? It is well known
that he has been put on his guard and expelled by the Reich\'s judgment,
so Eisleben does him no wrong, indeed, he almost spares him. If this
matter were mine, the devil should cheat them all, and I am very
surprised at the thirst of the L\[andgrave\] that he may give justice to
the man, contrary to the empire, and write and demand such to you lords
of Mansfeld.

Therefore, I don\'t know what the royal family should do, but they would
like to send a friendly reminder to them, that they should proceed with
good intentions, considering the circumstances of the things that the
realm and the authorities have done in this matter, so that they do not
fall into danger or disgrace and into grave and careful defamation. For
even if we remain silent here, one can also find people outside in the
realm who attack both the Landgrave and Duke of Brunswick 1) and all of
them with writings, as the rebels against royal majesty (as they are
also in this) and decorate that part in such a way that the Landgrave
should wish that he had never seen Würtemberg, as I would like to do so
masterfully. They have become mad, do not see at all that they do not
stand with the one from Würtemberg as with a ruling prince 2c.

Such will E. G. graciously accept from me as a subservient service.
Hiemit GOtt befehlt.

> Eu. Grace willing Martinus Luther.

1\) Henry the Younger of Brunswick was the Landgrave\'s brother-in-law.

**No. 1454.**

(Wittenberg.) September 9, 1529.

**To Johann Agricola in Eisleben.**

About Agricola\'s trade with Ulrich, Duke of Würtemberg.

The original is at Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 285 B. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 109; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 507 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 161.

> To the in Christ highly venerable brother, M. Johann Agricola, the
> extremely faithful instructor of the youth at Eisleben.

Grace and peace in the Lord! We have seen the tragedy, we know it, which
the Duke of Würtemberg is bringing on the track for you, my dear Johann,
but you be strong and do not fear. \"It is not so evil as they would
like to make it, will also (whether God wills) not become so evil.\" I
have drawn up what Count Albrecht desired, a kind of draft of an answer
that you will give him against those. This you, I beg you, will decorate
and polish (*acuas*) to the best of your ability. For I fear that Count
Albrecht will not suffer any vehemence in it, however necessary it may
be. For what will the tyrant 2) do? You have become a part of his
adversaries. You must confront this party and role until it is overcome
by a just and lawful procedure. In the meantime, you may do and say what
is the opinion of your party. I hear that you have given the Prince of
Hesse an all-too-political answer and have completely retracted it,^3)^
which I am sorry for; but so that you may also retract this retraction,
you must again

2\) \"the tyrant\" is Duke Ulrich, whom Agricola had attacked several
times in his proverbs for his tyranny, with mention of the name.

3\) On July 18, Philip of Hesse had written to the Elector John and
complained about the injustices that Luther and his family had committed
against princely persons. He not only complained that Luther himself had
attacked his father-in-law, Duke George of Saxony, with words of shame,
but also that Eisleben had now, in his proverbs, which he had recently
let go out, \"harshly attacked the good Duke Ulrich of Würtemberg, who
had been chased away, with several words of shame and untruth\" 2c. At
the same time, the Landgrave wrote to Agricola. The latter made a humble
apology by letter on July 24 and thanked him for the \"grace that such a
high person as the Landgrave considered him worthy to punish him for his
foolishness. (Kawerau, \"Joh. Agricola,\" p. 110 f.)

**\
1362** Letters from the year 1529. No. 1454 to 1457.

**1363**

> it seems advisable that you include in the beginning of the answer to
> the count that you had humbly sought peace before, but because they
> are raging and do not want peace, you are forced to no longer pursue
> the matter humbly, but straightforwardly and according to justice, and
> you are sorry for your humility, which has been thwarted
> 2c.Passavant\'s book, which is written not against you, but against
> all of us under your name with a harsh and bitter disposition in the
> most poisonous way, I find abominable (*execror*). But God will give
> an opportunity to repay what it deserves. Meanwhile, farewell and
> greet all yours. This challenge will turn out for the best for you. My
> Käthe greets you and your Elsa. September 9, 1529, Yours, Martin
> Luther.
>
> **No. 1455.**
>
> Torgau. September 28, 1529.
>
> **Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**
>
> (Regest.)
>
> The Elector asks Luthern to come to him in Schleiz together with Jonas
> and Melanchthon after the Marburg discussion has ended.

The concept is found in the Weimar Archive, X, p. 72. 0, No. 18.10.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 165 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 162 f.

**No. 1456.**

(Marburg.) 3. (?) October 1529.

**Consider\" Luther\'s teaching on the Lord\'s Supper.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2052, no. 62.

**No. 1437.**

(Marburg.) (4. \[?\] October 1529.)

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse, together with the external
theologians.**

Since Zwingli and his followers often referred to sayings of the church
fathers concerning the doctrine of the Lord\'s Supper, Luther and his
followers handed over to the landgrave this defense compiled from the
fathers. - This letter is mentioned in Melanchthon\'s report on the
Marburg discussion, St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, no. 24, § 21 and no.
25, § 17.

Handwritten in Dresden, *Cod.* Printed in Riederers Nachrichten, vol.
II, p. 349; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 508 and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 54, p. 103.\'

E. F. G. have heard how the ancient *Scriptores*, namely Augustine, in
this action, that Christ has a true body, that a body occupies a space,
that sacraments are signs. Such extensive and strange sayings, which the
Fathers spoke in other places than in the Last Supper, and in other
matters than in the Lord\'s Supper, are nevertheless drawn to the
Sacrament, from which nothing can be concluded about this matter. For
none of these sayings says this publicly, that Christ\'s body may not be
in the supper. But because we have not heard other sayings of the
ancients, in which their opinion is clearly expressed, and which are
actually and solely about this matter, we have not been able, for the
sake of our conscience, to refrain from informing God of such sayings,
and for God\'s sake we ask in all humility that God read and move them.
The matter is not so small as they think, but concerns God\'s honor and
all our souls.

Therefore, it is necessary that we be careful and not fall away from the
words of the Gospel through human reason or strange, unrhymed sayings;
for F. F. G. will find that the ancients taught no differently than how
the words of the Gospel sounded and how we teach. Now E. F. G., from his
high Christian and princely intellect, with which E. F. G., praise be to
God, is abundantly endowed, can well judge for himself how difficult it
is to depart from the words of the Gospel, and from the entire old
church, without sufficient cause. How this will be accounted for will be
found in the turning away.

We have also indicated here where to find the sayings, so that one may
easily find them, where E. F. G. wants to have the whole speech recited
in one saying, and see that not only spiritual use is spoken of, but
clearly the outward. For our opponent wants to interpret such sayings in
terms of spiritual use, because the sixth chapter of John is often
referred to. Johannis is often referred to. Now the ancients often spoke
of the sacrament in the same chapter and indicated their opinion of
external use.

**1364**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1457.

**1365**

*Hilarii de trinitate L.* VIII. (c. 13.)

Here one sees how he speaks that Christ is truly and naturally received,
not only spiritually.

*Chrysostom. in Joh. Homil.* XLV.

We have received the fruit of our good deeds *re ipsa, etc*. Here it is
clear that we have not been inculcated by love alone, but *re ipsa.*

See also *Chrysostom*. *Homil.* 83, where you will find his opinion on
the length.

*Cyprian. L. I. ep.* 2.

Which we admonish and irritate 2c.

*Irenaeus, D. IV. cap.* 34.

How can they know that the bread is the sacrament 2c.

In these words Irenaeus punishes the heretics who taught against the
divinity of Christ, and thus wants to conclude: If Christ were not true
God, he would not be in many places. So it follows that his opinion is
that Christ is bodily in the sacrament.

After this he also says: How do they say that the flesh perishes? 2c.
Here it is clear that the flesh is eaten.

*Cyprianus* says *in quodam sermone de coena Domini that* as Christ has
two natures, divine and human, so in the Sacrament are the bread and the
body of Christ. *Videantur caetera*.

*VuIgarius*^1)^ *in Matth.* speaks with clear wor

ten: Christ said: This is my body, not: This is my body\'s sign, so that
one understands that his true body is there; and this opinion he often
puts in other evangelists and in Paul. Now Vulgarius is old, and among
the Greeks he is one of the best teachers.

*In John* XV*, Cyril* clearly says that we are united to Christ not only
through love, but also bodily. Item, with natural usage, and gives an
example of wax put to other wax and poured into it.

One also has two books in *Ambrosio, de mysteriis initiand.* and *de
sacramentis, in* which our opinion is clearly written.

1\) Vulgarius == *Bulgarius* is *Theophylactus*.

Our opponent answers that one does not know whether the book is *de
sacramentis Ambrosii.* But so one may solviren what one wants. There are
many indications that it is Ambrosii, and even if it is not Ambrosii, it
is known that it is very old, and is allegorized in *Decretis* and
otherwise as an old scripture.

This is what we wanted to report to E. F. G. in our humble opinion; for
although our faith should stand on God\'s Word alone, it is nevertheless
comforting to know that our faith has witness in the church. It is a
stupid thing to have a conscience: therefore, in such great matters, not
to act freely, and without the clear word of God, nothing new should be
done.

But that our opponent thinks that they have reason enough for their
doctrine, we are concerned that they have not yet been highly challenged
in conscience, and well consider that they mean well; but it will be
found that their *arguments* do not do enough for conscience, contrary
to the quality of the words: *Hoc est corpus meum*.

They have two main *arguments*. The first, John 6, rejects external
usufruct, therefore it cannot be held that Christ would have commanded
external usufruct in the sacrament, as he rejected it before. This
argument does not enforce anything more, if it has already been tossed
about for a long time, than that external administration is rejected
without faith; for Christ teaches in the same chapter that one must
believe in him, that eating flesh in himself will not help, but that
faith helps. So Christ there urges faith, and does not order an outward
work; but afterward in the supper he orders the outward work: this we
also ought to keep, and not despise his order, and not interpret the
words to our liking.

The other argument is that because Christ has a true body, the same body
must be in one place, and could not be here and there. This argument is
not from Scripture, but is reason. For how do we know that Christ cannot
be here and elsewhere? So reason is not able to stand against God\'s
word in the challenge and judgment of God.

These are the most noble arguments, so they

**1366** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1457 to 1461. **1367**

lead. We do not know how to rely on this, and we ask the Lord for God\'s
sake that the Lord, as a Christian prince, take this matter to heart and
not allow anything to be done that might result in further annoyance and
trouble. E. F. G. see what mischief follows from contempt of the
Sacrament. We also ask, in all humility, that your grace grant us this
simple document, which we are compelled by our conscience to hand over
to you, and we are grateful to you. F. G. and are always ready to serve
him humbly.

> *M. Lutherus post Colloquium Marpurgi habitum Landgravio scripsit*.

**No. 1458.**

Marburg. October 4, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Gerbet in Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1952, no. 27.

**No. 1459.**

(Marburg.) 4. October 1529.

**To his wife.**

Luther reports the outcome of the Marburg conversation and his imminent
return.

Handwritten in Hamburg, Stadtbibliothek, Vol. I, fol. 38 b. Printed by
*L. Chr. Mieg, Monum. piet. et litter. Francof.* 1671, P. II, p. 39; in
*Bibl. Bremens. Cl. IV, Fasc*. 5. (1721), p. 934, supposedly from the
original ; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 62, No. 96; in Walch, vol. XXI,
299; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 512 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 107.

> To My Kind Dear Lord, Catharina Lutherin, Doctor, Preacher at
> Wittenberg. ^1)^

Grace and peace in Christ. Dear Mr. Käth, know that our friendly
conversation at Marburg has come to an end, and we are one in almost all
respects, without wanting to keep our vain bread in the Lord\'s Supper,
and to confess Christ spiritually present in it. Today the landgrave is
asking whether we could become one, or whether, if we remained divided,
we would still be brothers and Christ.

1\) This address, which is missing in the other editions, is set
according to the *Bibl. of Bremen*. In the Hamburg manuscript, it reads:
\"To my dear Mr. Käth, Doctorin, Professorin Lutherin zu Wittenberg.

Keeping our limbs under each other. The landgrave is working hard. But
we do not want the brothers and members, we want peace and good. I
think, tomorrow or the day after tomorrow we want to break out and go to
E. 2) Gn. Lord to Schleiz in the Voigtland, where S. C. F. G. has called
us.

Tell the Mr. Pommer that the best arguments have been of Zwinglii that
*corpus non potest esse sine loco: ergo Christi corpus of est in pane;
of Oecolumpadii* this: *Sacramentum est signum corporis Christi.* I fear
that God has blinded them so that they have nothing to bring forward. I
have much to do, and the messenger hurries. Say good night to everyone,
and pray for us. We are all still fresh and healthy, and live like
princes. Kiss me Lensgen and Hänsgen. On the day of Francisci \[Oct. 4\]
1529.

E. willing servant

> Martin Luther.

Johann Brenz, Andreas Osiander, Doctor Stephan of Augsburg also came
here.

They have become mad here with sweat fright, yesterday have laid down
with fifty, whose have died one or two.

**No. 1460.**

Jena. October 12, 1529.

**To Johann Agricola in Saalfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1954, no. 28.

**No. 1461.**

(Torgau?) 3) 17 October 1529.

**To Friedrich Myconius in Gotha.**

Luther urgently asks him to send him the history of Johann Hilten as
detailed as possible.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721,
p. 870; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 163 ; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 514 and
in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 171. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1186.

2\) Instead of \"E.\" Niederer, Nachrichten, Vol. I, p. 63, suggests
\"unsern\", probably rightly.

3\) On the same day, Melanchthon also wrote to Myconius about the same
matter, from Torgau (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. I, 1108), so it can be assumed
that our letter was also written there.

**1368**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1461. 1462. 1463.

**1369**

Grace and peace in Christ! Dearest brother in the Lord, Frederick, I ask
and implore you for the sake of Christ that you send as soon as possible
the things which you taught us in Eisenach to be extremely credible and
which we are asking for, namely, about that monk who died in the ban 1)
and prophesied that it would happen that those who were present would
see and hear the one who taught what he had taught and held. This
history, I say, see that thou write and send it to us in full, many,
whole, and superfluous words, omitting nothing: of the book that was
buried under the bricks, and what the name of the priest was, and where
he was that obtained this book; for thou knowest that I am much
concerned in this matter. Therefore I beseech thee that thou neglect
nothing, and love me as I love thee. For it was for your sake alone (so
that I would not leave you grieved) that I preached the sermon in Gotha
when I left, 2) whereas otherwise I would not have preached it even if
all others had insisted on it. So you again make it possible for me to
enjoy this ministry of yours, to use it, to be glad of it and to benefit
from it. For I desire very much, indeed, I glow the more with desire to
have this \[history\], the further away I am. I hope and promise myself
to you, as I am guilty and you worthy of it. And if it cannot be done
otherwise, may you send a messenger at my expense. Give my love to your
rib and to the children. Fare thee well in Christ. \"Sunday after Galli
\[Oct. 17\] 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1462.**

(Wittenberg.) October 19, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1956, no. 30.

1\) This refers to the Franciscan Johann Hilten, whose story is told in
the Apology. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1326, ? 714.

2\) On the return journey from Marburg, according to Lingke, Luth,
Reisegesch., p. 185, on October 8, according to Kolde, Beitr., p. 109,
at the latest on October 10. On the 11th Luther preached in Erfurt.

**No. 1463.**

(Wittenberg.) October 20, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther reports that he is working on the Army Sermon Against the Turks
and promises that he will inform him about the Marburg conversation at
another time.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum*, Ms. 26, fol. 34 and in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed
in the Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 717; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p.
164; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 516 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.
174. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1186.

> To Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, to be highly honored in Christ, the sincere
> and faithful bishop of the church at Zwickau.

Grace and peace in Christ! What you have written about Christoph, my
dear Nicolaus, I have reported everything to Christoph himself.
Christina may blessedly be his wife in the name of the Lord, amen. About
the gathering of the children \[in schools\] 3) I will perhaps publish a
sermon, but now I am busy with the exhortation of the Germans against
the attack of the Turk. ^4)^ Our sins have irritated the eyes of the
Majesty too much \[Is. 3, 8\], therefore the punishment rightly haunts
us. Nevertheless, your and our church must be urged to pray with tears
and repentance, as the Ninevites did \[Jonah 3:8\]. Who knows if He will
not have mercy on us and leave a blessing behind.

I will tell you about our conversation at another time, because I am
very tired and the matter is extensive. The articles have been
published, 5) to which they agreed against all expectations; they were
quite humble and modest. Here, too, the articles will soon be printed.
Be well and pray for me. The Lord be with you. October 20, 1529.

Martin Luther.

3\) Here, Luther refers to his \"Sermon on Keeping Children in School,\"
which did not appear until July 1530. St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 416.

4\) \"Heerpredigt wider den Türken.\" St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 2154.

5\) St. Louis Edition, Vol. X VII, 1939, No. 23.

**1370** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1464. 1465. 1466. **1371**

**No. 1464.**

(Wittenberg.) October 20, 1529.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

Luther wishes him luck in improving his situation.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 110; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 516 s.
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 175.

Grace and peace in Christ! I hear, my dear Cordatus, that among the
people of Zwickau your esteem and also your reputation are growing
daily, for which I boast and rejoice in Christ. But you continue to
overcome them through goodness. They are hard, I confess, but if our
hardness is added, they will become worse. You know the saying that two
hard millstones grind no good. ^1)^ Therefore, our patience will finally
put them to shame, and they will be delivered of their hardness with
much fruit. Sad things are heard of the Turk. Let us pray that we do not
perish. Greet your Christina and be well in Christ. October 20, 1529,
your Martin Luther.

**No. 1465.**

(Wittenberg.) October 26, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

About Luther\'s \"Army Sermon against the Turk\".

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Manuscript at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol. 34b; in Hamburg, Ms. 47, quarto,
120; in the Zwickau Rathsschulbibliothek, vol. XXXVI; in Wolfenbüttel,
*Cod. Aug.*

11.10, fol. 233; there in *Cod. Helmst.* 108, fol. 460b (with an altered
beginning as addressed to Spalatin and dated July 28, 1545); in *Cod.
Goth*. 451 and in *Cod*. *Jen*. b, lob 209. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 72;
by Schütze, vol. I, p.357 (after *Cod. Helmst.* ); by De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 517 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 175 s. German in the
Eisleben edition, vol. I, p. 482; in the Altenburger, vol. IV, p. 704;
in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 556 and in Walch, vol. XXI, 291 (without
date).

> To the extremely noble and also venerable man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> the extremely faithful bishop of the church at Zwickau.

Grace and peace in Christ! In a hurry, and surprised by the sudden
departure of these people who handed you this letter, best

1\) \"Two hard stones seldom grind pure ones.\" (Erl. Briesw.)

Nicolaus, I am compelled to write. For I thought they would stay here
longer; otherwise I would have written more to you and to Cordatus,
especially about the Turkish War, which is rightly upsetting Germany.
For we too have earned this wrath of God; and those who have earned it
neither repent nor mend, but continue. I am issuing an admonitory
sermon, \"A Sermon Against the Turk.\" M. Philip and Jonas are preparing
a booklet on the same matter. 2) You work on it, that your hard,
unbelieving and stiff-necked Zwickauers seriously believe, fear and
tremble before this rod and wrath of God. It will not be a joke, but the
final wrath of God, in which at the same time the world will come to an
end, and Christ will come to destroy this Gog and Magog \[Ezek. Cap. 38
and 39\], and to free His own. For everything is fulfilled in the
Scriptures, except that we are sure that our humble petitions will be
able to do something even against this Turk, who will not only plague us
Germans this winter, but to the end of the world, as Daniel chapter 7
says. Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. I will fight to the death
against the Turk and the Turk\'s God. Greet my Cordatus with his
Christina. On Tuesday after Crispini \[Oct. 26\] 1529. Martin Luther.

**No. 1466.**

(Wittenberg.) Oct. 27, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther expresses his joy over the victory won in Marburg. About the
withdrawal of the Turks from Vienna. Answer to the question whether the
Protestant princes may fight against the Turks together with the
Catholics.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 112; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 518 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 177.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I am glad that you are so happy, my dear
Amsdorf, about our Marburg meeting,

2\) The title is: \"Das siebend Kapititel Danielis, von des Türcken
Gotteslesterung vnd schrecklicher morderey, mit Unterricht Justi Ionen.
Wittemberg.\" At the end: \"Printed at Wittemberg, by Hans Lufft.\" 8
sheets in 4, without year. When Rörer sent the book to Roth in December,
he wrote: *ecujus libellii duo autores sunt: Philippi est inventio et
dispositio, Jonae elocutio.*

**1372** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1466 to 1469. **1373**

which, although small in appearance, was of great importance
(*efficaci*). This is what the prayers of the blessed brought about, so
that those who were so confused did not bring up anything of importance
(*frigerent*), and were humbled. To God be praise and glory.

Yesterday we heard that on the eve of a festival 1) the Turk had left
Vienna for Hungary by a great miracle of God. For after he had stormed
the city almost for the twentieth time, he undermined the ground in
three places, put powder in it, threw it apart and made breaches, but by
no force could he move his army to enter, since it had been made
despondent by God, so that they rather let themselves be stabbed by the
leaders than to have undertaken this last storm to enter. So it is
thought that, fearing the great guns and our future army, he departed in
dismay. Others disagree. God has fought for us in this year in such a
way that one can grasp it with one\'s hands. He \[the Turk\] has lost
26,000 men; of ours, they say, 6000 have fallen, who have gone down by
losses. This is what I wanted to tell you, if you have nothing else, so
that we may give thanks and pray with one another. For the Turk, who has
become our neighbor, will not let us have peace forever.

But since you ask whether our prince is certainly at liberty to unite
with the ungodly and the adversaries of the Word, we believe it to be
so, because it is a question here of common defense. It would be a
different matter if the question were whether one should start war or
enter into alliances where nothing is yet in the works. For likewise 2)
if the house of the wicked is burning, likewise if your enemy is hungry,
feed him, help him; in time of need you must also do good to your
enemies. Be at ease in the Lord and pray for me. Given on the day before
Simonis and Jude \[Oct. 27\] 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

1\) The \"festival\" will be understood to mean a Turkish festival. The
withdrawal began on October 16.

2\) Instead of: *Neque* in the issues we have adopted *Aeque.*

**No. 1467.**

(Wittenberg.) October 28, 1529.

**To Johann Lang in Erfurt.**

Luther recommends a man to him and gives news of Vienna\'s liberation.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 399, fol. 133. Printed in Literar.
Wochenblatt II (Nürnberg 1770), p. 369; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 167; in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 113; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 519 and in Erlanger
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 178.

> To the brother in Christ, Mr. Johann Lang, the faithful servant of the
> Word in Erfurt.

Grace in Christ! I commend to you, my dear Lang, this Magister Wolfgang
for your love, that you help him, if you can, to some position or
office. He is a good man and sufficiently learned both in the sciences
and in the knowledge of godly doctrine, and suitable to administer
either the office of a preacher, or a scribe, or a teacher.

I believe that you know everything about the Turk, how he blew up Vienna
by laying mines, and yet, in despair and tremendous fear and by a
miracle of God, he escaped from our territory, that is, from Germany.
But we Germans are always snoring. Farewell in Christ and greet your son
with his mother, and give them both many caresses and kisses. On the day
of Simonis and Judä \[Oct. 28\] 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1468.**

(Wittenberg.) 28, October 1529.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1957, no. 31.

**No. 1469.**

(Wittenberg.) October 29, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther recommends Johann Langer, who has been expelled from Naumburg, to
preach in Coburg in Balthasar Thuring\'s place.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N*, fol. 108. 41. Printed
in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 62, no. 97; in Walch, vol. XXI, 300; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 521 and in the Erlangen Edition, vol. 54, p. 108.

**1374** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1469 to 1472. **1375**

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Here he is Johann Langer 1) von Wolkenhayn, who was a preacher in
Naumburg, expelled there by the bishop, whom we have tried and
recognized here as the one who should be able to appoint to Coburg in
place of Balthasar Thuring himself. If it pleases E. C. F. G., they may
direct the said Mr. Johann with writings to Coburg and prepare him to
accept the office there as he has offered. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen.
Friday after Simonis and Judä \[Oct. 29\] 1529.

> E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1470.**

Torgau. October 30, 1529.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Answer to Luther\'s previous letter. The Elector approves Langer\'s
employment in Coburg.

The copy is in the Weimar Archives, fol. 108, 41. Printed by Burkhardt,
p. 166 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 181.

**No. 1 471.**

(Wittenberg.) November 5, 1529.

**To Duke Albrecht of Prussia.**

Luther informs the duke that D. Johann Apel for the position of a
chancellor to the place of the deceased D. Friedrich Fischer will be
well to get.

The original is in the State Archives at Königsberg. Printed in Faber\'s
collection of letters, p. 4; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 522 and in the
Erlangen edition, Vol. 54,

> To the illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Albrecht, Margrave
> of Brandenburg 2c, Duke of Prussia 2c, my gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! E.
F. G.

1\) In De Wette and in the Erlangen edition: \"Lauger\".

I have received a letter and a request, namely that I, together with M.
Philippo, should help to advise that E. F. G. should have one or two
skilled men in D. Fischer\'s blessed place, to which I give E. F. G. the
answer that I do not want to spare my diligence in this. And E. F. G.
will not refrain from saying that I have talked with Doctor Johann Apel
about it, and noted as much, where E. F. G. would continue to deal with
him, that the man might be moved in a reasonable way and perhaps also
raised. If God would grant that, then E. F. G. would more than likely be
provided with an excellent man, although I, for my part, would not like
to get such a man out of the university. E. F. G. graciously accept this
for a humble reply. For I am willing to serve E. F. G.. Hiemit GOtt
befehlt, Amen. *Quinta Novembris* 1529. E. F.

> willing Martinus Luther.

**No. 1472.**

(Wittenberg.) November 7, 1529.

**To Friedrich Myconius in Gotha.**

The history of Joh. Hilten, the Turkish War and Melanchthon\'s absence.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, *Helmst*. 285. A Handwritten in *Cod.
Goth*. A 1048, fol. 4. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 114; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 522 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 182.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Friedrich Mecum, the
> extremely faithful bishop of Gotha, his! Superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your letter was very pleasant to me, my dear
Frederick, full of brotherhood and love, at the same time also a
faithful witness of your diligence and your fidelity in the preparation
of the history, which I had asked for. I will therefore expect it as you
promise in your letter.

I believe that you know everything about the Turk. God fought for us by
turning away the Turk through the miraculous escape, and yet at the same
time He fought the wicked by starting a terrible example.

**1376** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1472. 1473. **1377**

frightened and punished. God must be asked to be our wall and to send
his angels to help us. I praise your confidence in which you write that
you pray with your church against the Turk and the gates of hell. May
the Lord hear you in this time of our tribulation, amen. Just as the
angel could not destroy the little city for the sake of one Lot, so may
it also happen to us for the sake of many godly ones, amen.

> Besides, there is nothing new here. Philippus is absent, otherwise he
> would have written; he is attending the wedding of Mr. Deutleben \"in
> Freiberg\" together with Amsdorf. My Lord Käthe greets you
> respectfully. Greet your rib or also your master, likewise our
> landlady and Basilius, 1) yes also your captain. May you also be well
> in Christ. November 7, 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

**No 1473.**

(Wittenberg.) November 10, 1529.

**To Jakob Probst in Bremen.**

> From the Turkish War and the feared undertakings of Emperor Carl V.
>
> Printed in *Luth. comm.* in Joh. ep. cath. ed. Neumann, Lips. 1708, p.
> 195; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 523 f. and in Crl. Briefw., vol. VII,
> p. 184. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1191.
>
> Grace and peace in Christ! We have enough news to write, my dear
> Jacob, and more than enough.
>
> If you have not heard from the Turks how they broke into Germany, you
> will hear it from the note which I gave to Bruno 2) that he should
> copy it for you. Austria is almost devastated. Vienna is, by a miracle
> of the arm, not taken, but still unrecovered.
>
> 1\) Basilius Monner from Weimar, therefore also called *Basilius
> Vinariensis*, Augustinian; then 1524 to 1535 Rector at Gotha;
> afterwards as a jurist at the court of the Elector, 1538 sent as an
> envoy to France; 1539 educator of the Elector Princes, 1554 professor
> at Jena, where he died in January 1566. - The \"Hauptmann\"
> (*Praefectus*) is Johann Oswald, formerly Amtmann in Eisenach; in this
> year he held the highest position in the Council of Gotha.

2\) Bruno Brauer.

urgently destroyed, the neighboring villages all burned, more than a
hundred thousand people killed or captured. He did the same in Hungary.
Germany is full of traitors favorable to the Turk. In addition to these
evils, Emperor Carl threatens us much more cruelly and has decided to
rage against us than the Turk. Thus we have both emperors, the one in
the East and the one in the West, as our enemies.

This is how the contempt and hatred for the Gospel is avenged. I hope
that the day will come that will put an end to all hopefuls. That is
why, I believe, the devils rage so much as at the last hour. This is the
hour when Christ is weak and wrestling with death.

You see to it in your church that you pray diligently and fervently for
the faith of all who have suffered or will suffer either imprisonment or
death, that Christ may be strengthened in us all until He rises in power
and glory, Amen.

They say that the Turk is camped in Hungary not far from Vienna and will
return around the time of spring. And they boast that Emperor Carl will
come to Germany, but no one fears him. For if he should do anything by
force, there is danger that he will corrupt himself and all his priests
from the bottom up. For there is counsel and help ready, if God is not
against it, which is strong enough for the destruction of all
monasteries and convents, that it is not safe for them to undertake
anything with contempt for the peace and patience of ours, unless
perhaps some fate 3) urges them to hasten their own hour.

My house is quite well. But I, a sinner, am the object and the goal of
the devils, who pursue me without end and play their game with me.
Christ save and free me; you will help me to achieve this through
faithful prayer. The grace of God be with you, amen. Greet your Eva in
my and my Käthe\'s name. On the day before Martinmas \[Nov. 10\] 1529.

Your Martin Luther.

3\) The editions here offer *factum*, but Walch has read *fatum*, which
seems more appropriate.

**1378**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1474. 1475.

**1379**

**No. 1474.**

(Wittenberg.) November 10, 1529.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

About the Turkish War and Hausmann\'s affairs.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Manuscript at Zerbst
in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26; in *Cod. Rostoch*; in *Cod. Goth*. 185,
Quart, Bl. 150 and in *Cod. Goth*. 397, fol. 138. Printed by Schütze,
vol. II, p. 115; by *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 168; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
525 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 185. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1373.

> To the man to be highly honored in Christ, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> extremely faithful bishop of the church at Zwickau, his very dear
> brother.

Grace and peace in Christ! Be strong in the Lord, my dear Nicolaus, and
do not fear the Turk too much. Christ is alive, and according to the
vision of Daniel, which Philip and Jonas now publish, 1) it is to be
hoped that he will not seize Germany, although he will pluck us and
avenge the contempt of the gospel. For it is a miracle in a hurry that
the Turk has left the place and the camp, and there his presumption is
broken. The day of judgment is at hand, and it will destroy both Gog the
Turk and Magog the Pope, the latter the temporal enemy, the latter the
spiritual enemy of Christ.

But that certain people call you and mock you with the biting and harsh
name \"the little saint\" (*sanctuIum*), I wish you extraordinary luck
that you are worthy of such a great hatred of Satan, who, since he is
not able to do anything else, at least exercises the venom of his tongue
on you. But you would act most rightly if you again mocked his poisonous
impotence and made him kiss the dung. For you cannot injure him more
sensitively and take revenge more gloriously than by laughing at his
impotent and powerless stings and bites with the greatest glee.

I wish that the bride of Christ may have much happiness. Now, if you
also desire a bride, I would gladly wish you happiness. But if you
desire without complaint

1\) See No. 1465.

You will be much happier, and I will wish you even more happiness, not
as if I wanted to offend marriage, this divine work and state, but
because I cannot but wish happiness to him who (as Paul says \[1 Cor.
7:26, 33\]) is free and safe from the turmoil of works and persons.
Christ teach thee and make thee prosper, and make thee pray for me. In
him be well. On the day before Martinmas \[Nov. 10\] 1529, your Martin
Luther.

**No. 1475.**

(Wittenberg.) November 11, 1529.

**To D. M. Philipp Rosenecker in Jena.**

The man had fallen into Turkish captivity, and the woman, when he
demanded that she join him, had entered into a second marriage.

The original is at the Rathhause in Wittenberg (under glass and frame).
Printed in the congratulatory program of the Wittenberg Gymnasium to the
University of Jena on its tercentenary, 1858. *Inclutae Academiae
Jenensi . . . gratulatur \... Gym*

*nasium Vitebergense*, edited by senior teacher Theophilus Stier.
*Vitebergae Typis Bernhardi Henrici Ruebneri*. 3 quarto leaves; in
Seidemann, Lutherbriefe, p. 39 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 187.

> To the honorable and wise Philippus Rosenecker of Jena, my favorable
> good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. My good friend! As I told you in Jena about
the marriage case, so I still say: because Jeronymus Malter, 2) master
gunsmith, her husband, is still alive and is with King Janus, she cannot
stay with him with good pleasures. For King Janus is one with the Turk,
therefore her husband is safe. Therefore, my advice is that you or she
write to the husband.

2\) Malter was captured in the battle of Mohacz on August 29, 1526 by
the Bassa Karra and was given by him to King John Zapolya (Janos), who
used him as a gunsmith. In July 1528 he wrote a letter to his
brother-in-law Georg Moser in Neusalza, in which he asked his wife to
come to him and enclosed six gold florins as travel money. However, the
letter arrived only in 1529, three weeks after the wife had entered into
a second marriage with the pastor Georg Jüngkling in Neustadt an der
Orla at the beginning of the year. Luther had already talked about this
marriage case with her relative Rosenecker in Jena on October 12, and
now repeats this in writing.

**1380**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1475 to 1479.

**1381**

and tell him all things, and pray that he will forgive her, and take her
again unto himself, and in the meantime let her be separated and set
apart from him 1) with you. What the man will answer, you can think
about it further. Hereby God commanded, amen. On St. Martin\'s Day
\[11.bNov.\] 1529. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1476.**

Coburg. November 12, 1529.

**The Council of Coburg to Luther and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

The council asks them to provide them with another schoolmaster instead
of the deceased M. Philipp Eberbach. The schoolmaster has an apartment
at the school, board in the rectory and a salary of fifty guilders,
\"from which he must supply the school with wood in the winter\".

Printed by *Schlegel, vit. Joh. Langeri,* p. 86; in

Bindseil\'s Supplement to the *Corp. Ref.* 1874, p. 50 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 188.

**No. 1477.**

(Wittenberg.) November 18, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 552.

**No. 1478.**

(Wittenberg.) November 23, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks the Elector to write to Duke Heinrich von Mecklenburg to
prevent the printing of Emser\'s Testament in Low German, which had been
started in Rostock by the Loll Brothers.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 140-147. EEE.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 46; in Walch, vol. XXI, 159 (as
from 1526); in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 528 and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 54, p. 112.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! It

1\) Jüngkling obtained permission from the court to remarry on Oct. 29,
1531.

Some pious citizens of Lübeck have written to us and asked that, because
some of the Loll Brothers 2) in Rostock have Emser\'s Testament printed
in Saxon, from which they fear that they will sweat much of the people
of the place and do great harm, that E. C. F. G., if it were to be done,
should write to the Reverend Prince, Duke Heinrich von Meckelburg, and
ask that H. F. G., for the honor and benefit of the souls, forbid and
prevent such printing, if it could be done. Prince, Duke Heinrich von
Meckelburg, and request that H. F. G., in honor of the Gospel and for
the benefit of souls, forbid and prevent such printing where it could be
2c. Although for my part of Emser\'s Testament, according to the text
that the same boy maliciously stole from me (for it is almost entirely
my text, but changed in a few words that would do no harm), I may well
suffer that one has it and reads it; but now he has poisoned it with his
glosses and annotations so maliciously and disgracefully that the text
does no fruit for it, but harm: I therefore ask, E. C. F. G., that such
a printing be forbidden. C. F. G. would graciously grant us such
intercession to the esteemed Prince Duke Henry and let it come to us by
this messenger who has been sent out for this purpose; but as far as it
is good for E. C. F. G. to do so, because we ever, as much as is in us,
want to ward off the devil. Christ our Lord be with E. C. F. G. forever,
Amen. On the day of Clementi \[Nov. 23\] 1529.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1479.**

Torgau. November 25, 1529.

**The Electorate of Saxony\'s Rues to Luther.**

Response to previous letter.

The concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 143. *lit. EEE*. 8.
printed in Burkhardt, p. 167 and rm Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 190 f.

Our kind service before. Venerable, esteemed, special lord and friend!
Your letter, which you sent to our lord, the Elector of Saxony. Lord,
the Elector of Saxony, concerning the will that is being printed in
Rostock by some Lol brothers with the Emser\'s inverted lock and
annotation in the Saxon language.

2\) \"Lollbrüder\" (also Noll- or Nullbrüder), Lollharden, brothers of
the common life. They held the St. Michaelis monastery in Rostock. The
church belonging to the monastery still stands and is used as a wool
magazine.

**1382**

Letters from the year 1529. No. 1479. 1480.

**1383**

highly esteemed of our gn. Lord 1) we have vomited and read out, and on
this occasion, according to the enclosed copy, we have written a letter
to our Lord Duke Heinrich von Mekelburg. And whether we can well
consider that it would be more beneficial to things everywhere if our
Lord had been at hand himself and had not been in the way. Lord himself
would have been at hand and the writing would have been done in his C.
F. G. name, but because the delay in this would have been somewhat
painful and burdensome, we want to leave it to your own discretion
whether this writing of ours is to be sent to our G. Lord Duke Henry of
Mekelburg. Duke Henry of Mekelburg, 2) or whether it should be delayed
until the future of our G. Lord, and we have not wished to hold you to
this friendly opinion, and are willing to serve you. Date Torgau,
Thursday Catharina \[Nov. 25\] Anno 1529.

**No. 1480.**

(Wittenberg.) November 27, 1529.

**To Duke Henry V of Mecklenburg.**

Luther turns to the duke himself to prevent the printing of Emser\'s
Testament in Rostock.

The original is in Schwerin in the state archives. Printed by D. Krey in
Rostock, \"Andenken an die Rostockischen Gelehrten\", appendix, p. 59;
in \"Etwas von gelehrten Rostockschen Sachen\", 5th year, Rostock 1741,
p. 352; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 529; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 113 and by Seidemaun, Lutherbriefe, p. 39.

> To the illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Henry, Duke of
> Meckelburg 2c., my gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! I do
not doubt that my most gracious lord, the Elector of Saxony, will have
written to E. F. G. out of my humble request, or will recently write to
her about a printing that has been done in Rostock, for we have received
a good report from honest people in Lübeck that some of the brothers of
Lol are printing Emser\'s testament in the Saxon language in Rostock,
from which they are concerned that noticeable harm will befall the pious
souls, and they have asked me most earnestly that I should write to my
most gracious lord,

1\) The Elector had already left for the convention in Schmalkalden
scheduled for November 25.

2\) In order to give more emphasis to the letter of the Electoral
Councils to Duke Heinrich, Luther wrote the next letter. The letter is
printed in \"Etwas von gelehrten Rostockschen Sachen\", 5th year,
Rostock 1741, p. 354, but with the wrong date: \"Dienstags Katharine\"
instead of: \"Dornstags\".

the Elector of Saxony, for a writing to E. F. G., which I have done, and
am of good hope that it is or will be done. Although I like the text of
Emser\'s testament, as it is almost entirely my text, and is also stolen
from me from word to word, but his poisonous additions, glosses and
annotations from his envious head, added to my annoyance, would be
dangerous, for the sake of which such a testament of Emser is most often
printed: 3) I also humbly ask that E. F. G. would not allow such
printing for the sake of the Gospel of Christ and for the salvation of
all souls (where it is possible), considering that if such printing were
to go out through the grace or forbearance of E. F. G., Satan would
afterwards stir and complain to E. F. G.\'s conscience, as if they had
allowed such great harm to souls, so that they would not have prevented
it, since they certainly had space and time. However, I hope and pray
that Christ will continue to instruct E. F. G., as a lover of the Word
of God, to do what is dear to His divine will, amen.

E. F. G. will graciously grant me my diligent, but nevertheless
necessary and good opinion letter. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. 1529, on
Saturday after Catherinä \[Nov 27\]. 4)

E. F. G. williger Martinus Luther.

3\) In 1529, clergymen (not Emser himself, who died already in 1527)
contacted the Loll Brothers to print Emser\'s Testament in Lower Saxon,
so that Luther\'s New Testament would be displaced by it. What is left
of the print, however, shows an improvement in the sense of the
brothers, namely a close connection to the Vulgate (also echoes of the
Lübeck Bible 1494), therefore their text is further away from Emser than
the latter is from Luther. - On Dec. 18, 1529, Duke Heinrich issued a
prohibition of printing to the Rostock City Council, whereupon the
Council forbade the printing. The printer Joh. von Holt now negotiated
with the brother and co-regent of the Duke, who remained Catholic, and
printing began quietly in 1530 and continued until the Acts of the
Apostles, when the Rector of the Brüderhaus, Martin Hillermann, and the
printer were accused of a conspiracy against the Council and its
Syndicus, Joh. Oldendorp, and were imprisoned and only released in 1532
after a vow of pardon, but the printed sheets found were confiscated.
Only defective copies are in the Rostock and Stuttgart libraries,
individual sheets in Dorpat.

4\) From memory it says: *recepta* 18 Dec. Güstrow 1529. (De Wette.)

**1384** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1481. **1385**

**No. 1481.**

(Wittenberg.) November 29 (?) 1529. 1)

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther resisted any alliance to wage war against the emperor.

The original is in the Cassel government archives (now at Marburg).
Printed in Neudecker\'s Urkunden aus der Ref.- Zeit, p. 114; in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. XXIII and (better) in Seidemann-De Wette,
vol. VI, p. 105 (of 27 Aug.).

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my
> most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! After E. C. F. G. have made known to me what S. G., the landgrave,
has written to E. C. F. G., and S. F. G. may suffer that E. C. F. G.
hear my objection inside, E. C. F. G. thereupon request that I report my
objection in writing:

First of all, this is my advice, that E. C. F. G. together with other
princes and cities, who are of an undivided faith, should give the
Emperor a submissive answer and with all humility ask for peace, look to
His Imperial Majesty 2); as I then hear that the councils are to meet
shortly at Nuremberg for this purpose; for the mandates, to which the
Emperor\'s answer refers or draws (which he gave to the embassy), have
not yet gone out. And since (as the Scripture says) the King\'s heart is
in God\'s hands, it is quite possible that the Emperor\'s counsel has
changed by God\'s grace since the time the 3) Embassy was in their
hands, and that His Majesty will not leave this way. And who knows
whether all this, which has happened so far and still happens, therefore
miraculously hinders and turns God to try our faith? Should such an
answer be given to the Emperor, which might be considered harsh and
defiant, then a

1\) This date is Conjectur Seidemann\'s in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 583,
note 5, who for \"*Vigilia* Sext. \[Sanct.\] Aug.\" to read *S.
Andreae.*

2\) Thus placed by us instead of: \"seiner K. M. ansehen s?!j\" in
Seidemann.

3\) \"the\" put by us instead of: \"the\".

The emperor\'s will and commandment are always at the disposal of the
emperor. Thus, it is also our duty before God to act against the emperor
as our sovereign with humility, as much as possible, and not to defy
God, for it is always God\'s will and commandment: You shall honor the
king. 1 Petr. 2.

On the other hand: Even if the emperor were of the mind that he wants to
proceed by force against the gospel, without *conciliation* and without
interrogation, one can still not in good conscience go to battle, God
granting that the emperor gives either an ungracious answer or no answer
at all. The reason is first of all that such a thing is unreasonable and
also against natural law. For going into the field and putting up a
defense shall not be done unless there is physical force or unavoidable
necessity. But such going forth beforehand and wanting to defend oneself
is not considered an act of necessity, but an irritation and defiance
against those who still sit still and have done nothing. Now it is
obvious that King Magistrate has not yet issued any *mandates* against
these princes, and whether they have already gone out, or would go out,
would not yet have been the issue. Between such and all, however, much
water can run, and God may well find many means, perhaps also by their
part, to act according to peace. Therefore, if the emperor were an equal
5) prince, one could not start a war or go to battle for the above
reasons. And if it should ever be thought that one should trust in God,
but not despise the means that one can have at the time, so that one
does not tempt God; all this is true, but one must not devise such means
oneself, but suffer and wait for the means that God presents, and then
not let them go and follow our conceit, and also that they be means that
may be used with God and not against God. Otherwise, where one so
anxiously seeks means, one is certainly too close to trusting in God.
For this is what the Jews would have said in ancient times, when they
made alliances with foreign kings and pretended that they trusted in
God;

4\) \"either\" put by us instead of: \"neither\".

5\) \"gleicher\" put by us instead of: \"gleinher \[?\]\" in Seidemann,
and \"kleiner\" in the Erlanger.

**1386** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1481. 1482. **1387**

But they sought means through such alliance, so they were severely
punished for it. Now military action would be an unnecessary and distant
means at this time. Item, the emperor is the lord and sovereign of these
princes. Now, of course, no one would want his subjects, if they were
subject to him, to act in such a way as is done here against the
emperor, and would actually be a rebellious and disobedient piece.
Therefore, it is advisable to use the diligence one has to seek means of
resistance, as one finds means, first all humility and submission to the
Emperor. Mt. 1) Then God will give grace (especially if the princes and
we will ask him for it with right earnestness) and our worries will find
good counsel, as he promises us and does not fulfill Ps. 55: \"Cast your
concern on God. He will provide for you.\" 1 Pet. 5: \"He resisteth the
proud, and giveth grace unto the humble.\"

On the other hand, it would also be a futile means, even dangerous and
harmful. For I would bet on it if we were already in the field in the
present war. How, then, if the emperor sits still or stays outside and
lets us wear ourselves out in the field and grow tired of fighting? What
would we have gained by this but insurmountable damage, plus the
disfavor and displeasure of the whole world? And with that, we would
have enraged the emperor first and foremost, and at the same time given
him every reason to go on an emergency revenge by appealing to the
empire. Then one would probably find scribes who should dress up our
things to disfavor, to annoyance, to disgrace the gospel, to disfavor,
and again make up the emperor\'s things so that he must be a vain angel
and we must be a vain devil.

Thirdly, it would be too close to the opponents and princes who are in
the empire if they and their poor subjects were to be seized immediately
by the emperor. For I hear that it has been written to the emperor to
put off the estates of the empire to a peace. And if they should be
attacked about it, both God and the world would be highly angered once
again, and we would be condemned. And

1\) Seidemann: \"Mt. \[?\]\"; incomprehensible to us. Did he perhaps
want to imply that something was missing? as: \"to prove\".

All these things they could do to their innocence cheaply and most
beautifully to plunge us into all misfortune and disgrace.

Therefore, my concern is that the nobility to go into the field will
remain away, unless there are other needs and things, and because with
the ordered way one can always ask HM for peace with all submission.
This is my faithful opinion, please, E. C. F. G. will hear it in mercy.
Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Sext. Aug. 2) 1529.

E. C. F. G. subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1482.**

Gotha. December 2, 1529.

Friedrich Myconius to Luther.

Myconius sends the history of the barefoot monk Johann Jlten (Hilten)
that he promised, along with a long introduction to it; furthermore, a
book by Jlten, and in the enclosure an excerpt from a letter on this
matter.

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. I, fol. 84. Manuscript in Hamburg, Ms.
I, fol. 348; in Dresden, *Cod. C* 342; and in Bremen, Stadtbibliothek,
Ns. a 11. Printed in *sive accessiones ad omnis generis eruditionem.
Gottingae* 1737. *tom. I, lib.* 3, x. 9;

Seidemann in Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte, III, 305 (without the
supplement) and datirt: 30. Nov. and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p.
194. The supplement in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1744, p. 317 (as a letter
of Spalatin to Luther from 1520; likewise Burkhardt, p. 36, in a
regest).

> To the highly famous and exceedingly faithful prophet of the Lord to
> the Germans, D. Martin Luther, his father in Christ.

Grace and peace from God, our Father, through Christ! So that I may
finally obey your orders, my most esteemed D. Luther, as I am obliged
to, and free myself from guilt, I am sending you the history of the
Minorite Johann Ilten, not in its entirety, but several small pieces, as
many as I was able to fish out of the old monks and the tattered
remnants of his writings and scrape together. Of all his souvenirs and
books, however, of which there was an enormous quantity, and of which,
no doubt, some are still preserved by the monks who hid them when they
were destroyed, I was only able to obtain these fragments,

2\) This meaningless dating is found in Neudecker and in the Erl.
Edition. The Erlanger Briefw. remarks: \"Neudecker has copied the
originals so carelessly that one may also dare here a Conjectur so
completely contrary to the printed date\".

**1388** Briese from the year 1529. no. 1482. **1389**

and certainly not without great diligence and art. For these monks
conceal and hide with extraordinary zeal the blood and the memory of
this and other martyrs of Christ, so that it does not cry out from the
earth to the Lord. But they take this trouble in vain, because he will
come in the near future who will demand all the blood of all the
righteous that has been shed on earth from the wicked.

This Ilten was formerly so great among the Lieflanders to whom he
preached that all who had the privilege of seeing and hearing him
thought that they heard an angel from heaven. But from this book the
monks have torn out some 1) leaves at the place which I have indicated
by a small paper inserted, where, as can be seen from the previous leaf
which is still left, 2) that man had described his history and his
martyr\'s sufferings. Among other things, however, the preface of this
book seems to me to be a testimony of a not evil heart, although I would
have liked him to have either written or known more certain things about
the most salvific and necessary doctrine of justification. Rome he
interprets several times, that it is the whore in Revelation, and that
this kingdom will cease around the year of Christ 1514, as can be seen
from his circles (*rotulis*). He was extremely annoyed by the
distinction that the monks first dreamt up: that the religious were
different Christians than the secular ones; he wanted that no other
worship of God was salvific than only Christian worship, without which
the monks were outside of salvation. What he has held, and frequently
discussed in the circles and elsewhere in this book, of the empire of
the Mahometists or Turks, of their victories and wars, which are to be
propagated to Europe, so that the consummate wickedness of the Europeans
and their godlessness may receive due punishment; Then, what he thought
of the kingdom of the restored (*reformatorum*) Christians and of the
tyranny of Antichrist and the kingdom of Christ here on earth, and of
the end of the world around the year of the Lord 1651, and beyond that
the account of the heavenly book does not go, and with which scriptural
passages he proved this, you will be able to accept more easily than I.
For I think that he did not say anything about the tyranny of the
Antichrist and the kingdom of Christ here on earth. For I think that he
does not write very probable things. But I cannot avoid it,

1\) Instead of (referring to *monachi*) we have assumed, according to
your Bremen manuscript and Heumann\'s copy of the original in the
*Parerga, quaedam* (referring to *folia*).

2\) The word: *apparet* is the complement of Heumann.

I do not see that he is lying about the fact that he has set the end of
Rome around the year of the Lord 1514, and that he has extended the
empire of the Turk over Europe from the year of Christ 600 to the year
1570. But you will know through the spirit of Christ that is in you what
kind of spirit it was that inspired these things and brought them
together. But I beg you, my most revered Luther, that you return this
book of Jltens after you have read it. For I have vowed to the monk that
I will keep it carefully, and if he should demand it, I will also send
it back. Take care that he cannot accuse me of lying, for I would
certainly be very ashamed of such an offense. But since the raging of
the papists against Christ does not cease, I would like the Spirit in
you and others not to cease to punish their sins, although they are
already sinning so much that there is no hope that these offenses and
the terrible sin of blasphemy will ever be forgiven. Nevertheless, since
Christ is now dying on the cross everywhere, I think it will not be
unreasonable for us to cry out with the centurion that Christ is
suffering improperly and that he is righteous. I have written these
three quatrains, which I have sent before the history of Jlten, so that
you may see that I gladly want to confess Christ\'s innocence with you
and threaten the fury of those with destruction, that they will quickly
receive their terrible punishments from the Lord and that God\'s
vengeance will come upon them. By the way, if something else seems to
suit you better, use these papers for any purpose (*pro tergendis
natibus*) or for lighting fires.

Nothing new is reported here, except that it is said that the emperor is
becoming very burdensome to Christ. But you know what a reward his
exceedingly powerful enemies have received. He will undoubtedly be
broken like a potter\'s vessel when he comes up against this stone. [Be
confident, I have overcome the world,]{.underline} \"which is probably
more, greater, wiser, stronger, angrier, because devil, hell, Turk,
pope, king, bishop, all nations are their war relatives\", how much more
have I overcome, yes, overcome the emperor. May the grace of Christ keep
you His Church, Amen. Respectfully greet the comrade of all your
tribulations, \"Käthen von Bora\". Gotha 1529, Thursday after the Feast
of St. Andrew \[Dec. 2\]. Yours, Friedrich Myconius.

3\) The Erlanger Briefw. offers: *perdentium illum*; we have followed
Seidemann\'s reading: *perdentionem illorum*; besides, here are two
other readings.

**1390** Letters from the year

. No. 1482. 1483. **1391**

[Enclosure]{.underline}. ^1)^

When I had closed the letter, Siebeleben\'s bishop 2) sent me a letter
from Johann Corner, whom I had commissioned to investigate Ilten\'s
history with the monks at Arnstadt, which contained these words: \"After
the investigation had been done in a careful manner, our hired scout
said: I have recognized that these brothers do not want to confess the
truth, although I had also approached them (he said) in an exceedingly
clever manner. But they confessed that Ilten had not been locked up in
eternal prison, but had been kept apart for the sake of the leprosy, so
that he would not infect others with his disease, and he had not lived
in seclusion until the day of his departure. \[In passing: See the
monkish deception. Ilten was never leprous in the body\]. After many
things they also added that he had had a strong spirit of prophecy, and
that he had often occupied himself with the prophecies of Johann
Lichtenberg 3). Among other things, the monks said that he had also
predicted that it would happen that no monastery in Eisenach would be
maintained; he had also predicted many other things, of which today
everyone sees that everything has come true. I have learned this from
our hired scout, as well as other things that are not relevant to the
matter, which it is not necessary to explain. I am sending this to you,
dear brother, so that you may report it to our Frederick 4) as soon as
possible.\" So far Johann Corner, pastor at Dietendorf.

**No. 1483.**

Friedewald. December 9, 1529.

**Landgrave Philip of Hesse to Luther.**

After the shameful treatment of the envoys sent to him, nothing good
could be expected from the emperor, therefore Luther should advise the
Elector that he, along with the other Protestant states, refuse to help
the Turks.

Printed in Rommel, Philipp der Großmüthige, Urkundenband, p. 32 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 199.

1\) The enclosure was attached to the letter on a special sheet and
bears the inscription in Myconius\' hand: \"From the last letter of Joh.
*Corner* (*Cornerii*) to Johann Bartholus, about Ilten.

2\) The pastor in Siebeleben near Gotha was Joh. Bartholus. - Joh.
Corner was pastor in Dietendorf in the Gotha office Jchtershanfen.

3\) See Luther\'s preface to Johann Lichtenberger\'s Weissagung, St.
Louis Edition, Vol. XIV, 266.

4\) Myconius.

Philipp von GOttes Gnaden Landgrave of Hesse 2c.

Dear, dear faithful one! We have no doubt that you are aware of the
unpleasant, burdensome and outrageous actions of the Roman Emperor. Maj.
has done against ours, the princes, princes and cities, who are attached
to the holy gospel, which they call your doctrine, and to the
protestation before the next Speirian imperial treaty, 5) whom we have
delivered to their sovereignty with such high, humble, submissive
supplications and requests and such Christian, honorable, just and
lawful entreaties, and especially how their sovereigns have had them
imprisoned in the inn. The same also applies to the unceremonious,^6)^
serious answer given by her M. to the same advertisement, and that from
this her K. M.\'s serious, vehement and ungracious disposition towards
us, the above-mentioned Electors, Princes, Estates, you and others who
are inclined to the Gospel, is to be understood without obscurity,
actually and certainly, and also that, where her M. has done something
ungracious to damp down the protestation, it is to be understood that
her M. has done something ungracious to damp down the protestation.
would do something ungracious to dampen and suppress the Gospel, it
would be difficult to do so, although we have no doubt that the almighty
God, who out of mercy and grace has again given us his word so
abundantly and graciously, will also preserve it powerfully against all
men. But nevertheless, the ways and means given to us by God and useful
for this purpose are not to be despised. Since there is now and
necessity demands that help against the Turks be sought from all, and
especially also from us, the above-mentioned Estates, by Our Lady and
her brother and others, since our, the Estates\', help is not the least,
but among the highest and most noble, we mean, if we unanimously decide
and do not grant or give ourselves any help, that beforehand Our Lady
has assured us of peace and that she will support us in our efforts. If
we unanimously decide and do not grant or give help, then we mean that
the Catholic Church has assured us beforehand of peace and that it wants
to let us stay with the Gospel unimpaired (which we consider Christian
in our understanding, and that it is unpleasant and unprovable), it
would nevertheless move the Catholic Church in such an objection, and we
are of good, comforting confidence in God that we would receive it and
that thereby much harm would be prevented; and we do not consider it
otherwise than that you, with your teaching, finally

5\) The detailed description of the tyrannical action of Emperor Carl V
to the Protestant envoy can be found in the St. Louis edition, Vol. XVI,
452-518, in the documents No. 849-863.

6\) \"ungewierig\" == not granting, rejecting.

7\) Added by us; there is a gap in our template here.

**1392** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1483. 1484. 1485. **1393**

and what serves for the promotion and planting of the same, with only
diligence: therefore we request of you with grace quite amicably,
whether from the high-born prince, our friendly dear uncle,
brother-in-law and cousin, the Elector of Saxony 2c., that his love
would seek or desire your advice or concern therein, you shall,
according to your skill, propose the above-mentioned way to his love,
and promote it with diligence, so that his love will let it please her,
and thus be done and left unanimously by all of us. We are sure that
this will give rise to concern and motivation on the part of the
Catholic Church and will also be to your benefit, as you will be able to
judge for yourselves according to your own understanding, and will send
us your response to this. ^1)^ This we provide for you, and will do so
with grace. Date Friedewalt, on Thursday after Nicolai \[Dec. 9\] A. 2c.
29.

To Martinum Lutherum.

**No. 1484.**

(Wittenberg.) Decembei?11, 1529.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the Schweinitz castle owner because of a cash defect.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, X, fol. 108. 41. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 62, no.98; in Walch, vol. XXI, 301; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 530 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 115.

> Your most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most noble, highborn prince, most gracious
lord! I should not interfere in this matter, but I must do so. The
Schweinitz castle owner, Kunz Pfeilschmidt, owes E. C. F. G. in his
account, as I have heard, something honest, even in money: he has asked
me, as in his greatest need, for this favor. I have made myself
difficult for many reasons, and have also thought back and forth about
whether he could be helped. It is true that he has served E. C. F. G.
for 20 years, and that he takes comfort in the fact that \[it\] should
be given to him.

1\) Luther replied on Dec. 16.

The situation is as follows: even if he were to be expelled, C.F.G.
would not be able to recover his property at once, and would have to
sell it by the day 2) and collect it again individually. If C.F.G. wants
to let him sit and take 50 fl. from him every year until he pays it all,
he hopes that he will keep himself honest and do well; for he has taken
a 100 fl. loss on the wine this year. I know of nothing more to do here
than to ask. E. C. F. G. will know how to do it. Hiemit GOtt befehlt,
Amen. Saturday after St. Nicolai \[Dec. 11\] 1529.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1485.**

(Wittenberg.) December 13, 1529.

**To the Abbot Friedrich Pistorius at Nuremberg.**

Luther asks him to persuade the father of the jurist Conrad Mauser to
attend his son\'s wedding to a Wittenberg woman in person.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 380. fol. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p.
116; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 531 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.
201.

> To the venerable man in Christ, Mr. Friedrich, Bishop of the Aegidien
> Monastery in Nuremberg, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Venerable Man in Christ, I have both nothing
and much that I would like to write to you. I have nothing from myself
except that I commend myself to your holy prayers. But I have much from
our new bridegroom, Conrad Mauser, your citizen, certainly an
exceedingly honest and worthy young man. And there is no doubt that your
kindness can easily be measured, if a letter should be written that
would be worthy of his new and fresh flame of bridal love, then perhaps
the whole world could not fast it, since even the wise King Solomon
himself confesses that he could not fast the way of a man to a maid
\[Sprüchw. 30, 19\]. But this I play in such a way, so that, I you the
high

2\) That is, on dates (Erl. Briefw.).

**1394** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1485. 1486. **1395**

time this molt recommend. For through you he wishes to become more
pleasant and happy for his parents. This will happen if your kindness
will help his father to realize that his son Conrad has certainly taken
a girl of excellent figure, and what is best, adorned with a good
character and due manners, I would also like to add, a Christian girl,
if the value of this name had not become low because of its frequency
and quantity among the people, but not among us. Also, the father of the
girl is not without wealth, as the citizens here are, but he belongs to
the number of the council and to the richer ones, and is with us a very
respected man, who presides over his house in the best way, and his wife
is industrious and of good repute. This will make your kindness known to
the father when it comes, so that he will not deceive the son, but
rather cheer him up with his good will. For he did not take her without
the father\'s consent, 1) but would gladly have the father\'s good will
made known by his coming to the wedding. For we would gladly that thou
also wert present in person, but we fear that we ask a thing for which
there is no hope. Let your kindness do what is good in their eyes, and
be well in Christ, amen. On the day of St. Lucia \[13 Dec.\] 1529.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1486.**

(Wittenberg.) December 13, 1529.

To Eoban Hesse in Nuremberg.

Luther sends him the 118th Psalm with short explanations, and asks him
to transform it into a Latin poem.

This letter is found in *Psalmus CXVIII ex ipsius M. Lutheri scholiis:
praeterea sedecim alij Latino carmine reddita per Helium Eobanu Hessum.
Eiusdem de fructu lectionis Psalmorum Elegia. Epistola M. Lutheri.
Epistola Ph. Melanchthonis*. 2)

1\) From this one recognizes that De Wette\'s statement: \"that Luther
asks the abbot to effect the consent of the father to this connection\"
is wrong.

2\) This letter is found in *Corp. Ref., 93b. I\', 1081. lacobi Micylli
psalmi duo. Lectori. E Schola Norica, Mense Februario. M.D.XXX.*. 32
leaves in 8. Dedicated to the town clerk Lazarus Spengler. Then in the
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p.202.

Martin Luther wishes Eoban Hesse salvation.

Grace and peace in Christ! Since I had seen that you, my dear Eoban,
were gladly and with pleasure practicing your poetry on some psalms
which had been given to you by Philip, and I, who love the Psalter very
much, took great pleasure in seeing this Hebrew poet clothed with Latin
poetry, I have often thought of giving you some more of this pleasant
occupation, of expounding to you some more of this pleasant occupation,
but I have been so often prevented and beset by other troubles, that it
has not hitherto been granted me to tell you a psalm which you should
make more sweet to me for my prayer and love by your poetry. For I did
not want to name a mere (*nudum* == without explanations) psalm, and I
ask that you exercise your poetic gift on it. Not as if I doubted that
all psalms are already sufficiently known to you, but because I am
selfish in these matters, and would like to see my thoughts
interspersed, so that the psalm would be all the more familiar and
pleasant to me, than if absolutely nothing of my thoughts, to which I am
accustomed, were included. Therefore, I now finally ask that you, if you
get leisure and allow your soul rest, may form this 118th Psalm into a
Latin poem for me. 3) For so that you do not stray far from my thoughts,
I send you at the same time several short explanations (*scholia), which
I have* noted privately, so that I may imprint the Psalm, which is
extremely dear to me, more sweetly and firmly in my memory. Whether you
want to copy the copy or send it back is up to you. But I would like you
to understand these requests of mine in such a way that you will not
hear me, let it be with great pleasure, and you will, as it were, send
it back to me.

3\) The Psalm edited by Hessus has in the above print the
superscription: *In Psalmum CXIIII \[sic\] cum interspersis (quantum cum
decore fieri potuit, et personae dignitas permisit) Martini Lutheri
Scholiis, per Eob. Hessum latino carmine reddita paraphrasis*. - Hessus
gave Luther\'s Schölten to Wenceslaus Link, who translated them into
German and published them under the title: \"Der Hundert vund
achtzehendt Psalm, niit kurtzer außlegnng oder verzeicbnuß D. Martin
Luther\'s\.... Wentzeslaus Linck. 1530.\" At the end: \"Gedruckt zu
Nürenberg durch Jobst Gutknecht.\" 3 sheets in 8. This interpretation is
different uon the \"beautiful Confitemini,\" St. Louis edition, vol. V,
1174 ff, and is not yet found in any edition, so we have not been able
to bring it.

**1396**

Letters from the year 1529. no. 1486. 1487. 1488.

**1397**

of your own accord. For I do not want to burden you with a burden,
especially in a matter that is not necessary, but only pleasant; but of
a pure and holy pleasantness, perhaps also not useless. For this psalm
has often served me as an exceedingly effective means against many
temptations and attempts of the devil; that is the cause why I wish it
to be embellished and made known in every language with all art and
imagery. Forgive my importunity and be well in Christ. On the day of St.
Lucia \[13 Dec.\] 1529.

**No. 1487.**

(Wittenberg.) December 16, 1529.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

Luther gives an evasive answer to the Landgrave\'s letter of December 9
(No. 1488).

The original is in the archive at Marburg. Printed in Rommel\'s Philipp
der Großmüthige, Urkundenband, Gießen 1830, p. 34; in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 108 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 204.

Grace and peace from Christ JEsu. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious
lord! I have received E. F. G. I have received the Holy Scripture
through this messenger, and I have heard what rude things are being
brewed in the Emperor by the clergy, and I hope to God, who boasts in
the Psalter that He makes ungodly rulers and people\'s attempts futile,
that He will now also hear us and make such attempts futile, mostly
because the clergy now boasts so highly, and defies the Emperor and
human help, and does not ask anything of God, nor does it call upon Him.
God only protect us, that we do not insist on our wit and strength, but
desire and wait for his help, then it will surely come. That also E. F.
G. desires, where I would be asked for advice, to help my lord. G., if I
were asked for advice, to persuade my lord that the emperor should not
be helped against the Turks, unless a common peace had been promised and
made beforehand 2c.: I have not yet been asked for this, nor do I know
anything about how things stand at Speier 1) now or at Schmalkalden.

1\) A regimental meeting was held there in November to discuss the
danger from the Turks; in Schmalkalden on Nov. 29.

It is a question of where the matter stands or goes that I do not know
how to answer this time either; but if it comes to that, I will, if God
wills it, advise in the best, because such a matter will then also come
to my conscience, and I will probably be forced to advise in the best.
However, I will ask, as much as I can and may with God\'s grace, that
not the will of the priests, but God\'s will be done, amen. I command E.
F. G. in Christ\'s grace, Amen. On the thursday after S. Lucie \[16.
Dec.\] 1529. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1488.**

Wittenberg. December 17, 1529.

**Luther and Jonas to the Elector of Saxony.**

Request to have the counties of Eilenburg, Bitterfeld and Belzig, which
are still in arrears, visited and thus to complete the entire visitation
work.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji,* fol. 55 d. V. 6.
According to a copy by Neudecker (not an imprint) printed in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. XXVI and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI,
p. 109.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! To Your Lordly Grace our obedient
obligated services are always preceded with diligence. Most gracious
Lord! We humbly inform Your Lordship that the district and office of
Saxony and the region of Meissen, namely Wittenberg, Seyde, Sweynitz,
Schlieben, Liebenwerda, Torgau, Leyßnick, Colditz and Grimma, have been
ordered by Your Lordship to be visited by divine visitation. We were
willing to visit them as well as the others, but at the same time we
were prevented from doing so by the accidental illness of Bastian full
of Kotterisch, and because the house of Tanbeuheim, as well as Doctor
Benedictus Pauli, were burdened with other business at that time. Since,
however, many of the three counties mentioned, and especially Beltitz,
are daily encouraging us, both orally and in writing, to carry out the
visitation, we humbly request that E. C. G., where it is in his power,
2) again order several persons, especially the 2) honest Hans von
Taubenheim, to do so, so that 2) the remaining counties mentioned above
may be informed of this.

2\) Gap in spending.

**1398** Letters from the year 1529. no. 1488. 1489. 1490.

**1399**

> We would like to visit and send the registration to E. C. G. in its
> entirety, considering the great need that such work requires. This we
> want to deserve for the same E. C. G. in submissive obedience at all
> times. Date Wittenberg, Friday after Luciä \[Dec. 17\] *Anno Dei*
> 1529.

E. C. G. subservient, obedient Martinus Luther, Ecclesiast, and Justus
Jonas, Provost at Wittenberg, both *Doctores of* the Holy Scriptures.

> Postscript. ^1)^
>
> Since Doctor Benedictus Pauli has also indicated to us that it is
> impossible for him to wait for the visitation in addition to his
> mayoral office and other pending business, we humbly request that Your
> Lordship give him a new order or graciously appoint someone else to
> take his place.
>
> **No. 1489.**
>
> Wittenberg. December 20, 1529.
>
> **Luther and Jonas to the Elector at**
>
> **Saxony.**
>
> Request for the monastery administrator at Sitzenrode for permission
> to marry.

The original, executed by the visitation clerk, is in the Weimar
Archives, *Reg. O,* p. 476. Printed in Burkhardt, p. 168 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 206.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! We are always ready to render our
servile and obligatory services to Your Lordship. Most gracious Lord!
After E. C. G. ordered us, among other deputies, to visit and inspect
the parishes and monasteries of the counties of Saxony and the region of
Meissen, and also to procure equity everywhere, we also summoned, among
others, the head of the monastery of Sitzenrode, 2) Ern Johann Donati,
to Torgau, whom we found to be a particularly skilled steward, who also
committed himself to all obedience to E. churf.

1\) This postscript is missing in the editions, but is added by
Burkhardt, p. 495, and also included by the Erl. Briefw.

2\) A Benedictine nunnery near Torgau.

with a subservient favor. However, since we have noted that he has
remained without a wife until now, and that he has refrained from
marrying only because the administration of the monastery, which E. C.
G. had prescribed for him throughout his life, might be withdrawn from
him in such a case. which E. C. G. had prescribed for him throughout his
life, might be withdrawn from him in such a case, he has kindly and
obligingly asked and requested us, upon our diligent admonition, to be
helpful to him at E. C. G., so that such a change would be permitted to
him and that E. C. G. would graciously grant him the right to marry.
Therefore, our humble and diligent request to E. C. G. is that E. C. G.
graciously allow such a change to the headman and administrator,^3)^ in
view of the fact that it is a good and Christian undertaking that such a
large household can hardly be administered without a female. In
addition, the virgin, whom he was willing to free, was brought up in the
aforementioned monastery and before that time was used for housekeeping
at the assembly of virgins. For the sake of E. C. G. we are always
willing and ready to earn this in humble obedience. Date Wittenberg,
Monday after Lucie \[Dec. 20\], Anno 1529.

> E. C. G. submissive, obedient Martinus Luther, Ecclesiast, and Just
> Jonas, Probst zu Wittenberg, bede Doctor.

**No. 1490.**

Torgau. December 21, 1529.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther and Jonas.**

Response to the letter of 17 December.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji*, fol. 55 b. 6.
4. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 169 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 207.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotees! We have
received your letter, in which you inform us that the district and
office of Saxony and the region of Meissen, namely Wittenberg, Seyda,
Schweinitz, Schlie

3\) Monday after Erhardi (10 Jan.) 1530 followed the approving
churfürstliche resolution (Burkhardt).

**1400** Letters from the year

1529\. no. 1490. 1491. **1401**

We have ordered the visitation of Liebenwerd, Torgau, Leißneck, Colditz
and Grim by divine help, so that Eilnburg, Biterfelt and Beltzk are
still behind the scenes, which you were prevented from doing in the
first visitation for several reasons, We have heard your request and the
attached petition, and you have noted it for your gracious favor, and it
is not without necessity that these three places be favorably visited in
the same way as the others. Therefore, we allow ourselves that this be
done first, as you can do it with I), as we then order our council and
dear faithful, Benedict Pauli, Doctor, and Hansen von Taubenheim, to let
themselves be used for such visitation next to you at your request and
notification, but if you need Doctor Pauli in secular matters, then let
him, for the sake of his mayoral office, or if he is to sit in the court
court, allow him. 2) And since we daily note that in the Saxon and
adjoining Meissen district all kinds of matters come to us that are not
finally settled: In order that equity may now prevail in the same for
the prevention of further injustice, it is our gracious request to you
that you do not make the matters pending, but think with diligent
consideration on the ways that they may finally be recorded and passed,
also that you do not allow the parties any dangerous or wanton evasion,
as shall then also be held by us thereupon. But the matrimonial cases,
so pending, you want to discuss for the prevention of further
aggravation by reasonable Christian instruction, and if you do not want
to wait for the same matrimonial cases everywhere, you want to send them
to our learned judges, the assessors of the court court in Wittenberg,
according to our common tender to promise, and thus turn to good
diligence in the things everywhere. In this you do us a favor. Date
Torgau, Tuesday Thomä Apostoli \[Dec. 21\] 1529.

**No. 1491.**

(Wittenberg.) December 25, 1529.

**Luther and Melanchthon to the Coburg Council.**

Even before the request of the Coburg City Council for a schoolmaster
(No. 1476), dated Nov. 12, 1529, had arrived in Wittenberg, Melanchthon
had already sent a letter of request to the city council on Nov. 12,
1529.

1\) \"with ichte\" = somehow.

2\) \"Allow\" here will probably be as much as: give leave.

15 Nov. in a letter to M. Joh. Fesel, preacher at Coburg, who suggested
Wolfgang Höfler for this position (*Corp. Ref.,* I, 1110 f.). From our
letter it appears that as a result of this, the council of Coburg wrote
again in the meantime, which is answered here (not to No. 1476). At the
same time (Dec. 25), Melanchthon also wrote to Fesel that Höfler was
willing to take over the school (*Corp. Ref.,* 1, 1116).

From the original in Christian Schlegel in *vita Langeri*, p. 87; in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 64, no. 105; in Walch, vol. XXI, 361; in De
Wette, vol. I V, p. 205; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 206
(everywhere with the wrong date 1530) and (under the year 1529) in
*Corp. Ref.,* vol. I, 1115 f.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of the city of Coburg,
> our favorable lords and friends.

Our friendly services before. Honorable, wise, favorable gentlemen and
friends! We have informed Wolfgang Höfler of your opinion concerning the
school, in which he notes your friendly will towards him, and asked us
to thank you diligently on his behalf, as is due, and to ascribe the
following opinion, that he is inclined to accept the school in Coburg,
and for this reason, after the end of the present Leipzig market, to
move out^3)^ . But because you add in your writing that he would rather
study here longer, this should not be contrary to you: he wants to have
this completely stated to you, as his lords and sponsors; for although
he is inclined to accept the school, he still wants to show himself
obedient to you, and if it would be your concern that he should study
here longer, and you determine a certain time and study for him, he will
keep obediently and follow you. From all this you will show him your
mind, if he comes out with God\'s help. We are always willing to serve
you kindly. God keep you. Date on the day of *Nalalis Domini*, MDXXX
\[Dec. 25, 1529\]. 4)

> Martinus Luther.

Philip Melanchthon.

3\) On Jan. 5, 1530, Höfler left for Coburg (see *Corp. Ref.,* II, 11).
He held the post until his death in 1544.

4\) According to the way to start the New Year with Christmas Day.

**1403**

**1402** Letters from the year 1529. No. 1492 to 1495.

> **No. 1492.**
>
> (Wittenberg.) (December 1529.) 1)
>
> **Luther\'s and Melanchthon\'s concerns to the Elector on the day at
> Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 283, no. 819.

> **No. 1493.**
>
> Wittenberg. 1529.

**To Johann Purgolt, Mayor of**

> **Eisenach.**
>
> Luther indicates to him that both he and Melanchthon wrote to the
> captain at Wartburg so that M. Heinrich Scholl would keep his brewing
> rights and his school office 2c.

From a manuscript in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. RR,* p. 237, No. 2,
printed in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 700 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 210.

Grace and peace in Christ! Dear Cautious, dear Lord and Friend! What
they have done in Eisenach with your son-in-law, to deprive both of the
brewing rights and the school office, has not pleased me and *Mag.*
Accordingly, we have both written to the captain at Warpurg 2) in the
hope that M. Scholl, your oath-bearer, should be retained in the school
office, for although their nobility does not grow out of envy, as cannot
be well believed, there are not so many people available at present that
one should choose and supply them with a vain Philipp Mel. or the like
according to their thoughts. Therefore I ask you to admonish good
friends and citizens of mine with the indicated, if necessary, writing,
that they help resist envy and let themselves be based on Mag. Scholl 3)
so that they do not experience a change that makes them regret it. For a
thing is soon changed, but not so soon improved. Change is bad,
therefore everyone should suffer and keep what he has,

1\) This concern, which was placed \"on the day *trium Regnum* at
Nuremberg 1530,\" cannot have been written as early as April 1529, where
De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 438 and the Erlangen edition, Vol. 54, p. 63
place it.

2\) Eberhard von der Thann.

3\) Perhaps: \"benügen\". It may have been read \"benugen\" in
\"berugen\".

that God does not punish the ingratitude. I did not want to behave in
such a way in good opinion, because I am willing to serve you and yours.
Hereby commanded by God. Date Wittenberg, Anno 1529. Martinus Luther.

> **No. 1494.** (1529.)

**Concerns to Brenz about the death penalty of heretics.**

(Fragment.)

Printed by Hartmann and Jäger, Joh. Brenz,. Vol. I, p. 301 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 211.

In a concern about the means by which the authorities should defend
themselves against sects, written at the end of 1529, Brenz says that he
asked Luther for advice about the death penalty for heresy, and that
Luther answered him thus:

I am hard to judge by blood, even if there is enough guilt; in addition,
I am frightened by the succession of the example, which we saw with the
papists and before Christ\'s time with the Jews, where it was set to
kill the seducing teachers: \[Now it has come to pass that not only the
holy prophets and innocent people have been killed by virtue of such a
statute, so that the godless authorities have helped themselves, and
have made false teachers and heretics, as much and as many as they have
longed for. The same would be true of ours, where one could prove by
example that it is fair to kill false teachers, just as innocent blood
is shed for guilty among the papists. Therefore, false teachers should
not be killed; it is enough to expel them; even if the descendants
wanted to abuse such punishment, they would sin again and harm only
themselves.

> **No. 1495.** 1529.

**Luther\'s preface to Jonas\'s German translation of the second edition
of Melanchthon\'s Interpretation of the**

**Colossian Letter.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XI V, 176.

**1404**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1496. 1497. 1498.

**1405**

**No. 1496.**

Wittenberg. January 2, 1530.

**To Michael Stiefel in Lochau.**

About a church discipline case due to irreconcilability.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 2; in *Cod.
Rostoch*; in Copenhagen in the old royal library, 1393, fol. 194; and in
*Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 190. Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 80; in De Wette, vol.
Ill, p. 538 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 213. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1198.

Grace and peace! It is enough, my dear Michael, against this stubborn
woman and man, if you publicly and privately do not inform them that the
kingdom of heaven is closed to them, and that they cannot be saved
unless reconciliation is made with the other sister. But publicly you
shall not announce it, if you have not first privately admonished; then
the second time with two witnesses; the third time you shall say from
the pulpit before the congregation that they are to be considered
Gentiles, as Christ teaches Matth. 18, 17. And so you may deny them the
ministry of preaching and the sacraments. This is enough for the
beginning. Let the \"Schösser\" do nothing about it yet, because it is
not a worldly matter. Farewell. Wittenberg, on the 2nd day of January
Anno 30. Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1497.**

Wittenberg. January 3, 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther sends him and the Cordatus copies of the second edition of the
Army Sermon against the Turk, comments on a gift to be expected from the
Zwickau Council and gives news of his literary works.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
59. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 4; in
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 9; in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in
Cod*. Gothan*. 185. printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 119; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 169; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 539 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 214.

> To the worthy man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, bishop of the church at
> Zwickau, his highly esteemed and extremely dear superior.

Grace and peace in Christ! Since the sermon against the Turks has not
yet reached you

I am sending two copies of the second edition for you and Cordatus. But
that you write that your council will fulfill the promise, I know of no
promise. Furthermore, I am also troubled by such gifts, because they are
great (*heroica*) and of great value, through which I am suspected by
people of great wealth. Since I detest them and could not stand them
even if I had them, I also suffer the name most unwillingly. Therefore,
you would do better to see to it that this does not happen. No one owes
me anything except food and clothing, but I owe everyone everything.

I will finish the booklet on the rights of marriage 1) in the next three
days. The booklet on the customs and religion of the Turks, which was
published about 70 years ago, will be printed in Latin. 2) We have
corrected the New Testament to the end, and it is more than half
finished in print. 3) After that we will return to the translation of
the Prophets. Farewell and pray for me. January 3, 1530. Yours, Martin
Luther.

**No. 1498.**

(Wittenberg.)January 3. January 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

Luther wished him luck with the birth of a son and accepted the position
of godfather to him. He tells of the emperor\'s imminent arrival and the
papists\' cries of triumph over it, and of an extortion of the pope
under the pretext of the Turkish war.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 26; there in *Cod.
Guelph*. VuZ. 11. 10, fol. 197; ibid. in Cod. *Guelph*. Vu\]. 19. 15,
fol. 1206; in *Cod. Rostoch*.; in Copenhagen in the old royal library,
Ms. 1313, fol. 197; in *Cod. Goth*. 451 and in *Cod. Jen*. 6, fol. 200.
printed by *Buddeus*, p. 81; by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 540 and in
Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 216. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1200.

1\) Of Matrimonial Matters, St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 754.

2\) Luther\'s preface to this book is found in the St. Louis edition,
vol. XIV, 298, newly translated by us from the Latin.

3\) The new edition was published for the Frankfurt Easter Fair.

**1406** Letters from the year . No. 1498. 1499. **1407**

> To Mr. Conrad Cordatus, minister of the word at the church in Zwickau.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I wish you happiness with all my heart, my
dear Cordatus, that you have become a father through the birth of a son.
May the Lord be with him, that you may have joy in him all the days of
your life, amen. I will send my testimony as soon as it comes, in which
I will acknowledge that I am godfather 1) as you have asked, so that he
may remember me when your son is grown up.

The papists triumph and write (*scriptilIant*) to each other and say:
The Savior is coming! namely the emperor. But oh woe! (*hui*) a hard
savior who will devour them at the same time. I believe that you have
heard that two bishops (one of whom is the bishop of Trent) have been
sent by the pope to Germany with the permission of the emperor, with
such an order that they should hand over to Ferdinand against the Turks
all the gold and silver that is presently in the churches in all of
Germany. If this was not enough (for what should be enough for those
people?), then they were to add the third part of all ecclesiastical
income. If this was not enough either (as it cannot be enough for those
who want to see Germany sucked dry and ruined), then they should sell
castles, cities and all territories and hand them over to Ferdinand, the
victor and devourer of the Turks. When this (it is laughable) was read
out in the pulpit in Paderborn, one canon replied: \"Dat de Düwel dem
Bawest int Liess fare\", another canon: \"So Doctor Martinus wants to
stay for another year\". The bishop of Bamberg 3) said, when those two
bishops, the robbers, were released, that he would rather suffer eternal
imprisonment than consent to this robbery. The Würzburg 4) sent an envoy
with a good gift to reverse this decree with the emperor. Behold, how
the pope with Florentine kün-.

1\) *catechistam*. The questioning of faith at baptism was called
*catechism*; lastly the word was used for the paternity itself.

2\) Bernhard von Cles (Glöß).

3\) Weigand von Redwitz.

4\) Conrad III von Thüngen.

The most important thing is that he wants to destroy Germany, since he
cannot avenge himself in any other way. This is the beginning of
salvation from their Savior; and rightly so, since they are repugnant to
Luther, their defender, they may lose everything under their guardian
and be brought to ruin in the wrath of God. In Hesse in the city of
Cronberg 5) a child in the womb, because the whole family in the room
heard it, cried out loud twice. This is a very bad sign. You will tell
this to the very dear man, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, your pastor. Be well
and pray for me. January 3, 1530.

Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1499.**

(Wittenberg.)January 4. January 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercede for someone.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, N, fol. 108. 41. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 63, no. 99; in Walch, vol. XXI, 300; in De Wette,
vol. Ill, p. 541 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 122.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c., Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of
> Meissen, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Paul Serl is here at present with a supplication, as E. C. F. G.
will hear, who also asks my intercession to E. C. F. G.. Now I know well
that I am to go about such business idly, and that there would be others
through whom he would bring his things forward; but because I have
promised his wives carelessly, I ask E. C. F. G. to do in this what they
consider good; for he has also given me a harbor; help what you can.
Therefore, I entrust it entirely to E. C. F. G.\'s good pleasure. -
Herewith a new blessed year in Christ, Amen. At Wittenberg, on the
fourth of January, 1530.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

Martinus Lutherus.

5\) Since the expulsion of Hartmuth von Cronberg the town was Hessian.

**1408** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1500. 1501. 1502. **1409**

**No. 1500.**

(Wittenberg.)January 4. January 1530.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Intercession for a Prisoner. From the predatory decree of the pope.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 120; in De Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 541 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 218.

Grace and peace in Christ! I ask you, my dear Amsdorf, to see to it that
this letter is delivered to your council. I write for that poor prisoner
in Eilenburg, Brosius 1) Smet, who has been punished long and hard
enough when he has transgressed. For he has committed nothing in the
act; but if the will alone was there (which I do not know), why is there
such rage against him? Help me, too, by standing up for him. I am sorry
for the wife and the five children who have been deprived of his care
and support.

The papists praise their savior, the emperor, but he will devour them
beautifully. I believe that you have heard what the pope has offered
Ferdinand through two skillful bishops, namely that all gold and silver
in the churches of all Germany be handed over to him against the Turks,
then the third part of all ecclesiastical revenues, and finally, if this
is not enough (for when will it be enough for the pope?), to sell the
lands and hand them over to him. 2) That this is true I have heard from
the court. That this is true, I have from the court. Farewell and pray
for me. January 4, 1530. Yours, M. Luther, D.

**No. 1501.**

Wittenberg. January 9, 1530.

**Luther and the other visitators to the Elector John of Saxony.**

The visitators announce the beginning of the visitation in Belzig, ask
to appoint the bailiff Sebastian von Kötteritz there, if D. Pauli should
be prevented, especially since Luther will travel to Wittenberg after
eight or ten days. They ask for witness money and suggest D. Bugenhagen
as Luther\'s temporary deputy.

1\) The text offers: *socius Smet*, an impossible reading. We assume
that instead of sosius a first name is to be put, and have conjicirt
*Brosius.*

2\) Instead of the meaningless \"*sic sic* \[?\] we have adopted *sibi.*

The original of the chancery, but not signed by Luther and the other
visitators, can be found in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. Ji,* fol. 84b. B.
2. 1530. 58. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 171 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol.
VII, p.218f.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! Your electoral graces are always
preceded by our submissive and obedient services. Most gracious Lord! By
recent order of E. ch. G.\'s command we are willing, by divine grace and
help, to travel to Beltitz on the next Thursday \[Jan. 13\] and to
approach the visitation of the place. However, if we are concerned that
E. ch. G. might demand and use Doctor Benedict Pauli in the middle of
the work, in case such would occur, we humbly request that E. ch. G.
should write to Bastian von Kotteritsch, bailiff at Bitterfelt, and
order that he then be used at our request in the doctor\'s place,
considering that perhaps I, Martinus Luther, might also travel to
Wittenberg again after eight or ten days.

Because we also have a shortage of food, we ask that E. ch. G. to
provide us with it and have it given to Johan von Taubenheim. This we
want to do for the sake of E. ch. G. in submissive obedience at all
times. Date Wittenberg, Sunday after *Epiphaniae Domini* \[Jan. 9\]
*Anno ejusdem* 1530. E. C. G. submissively obedient

Visitatores 2c.

(On a strip.)

We also do not want your Lord\'s humble opinion that in case I, Martin
Luther, would travel to Wittenberg again, the other gentlemen would
consider using Ern Johann Pomern,^3)^ pastor at Wittenberg, in my place
for eight or ten days.

**No. 1502.**

Wittenberg. January 12, 1530.

**To the preachers of Lübeck.**

Luther expresses his joy at their work for the Reformation and gives
them instructions for its prosperous continuation.

3\) Not Bugenhagen, but 21. Georg Rörer became Luther\'s substitute.

**1410** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1502. 1503. **1411**

> According to an inaccurate copy in *Cod. Dessav*. B. reported by H.
> Lindner in Theologische Studien und Kritiken 1835, Heft II, p. 343; in
> De Wette-Seidemann, Bd. VI, p. 112 and in Erlanger Briefw,

S. 220.

To the Servants of the Word at Lübeck. ^1)^

Grace and peace of Christ in faith and patience! We have heard the good
and joyful news about you, dear brethren, namely, that the gospel is
lifting up its head among you through your ministry, for which we
rejoice and give thanks to the Father of mercies, asking nevertheless
confidently that he who has begun his good work in you may guide you
with his Spirit, lest he who tempts may be a hindrance to you according
to his wickedness. Therefore, continue in fear and humility, knowing
that since it is the word of God that you are acting upon, that just as
2) it must be proclaimed with the greatest confidence against men and
devils, so it must be acted upon before God with the greatest reverence
and fear. So He will give you blessings, that you may produce much
fruit, and that your fruit may remain, as it is written \[Ps. 111:3\],
\"His righteousness endures forever.\" And although we believe that it
is not necessary for you to be reminded by us, yet out of godly concern
we ask and exhort that you do not put the change of customs, which is
dangerous, first, but last; that you act first on the main point of our
doctrine, which is of our justification, namely, by an alien
righteousness, that of Christ, which is given to us by faith, which
comes by grace to those who before were terrified by the law and,
crushed by the consciousness of sins, sigh for redemption. It is of no
use to tell others about grace, for they grasp only the outward change
of customs, with which they tickle themselves for an hour, but soon, as
sated people, they are disgusted with all sound doctrine. But the change
of the ungodly customs will sufficiently arise by itself, where that
main piece of doctrine, well presented, will be accepted in godly
hearts.

1\) According to Seckendorf, *Hist. Luth. lib*. II, x. 219, these
preachers were Andreas Wilhelmi (Wilms) and Joh. Walhof.

2\) Instead of vsl we have assumed *ut,* so that *ut* and *ita* are
Correlativa.

has taken root. For they will immediately recognize how great an
abomination and blasphemy that Papist idol is, namely the mass and other
abuses of the sacrament, so that it is not necessary to fish before the
name, that is, to tear it down first, before asking about the
righteousness of the faith. Among the most important things, however,
you will constantly memorize both for yourselves and for the people the
prayers and litanies, private and public, namely, for the purity and
fruit of the word, for common peace and for the authorities, and for all
other things, as you can read in the litany. These few words of a
remembrancer, I ask you to receive with favor, as from those who are
partakers of your gift and service. Christ himself, our one and only
Sustainer, will be with you and will teach and direct through you that
which will serve his glory and common salvation, amen. Wittenberg,
January 12, 1530.

**No. 1503 .**

Torgau. January 18, 1530.

Elector John of Saxony to Luther.

The Elector exhorted Luther not to stop preaching, but to preach at
least once a week.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. N,* p. 109. 16.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 172 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 221.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! It has come to
us many times in the past few weeks that you should have stopped
preaching in our city and parish church in Wittenberg, which has almost
distressed us, and especially because we cannot know why this is so,
whether it has happened because of your incapacity or because of other
things that have burdened you. 3) For if you

3\) We do not know the actual cause. Mathesius writes about it in the
7th sermon (Mathesius, Luthers Leben, St. Louis Edition, p. 115): \"In
the beginning of the 30th year, his zeal burns against his own
parishioners, gives them a fierce sermon of repentance, almost like the
Lord Christ cried out against his Capernaites and Bethsaidites, because
God\'s word wanted to become a mockery and ridicule to him, as the
prophet Jeremiah complains miserably about his listeners in the 20th
chapter. He also decided that he would no longer preach in God\'s name.
So also the doctor let himself be heard publicly this time, never to
preach henceforth, and also stopped for a while, until his zeal cooled
down, or indeed his profession burned in his heart, so that he stood up
again.\"

**1412**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1503 to 1509.

**1413**

you are not able to preach often during the week because of your body,
we would like that the burden could be eased for you so that you preach
only one thing during the week, as approximately on Sunday during the
mass. But if it would have been a burden for us in Wittenberg, we would
not have liked to hear it, and it would have been quite a burden for us
to hear that because of their clumsy behavior there should be a reason
to slacken your preaching. Since you know better than we can tell you,
\[that\] not only those of Wittenberg, but also ourselves, other
countries and foreign people, are concerned that you do not stop
preaching, our especially gracious request is that you, to the praise of
the Almighty and to the comfort of poor eager people, do not completely
cease or slacken your preaching, But, if you are at all able, preach
weekly on Sundays at least only once, for if ours in Wittenberg are
perhaps the cause of their clumsy nature, we are obliged and want to
show ourselves, in which we as the sovereign should have understanding,
with the help of the Almighty, that these complaints or the causes
should be stopped. For if you should be sure to preach, it would cause
us, as the sovereign, a great deal of concern for the government, and it
would also be likely to give special pleasure to the opponents of the
holy gospel, We will therefore graciously provide ourselves to you, and
you will, to the praise of God and to our gracious will, begin to preach
again next week and not let up on it. In this you do us a gracious
favor, and we want to recognize this in all graces and kindnesses
towards you. Date Torgau, Tuesday after Antonii \[48 Jan.\] 1530.

**No. 1504.**

Torgau. January 27, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

(Regest.)

After the Elector, in Luther\'s absence, had asked Bugenhagen for his
opinion on the question of resistance against the Emperor, the latter
requested that, since many people disagreed with Bugenhagen\'s opinion
that one should defend oneself against the Emperor, Luther should
consult with Jonas, Pommer and Melanchthon and send him his opinion.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, fol. 43.
Printed in Hortleder, vom deutschen Kriege. Gotha 1645. vol. II, book 1,
cap. 5, p. 4 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 223.

**No. 1505 .**

(Wittenberg.) (February 1, 1530.)

**To the Elector Joachim I of Brandenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 736.

**No. 1506 .**

(Wittenberg.) (February 1, 1530.)

**To the bishops of Brandenburg, Havelberg and Lebus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 738,

**No. 1507.**

(Wittenberg.) (February 1, 1530.)

**To the Counts and Lords of the Electorate of Brandenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 740.

**No. 15 08.**

Wittenberg. February 1, 1530.

**To Catharina Hornung in Berlin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 742.

**No. 1509 .**

(Wittenberg.) (February 2 \[?\] 1530.) 1)

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Of the apostasy of the Strasbourg people from the empire, from the Turk
2c.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
71 (undated). Manuscript at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum*, Ms. 43b
(undated); in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 121 (dated 2 Feb.
1531); there *Cod. Guelph*. 214. *gud.*, fol. 1 (without the ending,
1531) and in 6oci. b, fol. 207 (without the ending and undated). Printed
in *Buddeus*, p. 232 (after *Cod*, *Jen*.); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 220
(after *Cod. Helmst*. 108 - Aurifaber, vol. Ill, fol. 121) and in Erl.
Briefw., vol.VII, p. 227.

1\) This letter is undated everywhere, except in *Cod*. *Helmst*., where
it has the date: \"February 2, 1531\", which De Wette assumed. The
*Cod*. That the letter belongs to the year 1530 results from the fact
that the people of Strasbourg became citizens of the city of Zurich on
Jan. 5, 1530, and thus had fallen away from the empire, and Luther
speaks of Cardinal Wolsey as still living, who died on Nov. 28, 1530.

**1414**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1509. 1510. 1511.

**1415**

> To the man venerable in the Lord, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the extremely
> faithful and loud bishop of the church at Zwickau, his brother.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I have nothing of news to report to you, my
dear Nicolaus. You may have several. The people of Strasbourg have
fallen away from the empire to the Swiss and want to oppose Emperor
Carl. I have been a prophet, since I have always said that the spirit of
the Sacramentirans is full of secret rebellion. It is now revealing
itself. If God does not resist, they will give us a new mint, but to
their destruction, so that they may receive their punishment for the
violation and desecration of the Sacrament and the Gospel. Let the dead
bury their dead. One rumor says the Turk is returning; another, Carl is
going back to Spain. Everywhere the godless papists are seized by
necessity, but do not go into themselves. England allows the gospel,
with the king looking through his fingers. The Cardinal, 1) the demigod
of England or rather of Europe, is condemned to eternal imprisonment. In
France and Spain, the word is also beginning to go out. The
Sacramentarians, after our meeting in Marburg, are burning more fiercely
against us than ever before, for they are sorry that we could not be
drawn into their abyss, and perhaps there are other things. Christ, who
started it, will also lead it out. Farewell and pray for me. My mistress
Käthe greets you reverently. The grace and gift \[Rom. 8, 15\] be with
you, amen.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1510.**

(Wittenberg.) 10. (?) February 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

Luther jokingly reproaches him for his wantonness and reports
Carlstadt\'s ingratitude and hostility.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 3d (datirt 18.
Februar) and in *Cod. Rostoch*.

1\) Wolsey was overthrown in October 1529 and sentenced to perpetual
imprisonment.

(Feb. 10). Printed in Strobel, Miscell., vol. Ill, p. 83 (Feb. 25); in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 171 (Feb. 25); in Schütze, vol. II, p. 121 (Feb.
10); in De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 549 (Feb. 10) and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 229 (Feb. 10).

Grace and peace in the Lord! \"Good makes you brave.\" That this is true
I also learn from you, my dear Conrad, since you, perhaps also feeling
your wealth, have dared to send back my Thaler 2) as if it were not
worthy of being hidden among your treasures; then you also boast in a
skillful manner of your reputation (*auctoritate*), through which you
are able to do so much that the goldsmith, obeying your command, soon
accomplished it in one day, while ours could not even accomplish as much
in half a year, - you happy man! But see that you do not challenge
Nemesis too much, who likes to envy the lucky ones. But God will grant
that I can prove myself by another testimony as the godfather of your
son.

By the way, yours, whom we liked to see and get to know, will report all
ours. Carlstadt is resurrected by Satan in Friesland, and he pays us due
thanks for saving his life at^3)^ by slandering me and ours everywhere
in diabolical letters. You pray against him that the Lord may repay him
according to his works as soon as possible. For there is no hope that he
can be dissuaded from his blasphemies and rages against Christ. Greet
your Christina with your son, and may you all be well in the Lord, amen.
February 10, 1530.

Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1511.**

Wittenberg. February 15, 1530.

**To his father Hans Luther in Mansfeld.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1794.

2\) *Vallensem*, the Thaler, which Luther had sent as a godfather gift,
not, as De Wette assumes, \"a compatriot from Mansfeld in the valley\".

3\) About Luther being the lifesaver of his enemy Carlstadt, see St.
Louis Edition, Introduction, Vol. XX, p. 24 f.

**1416**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1512. 1513.

**1417**

**No. 1512 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 25, 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther wanted Hausmann to write a memo for him about the things that
seemed to be lacking in the church, and he reported on his work.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
60. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 36b; at
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod*. *Helmst*. 108, fol. 5 and in *Cod. Rostoch*.
Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 122; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 170; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 558 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 231. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1375.

> To the venerable man in the Lord, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the very loud
> bishop of the church at Zwickau, his superior.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your letter was pleasant to me, my dear
householder, as your letters always are, because of the extraordinary
simplicity of spirit and the highest benevolence towards me, of which
they are always full. But I would like you to tell me once everything
and anything in order that seems to be lacking in the church. For I am
neither mindful of all things, nor do I see them. This I would have as a
memo, and since it would be before my eyes, I would perhaps try to
express it if the opportunity and leisure arose; otherwise I am
disturbed by the most diverse matters, forget it from one day to the
next, and the time passes. Now we are preparing Daniel for printing, as
a consolation for this last time. We have also taken Jeremiah and the
other \[prophets\] in hand. We will publish the New Testament at the
next Frankfurt Fair,^1)^ whereby we will, of course, arouse a new rage
against us among the papists, for we have explained the Revelation of
John completely with a diligent preface and glosses. You pray for us, as
you do. My Käthe greets you respectfully. February 25, 1530, your Martin
Luther.

1\) This new edition, which he edited together with Melanchthon,
received, in addition to changes in the text, new marginal glosses and a
new, longer preface to the Revelation of John. Köstlin, M. Luther (3.),
vol. II, p. 161.

**No. 1513 .**

(Wittenberg.) February 26, 1530.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

Concerns about a marriage case, since one had married the widow of his
father-brother.

Manuscript in Gotha, Cod. 402, fol. 185; in Wittenberg, *Cod*.
*Schleusner* and in Greifswald, Mss. tksol. 4°, no. 35, fol. 24. Printed
in Schütze, vol. ill, p. 166; in De Wette, vol. ill, p. 554 and ini Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 232. In German translation (datirt den 3. März) in
sämmtlichen Ausgaben der Tischreden, Cap. 43, § 110 (except the St.
Louis edition, where this passage is referred to) and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 1I4.

Grace and peace in Christ! I believe you remember, my dear Spalatin,
that I have already made known my opinion about the matter of this
widow, who had been the wife of his uncle 2): that I could not in good
conscience approve of such a marriage, since it seemed to be expressly
contrary not only to Mosiah\'s law, which is not Mosiah\'s law as well
as nature\'s law, but also to the civil laws. Ignorance or deceit, as
you know, do not excuse it; the fact that they have lived together for a
long time is not enough for me to weigh down my conscience with this
deed. Let him do as he pleases, and do not ask me for counsel. I am
moved by Paul 1 Cor. 5, which is so inflamed because of the stepmother
that he does not want \[such unions\] to be called marriages among
Christians, which are not considered such even among pagans, and he
clearly calls it a more than pagan fornication, and separates them. He
would have done the same in this case, and would have called it a more
than pagan fornication, since in the customs and laws of our peoples
there is no such example, and it appears as a mere abuse of evangelical
freedom. According to my will, I would gladly be compliant with this
rule: many things are not permitted, which are nevertheless retained
after they have been done, but my conscience and the new deed leave me
uncertain. There you have what my opinion is. Pray for

2\) A certain Ezold (not Ehold, as he is called in *Corp. Ref.,* Vol.
II, 14) had married the widow of his father-brother and produced several
children with her.

**1418**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1513 to 1517.

**1419**

us. Fare well in the Lord. February 26, 1530, your Martin Luther.

It is claimed that it is certain that the Turk has returned to
Constantinople; so it is written from Poland.

**No. 151 4.**

(Wittenberg.) February or March 1530.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. VI, 892.

**No. 1515 .**

(Strasbourg.) Early March 1530.

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Gerbel describes the difficulties that it would cause to fulfill the
order given to him by Luther to reconcile the parents of Christoph
Lasius with him:\' He reports that Carlstadt has arrived in Strasbourg
and that further machinations by him are to be feared. Of a rumor that
Melanchthon had died and left something behind that was contrary to
Luther\'s opinion.

Handwritten in Strasbourg, *Thes. Baum.*, Ill, 656 (*e Ms. Semin.
Protest.*). Printed in Kolde, *Analecta,* p, 447 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VII, p. 234.

**No. 1516 .**

Wittenberg. (Early March \[?\] 1530.) 1)

**To Justus Menius in Eisenach and Friedrich Myconius in Gotha.**

Luther approves of their plan to publish a book against the Anabaptists.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 207; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 558 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 236.

> To Justus Menius and Friedrich Myconius, bishops of Eisenach 2) and
> Gotha.

Grace and peace in Christ! It pleases me, my dear Justus and Frederick,
that you have written the book against the Anabaptists.

1\) The approximate time of writing of this letter results from the
comparison with the one to Justus Menius of April 12.

2\) Menius, who had previously been in Erfurt, had accompanied Luther to
Marburg and had not returned to Erfurt, since he had become
superintendent in Eisenach on Luther\'s recommendation.

No 3) Come out as soon as you can. Then, since they are not only
blasphemers but also completely rebellious, let the sword use its right
against them. For this is the will of God, that he who resists authority
should receive judgment upon himself, Rom. 13:2. Therefore, let us think
no better of these people than God Himself and all the saints. This in
short, since I am very busy. By the way, pray for us as we do for you.
Christ be with you, Amen. 1530. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 15 17.**

(Wittenberg.) March 5, 1530.

**To Adam Adam.**

Luther praises Adam\'s zeal for the right doctrine of the sacraments and
comments on the Marburg conversation.

Handwritten in *Cod. Gothan*. Printed by Schütze, Vol. II, 123; by De
Wette, Vol. Ill, p. 559 and in Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VII, p. 237.

> To the man to be revered, Mr. Adam Adam, the servant of Christ in the
> word of truth, his brother.

Grace and peace in the Lord! My dear Adam, I have gladly heard and
perceived your zeal for the truth of the Sacrament; but your disputation
xxxx xx \[?\] seems pointed, but it has no meaning in this matter, since
those are not moved by much stronger things. It is still my intention to
write about the sixth chapter of John when I get leisure and time; you
will see my work, God willing. By the way, that I am vehement is not to
be wondered at; if you were what I am, you would perhaps be even more
vehement. Different people are touched in different ways, therefore they
are moved in different ways. You haven\'t fought any wars yet, but only
watched, but as that 4) says: Regiment shows what kind of man one is.
This for you.

3\) Luther wrote a preface to this book, which is included in the St.
Louis edition, Vol. XIV, 306. There the complete title of the book is
given. The entire book together with the preface is found in the
Wittenberg edition (1551), Vol. Il, p. 299d ff.

4\) In the St. Louis edition, Vol. Ill, 1574 and Vol. VII, 1374, Luther
attributes this saying to Bias, but ibid. Vol. I, 834, § 24 to
Aristotle, and Vol. Ill, 964, § 3 to the pagans in general.

**1420**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1517 to 1523.

**1421**

That others take offense at our meeting in Marburg, they are right to do
so, since they do not want to be edified. Since so many errors had been
overcome and confessed by the Zwinglian party, they must rightly be
annoyed by the fact that they postponed their opinion in this one
article, as if it were really up to us to force those who have been
convicted to confess. In the same way, I would have them be angry with
Christ because he often convicted the Pharisees and Sadducees, and yet
could not persuade them to confess. So despise this kind of people, who
are looking for offences to take offense at, and do not even look at the
works of virtue by which they would like to be edified. I do not dignify
them with a word or a look, for they will constantly find something to
slander. You are well and pray to God for me. March 5, 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

I have written to the Prince of Liegnitz once before, but I have
achieved nothing with him; there is also no hope that anything will be
achieved by letters.

**No. 1518.**

(Wittenberg.) March 6, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 544.

**No. 1519.**

(Wittenberg.) March 12, 1530.

**To Joseph Levin Metzsch in Mila.**

This letter, which is included in the St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1814,
does not belong to the year 1520, as we see from the Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol. VII, p. 249, but to the year 1530. We have placed it,
just as the earlier editions, *sub*. No. 273 also in the year 1520. In
the Zwickau Rathsschulbibliothek there is a copy of Stephan Roth, which
is undoubtedly made after the original, with the year *Anno* XXX, which
will be correct, because Roth was in the closest contact with Metzsch.
Metzsch studied in Leipzig in 1522. The debts seem to have weighed
heavily on him, so that he once seriously thought of selling his Mila
estate. Perhaps the strong child blessing - until 1546 there are 3 sons,
3 daughters, three times twins and another son born - contributed to his
indebtedness.

**No. 1520.**

Torgau. March 14, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther and his Colleagues.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 635.

**No. 1521**

(Wittenberg.) March 14, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 637.

**No. 1522.**

Torgau. March 21, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther, Jonas, Bugenhagen and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

The Elector requested that Luther and the other theologians come to him
in Torgau as soon as possible to discuss a number of matters.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. E,* fol. 37, No.
1, p. 18. Printed in Förstemanns Urkundenbuch, vol. I, p. 112 ; in
*Corp. Ref.,* vol. II, 33 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 279.

**No. 1523.**

Berlin. March 24, 1530.

**Catharina Hornung to Wolf Hornung with Luther\'s preface and
glosses.**

This letter is the answer to No. 1505 to No. 1508.

First printing: \"Ein antwort Kathermen Hornung, auff D. Marti. Luthers
notbriefe, An Wolfs Hornung.\" At the end: \"Printed at Wittemberg by
Nickel Schirlentz. Ym Jar. M.D.XXX.\" 6 leaves in 4. Then in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 280.

Preface \[Luther\'s\].

Luther had several letters of distress (as he calls them) sent out to
the Margrave, Elector of Brandenburg 2c., and to the same country\'s
commoners and estates, as well as to Katherina Hornung\'s, to admonish
them all to join the shameful, blasphemous cause, which stinks through
the whole empire and gives great annoyance to all the world. To such
letters, she alone answers Wolff Hornung, and defends both herself and
the Elector, speaking to him at the end: \"This is what I have told you
in response to your cry.

**1422**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1523.

**1423**

and do not want to restrain Luther\'s chatter.\" Because it should be
answered to such public letters, it would be a pity that \[it\] should
not go out publicly, so that everyone would know what Luther\'s answer
to his letters had been.

And it is truly a very feminine thing that it is not easy to grasp who
is the master over such a woman, unless one has gloves on of deer skins
lined with misery skin, 1) as everyone can well notice. Her name is Mrs.
Katherina Blanckenfelt, and yet Luther had written to Katherina Hornung.
But perhaps the saying Mosi, Genes. 2, 24: \"The two are one body\"; 2)
although Moses strictly forbade \[Deut. 22, 5\] that a man should not
wear female clothing. And God will protect each one\'s own from this
woman Katherina Blanckefelden,^3)^ unless a good healer would have come
upon her with a sharp pinch, and would have made a borgel^4)^ out of it,
so that she would not have to make a vain Katherin Blanckefeldin out of
it. What a shameful, impudent thing it is about whores and boys.

Follow the letter from word to word:

Wolf Hornung ! ^a)^ I have received your letter together with an
enclosed copy of some alleged writings,^b)^ which your god and
councilor, Luther, is supposed to have done and sent out to my lord, the
prince and sovereign, also to the three bishops, counts, lords and
knighthood of this electorate of the Mark of Brandenburg, which I,
having found little truth^c)^ in it, neither allow myself to be mistaken
nor to dispute.

a\) Dear, speak: Good morning, Wolff Hornung!

b\) Devil! She is truly angry, and talks to her husband as a great
prince and lord.

c\) \"little truth\". So I can hear that nevertheless not everything is
a lie. We thank such report and confession.

1\) Such gloves were worn by princes and great lords; neither blow nor
thrust passed through.

2\) This goes to the Elector Joachim and Catharina Hornung, behind whom
the latter hides in this letter. From this also the following becomes
understandable.

3\) That is, before the Elector Joachim, who hides under the woman\'s
skirt.

4\) Borg == a castrated pig.

For I have no doubt that the common and noble estates of these lands
will not allow themselves to be moved by such a man\'s loose, open,
unsealed, untrue fiction and maps, first of all against their most
gracious prince and sovereign, and likewise against me, to do anything
displeasing, ungracious or repugnant. ^d)^ But here you see how much
Satan would like to blow fire out of his envious mouth, if only it would
ignite or stick. ^e)^ And Luther should truly not worry so hard, but
should rather reflect to himself how good marriage and faith he kept to
his lost nun, when he walks along the gaff at night with the lute^f)^ .
But so that I do not forget my need for you, I do not want to tell you
that I have not confessed to Luther or to you of your unknowable and
fictitious statements, nor, if God wills, shall I be proven with truth
and reason. ^g)^ For the fact that I am held against you by force, or
protected for injustice, you do first of all, together with your
followers, to my most gracious lord, the prince and sovereign, and
likewise to me, unkindly, violence and injustice. For your tyrannical,
murderous evil deed, which you perpetrated on me while I was sitting by
your side and at your table, without cause and in a dishonorable
manner,^h)^ is unlawful to the city and the country, and must also be
executed and proven with a living document in case of necessity. So I
can still show it with the sign on my body,^i)^ so I have from you; so
you can also deny or contradict it with no truth or reason. The sworn,
prescribed and sealed receipt is yours,

d\) It may also truly good, strong hope, because it is probably such an
evil thing.

e\) Yes, are you here troffen, you noble blood? In *aeternum*, *Domine*,
whores and knaves never part.

f\) Here I want to swear on Katerninus 6) and Katerina\'s chastity that
it was not a lute but a bagpipe.

g\) There would be two or three whore children from your whore host.

h\) Behold, Hornung, rub against me more, if thou wilt see Rome!

i\) And with the landmark, 7) which dll have from your little dream, you
can probably prove more, what he and you are.

5\) schleuplich == slippery, insidious, insidious.

6\) This is the Elector of Brandenburg.

7\) namely the child she had from the Elector.

**1424**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1523.

**1425**

which you have, without all compulsion and urgency, confirmed, sealed,
and also fastened with a physical oath^k)^ (to which you have never
urged or induced either with tower or stick or some imprisonment or
punishment of severity 1^)^ ), unpleasant or burdensome, so I have
nevertheless, I have, as far as the marriage and the divorce are
concerned, always offered myself to due and proper right, that I hereby,
if you do not want to remit me ever speech, offer myself again on my
proper judge and my *ordinarium*,^l)^ not to be before you right and
fairness of the place. But as far as the goods are concerned, which you
handed over to me according to the sworn contract, you know to remember
that you did not bring me more than one and a half hundred florins
against my contribution, which extends to a thousand florins. Now you
bought the house in which I still live for three hundred florins, paid
one hundred florins on it alone, and left me with a debt of two hundred
florins to pay on the house. Item, with my most gracious lord, the
Elector, three hundred florins of borrowed money, item, with Claus Fugen
one and a half hundred florins, which debt I have then paid and laid
aside in your absence, praise God! from mine,^m)^ and not from yours.
Now make a calculation of what I may owe you of this, if it should come
to a division. Therefore, it would be unnecessary for you to complain so
highly that your great property is held up to you, for from this you
have to judge how much you should be entitled to if it is to come about
right away. But so that I am not lacking again for the sake of the
piece, an honorable councilor here in Cologne on the Spree, where I am
possessed, shall be my rightful and powerful in all equity. ^n)^

k\) Oh, on my holy cross! she means the contract, sealed with the
sausage.

l\) Well, my dear, if you are torn, then the devil will lapp you!

m\) Dear, but did you pay it from yours, from which yours? since you sit
on? 2) or on which you live? If it is to be divided, then half of it
must go to Hornung and the other half to your Träutlein, and perhaps
that would be right.

n\) I hear nothing unequal nor unreasonable, except that the above
division shall proceed equitably.

1\) That is, by threatening torture.

2\) These words are to be taken literally.

I also want to be hopeful and undoubtedly confident, if you want to take
me to the end of one with justice, and my most gracious lord, the
Elector, will ask for such justification for escort, it will not be
denied to you. But that I should turn to you again with my body or
person, that I cannot bring myself to do,^o)^ for that I once
encountered from you, I would also have to worry about from you further.
But for an amicable agreement, so that I would be separated from you, I
have often offered to come to you in and outside of the country,^p)^ as
namely to Jüterbach, Baruch and many other places, but that you wanted
to provide me with a princely escort to Saxony. For this purpose, I have
twice sent you the sealed escort of my most gracious lord, the Elector
of Brandenburg, so that you would never lack safe access to me,^q)^ but
it has always been you and not me who was lacking. From this it appears
publicly, with what reason and truth that you are shouting me out
together with your followers so publicly and yet blamelessly^r)^ and
educating the people, and also with what evidence it is imposed on my
most gracious lord, the Elector, that I should be protected and handled
in my will of courage or against fairness, since I can tolerate and
suffer justice^s)^ and fairness and have never refused it. And to top it
off, and over and above my previous ordinary legal submission, I am once
again inclined to accept and wait for an amicable day and trade with you
at an appropriate place of this Electorate border, as Mittewald,
Potsdam, Brietzen, Trebbin, Sarmund, Köpenick,^t)^ which places are
located to you, and if you would also ascribe daytime, I offer to you
once again of my most gracious lord, the Elector 2c., certainly

o\) I believe that, on my oath, because you have something greater to
bring over your heart, for which you would need such an amicable
agreement.

p\) Thus a wife shall write to her husband, for good example and honor
to all wives.

q\) Believe the devil with your skillful escort in my place!

r\) Truly, quite innocent! how manly conscious.

s\) \"Right\" - that Hornung would sit in the tower and have to watch
whores and boys; if it were still so good for him!

t\) Oh, to Berlin would probably be better!

**1426** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1523. 1524. **1427**

and to obtain and send a vehicle (escort) 1)^u^ ) so that you will not
be lacking again for my sake. But if all this is not convenient nor
acceptable to you, then I place it at your disposal to take not only
one, but two or three nuns or others of your liking who have gone
astray,^v)^ and shall not give me anything to do with it. ^w)^ Your
bishop at Wittenberg will undoubtedly allow you to do so, and will bless
it,^x)^ . I did not want to hold this against you in response to your
letter and Luther\'s talk. Date Thursday after Oculi \[March 24\] 1530.
Katherina Blanckenfelds, ^y)^

u\) The woman must truly be at court and have a mad lord that she, as
her beloved, is so powerful.

v\) Grammertzy! 2)

w\) Do not be very angry, tender beautiful woman, or you will turn
black.

x\) Whichever dog the shillelagh meets, he cries.

y\) Bad: \"Katherin Blanckfelt\", and not: Katherin Hornung. For she has
divorced herself, is herself judge, plaintiff and culprit, and all in
all: nevertheless she is pious, just and honest, as this letter
testifies and does not deny.

**No. 152 4.**

(Wittenberg?) (End of March or early April 1530.)

**Luther\'s (?) expert opinion for the Elector John of Saxony, for the
Diet of Augsburg. 3)**

He answered how one should behave when the emperor offered fasting food,
forbade preaching, and demanded that the Elector go with him to the
church.

Handwritten in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. E,* fol. 41, bl. 327 d and
in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Förstemann\'s Urkundenbuch, Vol. I, p. 197
(as an unnamed concern about the middle of May); in Schirrmacher, p. 145
(according to *Cod. Rostoch*. with the superscription Aurifabers: Ein
ander Bedenken I). Martini Luthers an den Churfürsten zu Sachsen; p. 482
set after June 16) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 285.

1\) Added by us.

2\) *Grand merci* == Big thanks.

3\) Brieger, Torgauer Artikel (in Kirchengesch. Stud. for Reuter. 1890,
p. 281, considers that form and content make Luther probable as author.
He assumes March or early April as the time of writing, because the
Elector, as a result of the news received from Insbruck by Hans von
Dolzig (Förstemann, Urkundenbuch, p. 177) of May 8, which included a ban
on preaching

Whether Imperial Maj. Maj. would ask or command that my most gracious
lord should allow fish and not meat to be eaten on Fridays and
Saturdays,

it happens,

My most gracious lord may again ask that His Imperial Majesty will spare
His Lordship. Maj. will spare his Lord\'s Grace with this. But if a
serious commandment is to follow, my lord may well do so. Lord may well
do so, at the service of His Imperial Majesty. Maj.\'s service, but with
notice that it is not for conscience\' sake, but for His Imperial
Majesty\'s love and obedience. Maj. for love and obedience. For hitherto
my most gracious lord, in other imperial assemblies, with the same, and
not with imperial maj. Maj. as sovereign, nor has any seal or letter
then been presented as an imperial order. Maj. command, as now would be
present and command.

On the other hand, whether Imperial Maj. Maj. would request or command
that his Lordship not allow preaching, his Lordship cannot grant this,
but shall be free to allow his Lordship to preach, for St. Paul says:
God\'s word shall be unbound; yet up to now every prince has been
allowed to hold masses and preach his chaplain in his court and camp.
However, it is not in his power to close the house or to forbid other
people to come to it, because he is not the master of the people of
Augsburg.

Thirdly, whether Imperial Maj. Maj. would ask or command that His
Imperial Grace should go to mass with him: here I fear, because the
devotees at Augsburg have now trampled the Sacrament underfoot and
reviled it to the highest degree with a shameful chant, 2c. that His
Imperial Grace would do well if she at least went to church with them
once for nieste, but that the boys who desecrate the Sacrament should
not go to mass with them,

On May 11, he [again]{.underline} requested Luther\'s advice in this
matter, and in his letter he refers to a previous concern of Luther\'s,
namely probably to our document. Therefore, Förstemann\'s time
determination: \"approximately in the middle of the month of May\", will
be too late, but even more so Schirrmacher\'s: \"after June 16\", since
the preaching ban really took place on June 18 (see St. Louis Edition,
Vol. XVI, 749, No. 944). However, the fact that such a concern about the
three points was demanded so early, in March or April, can be explained
by the fact that these were taken over as open questions from the
Imperial Diet at Speier in 1529.

**1428** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1524 to 1528. **1429**

may not boast that his Lordships keep it with them. So it does not harm
the conscience, because his Lordship does not keep such a mass as a
sacrifice (although who knows whether the priest himself would make a
sacrifice out of it, who keeps such masses? They are probably so crude
and wild), but rather, as a servant to his master of the house, the
Imperial Majesty serves and does his will. But the annoyance that one
might take from this is less than the improvement that the enthusiasts
might take by avoiding such masses. Thus we have here a mighty example
of the Scripture, 2 Kings 5:18 f., that Elisha the prophet permits the
prince Naaman of Syria to go with his lord king to his idol\'s temple
and to be with him. And if they are angry, it will be found in other
things, in which his lord will hold differently than all of them; the
deed will prove it, and is fed with obedience and willing humility with
good grace to the false mouths.

**No. 1525 .**

(Wittenberg.) 1. April 1530.

**To Georg Wicel and Anton Hermann in Belzig.**

Wicel, born in 1503 at Bach, preacher at Niemeck, had taken in Joh.
Campanus from Malseick in the diocese of Liège, who studied in
Wittenberg and denied the Trinity, and was therefore, as well as
Campanus himself, imprisoned along with Hermann. Campanus was
subsequently released, under the condition that he leave the country.
Wicel and Hermann also gained their freedom through Luther\'s use. Wicel
remained in Niemeck until the summer of 1531; then he left it under a
pretext and returned to the papacy. Nothing further is known about
Hermann.

Printed by *Zeltner, hist. Cryptosocinianismi Altorfini. Lips*. 1729. p.
350; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 126; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 172 ; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 565 f. (from an alleged original in private
possession) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 288.

> Dell noble men, M. Georg Wicel and Anton Hermann, his afflicted
> brothers in Beltitz. ^1)^

Grace and peace in Christ! I immediately wrote to the prince about your
lot

1\) Already because of two wrong readings in this inscription, namely
*Wiselio* instead of *Wicelio* and *Bilnitz* instead of

*Biltitz*, the document used by De Wette cannot be original.

I have even sent my own messenger at my own expense. For I knew nothing
at all about your being thrown into prison, and such a severe and cruel
one at that. ^2)^What the fault is, I do not know either, if it is not
perhaps the harboring of Campanus, but I hope that this will be easily
obtained. For he has already been in Torgau for almost 15 days and has
brought forth wretched monstrosities of doctrines, which, however, have
not yet come before my eyes, but have only been told, so that I cannot
sufficiently guess what he is up to. Therefore, in the meantime, suffer
patiently, and I will faithfully strive for you so that you will soon be
released. Be well in Christ. Friday after Lätare \[April 1\] 1530,
Martin Luther.

**No. 1526 .**

(Wittenberg.) 2. April 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 664.

**No. 1527.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. April 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 665.

**No. 1528.**

Weimar. April 12, 1530.

**To Justus Menius in Eisenach.**

On the writing against the Anabaptists, which Menius was about to
publish together with Myconius. Luther draws attention to a weighty
reason of evidence against them, which should be added.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 125; in
De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 569 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 293.

Grace and peace! Your writing against the Anabaptists 3) pleases me very
much, my dear Justus, although Philip fears that its expansiveness,
which is, however, necessary in my opinion, will do harm to the sale. It
seems to me, however, that noth-

2\) Here we have with Zeltner and *Strobel-Ranner Si audem* omitted.

3\) See No. 1516.

**1430** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1528. 1529. 1530. **1431**

It is necessary to add this part, namely of the calling, 1) because they
cannot be refuted by a stronger reason than that they run since they are
not called, since they are not sent, since they sneak into the corners.
For these are clear signs that they are servants of the devil. All this
piece, if thou canst or nullest, thou must strongly press with examples
and testimonies of the Scriptures. For Christ, who is not deceived,
declares them to be thieves and murderers, John 10. But here the sow
teaches the cook (*sus Minervam*). Thou art well pleased in Christ with
wife and children, and pray for us. Weimar, 2) Tuesday after Palmarum
\[April 12\] 1530. Martin Luther.

**No. 1529 .**

(Coburg.) April 18, 1530.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

News about the expected arrival of the emperor in Germany and about the
coronation celebrations in Bologna.

Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 190 (with the wrong date: *Altera
Novembris*); by De Wette, vol. Ill, p. 564 (set too early, in March) and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 294 (April 17 or 18).

Grace and peace! Our Ziringius 3) will tell you more about the
Emperor\'s affairs, for it is a long story. It is true that he has
decided to come to Germany, and he will come shortly, as everyone
believes, full of wrath against us, unless the Turk makes peace, as he
did at Vienna, where he induced the most arrogant dukes of Bavaria to
write most humbly to the heretical princes for help. It is said that the
Turk is in Hungary and has decided to return at the beginning of spring.
One of the envoys sent by our princes to the emperor and captured or
detained by him has been with us.

1\) This was done at the end of Scripture, Wittenberg ed. (1551), vol.
II, p. 349 d f.

2\) On April 3, Luther, accompanied by Veit Dietrich, had gone with the
other Wittenbergers to Torgau, and from here, on April 4, he left with
the electoral retinue. In Altenburg, Spalatin joined them on the 6th,
and on the 8th they were in Weimar, where they rested until the 12th.

3\) *Album 128: Johannes Czyrius Magdeburgens..,*

inscribirt end 1526.

were. 4) He tells wonderful things about the pomp when the emperor was
received by the pope at Bologna, where he has now been crowned. But
after his feet had been kissed, the pope said: Your Majesty will excuse
me: I did not like that they kissed my feet, but the law of ceremonies
requires it. Then the Emperor knelt down at his side, the Pope kissed
the Emperor often on the cheek, until all his great ones had kissed him
in the same way, and it was reported that gold was scattered among the
people, 4000 ducats. Carl gave the pope 4000 gold medals in a gold
purse, 5) that is, gold coins embossed with his and his brother\'s
image, which we usually call \"gift coins or honor coins\". May the
canons rejoice and triumph, so that they may quickly perish, amen. For
the world must rejoice and the apostles be sad, but this joy will find
its due end. Let us only pray, and the gates of hell will not be able to
do anything. Fare well in the Lord. On Easter Monday 6) \[April 18\]
1530. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1530 .**

Coburg. April 18, 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 667, no. 916.

4\) Namely Michael von Kaden. (See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, No. 849
ff.) In a letter of April 7, the Elector had asked the Nuremberg Council
to let Luther and his famulus Veit Dietrich \'live in Nuremberg during
the Reichstag, because he wanted to have him near him. The council
refused because Luther was still in the Reichsacht after the Worms
Edict, but did not want to give the negative answer by letter, but sent
Kaden to the Elector to communicate this orally. Kaden arrived in Coburg
on Easter evening, April 16. (So Kolde in the Kirchengeschichtl.
Studien; Luther writes to Hansmann; April 17, St. Louiser Ausg., Vol.
XVI, 667.) From the time of his presence, the date of the letter can be
determined with certainty. Förstemann\'s Conjectur: *AItera Paschatis*
(April 18) will be correct (Förstemann, Urkundenbuch, vol. I, p. 147,
note 3).

5\) We assume with the Erlangen correspondence instead of *medanos* the
conjecture *medallos*, think coins.

6\) This is, as already said, Förstemann\'s Conjectur instead: *Altera
Novembris*. - Because of the *[fuit]{.underline} apud os*

April 18 is more likely than April 17.

**1432** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1531. 1532. 1533. **1433**

**No 1531.**

Coburg. April 22, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 669, no. 917..

**No. 153S.**

Coburg. April 23, 1530.

**To Esban Hesse in Nuremberg.**

Luther jokingly apologizes for the rarity of his letter.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 285 B, on the reverse of the
original of the preceding letter. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 130;
in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 6 (wrong: April 24) and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VII, p. 300.

> To Mr. Eoban Hesse, his extremely dear brother, the highly famous poet
> of Germany, the good and godly man.

Grace and peace in Christ! I send you four letters at the same time, my
dear Eoban, and they are lively and eloquent, yes, exceedingly eloquent,
the Justus, Philippus, Spalatin and Agricola; I would have liked to be
the fifth, but there was one who would tell me: Silence, you have a bad
voice! 1) Perhaps the peculiarity of this region is to blame, which
hates the five number of senses, and under tasting (*Smegkan*) combines
two. 2) Therefore you may also recognize me as the fifth in Philip, the
fourth. Beware henceforth that you do not ever complain that letters are
rarely addressed to you. I have made you so overburdened that you can
never answer me enough with letters. This

1\) The meaning seems to us to be that Luther wants to say: You highly
famous poet would say to me: Silence, you are not fit to speak among
these extremely eloquent, finely educated humanists. - Scholars do not
agree on the interpretation of this passage. [Rückert]{.underline},
Luthers Verhältniß zum Augsb. Bekenntniß (1854), p. 17, refers the
expression *mala vox* to Luther\'s decisiveness and vehemence.
[Knaake]{.underline}, Luthers Antheil an der Augsb. Conf. (1863), p. 42,
says: \"It must have been unpleasant for the opponents to hear Luther\'s
voice, because his person was abhorrent to them\" 2c. D.
[Enders]{.underline} would like it to be Germanized thus: \"Shut up! you
have an evil mouth!\" We must confess that none of these attempts at
explanation seems to us to make the right sense, fitting into the
context.

2\) In Upper German, \"Schmecken\" is used for both \"smelling\" and
\"tasting\".

I know, and I know that you also believe it. So that I do not do
injustice to these exceedingly eloquent letters by this silent and dead
letter of mine, I will refrain from writing more now. You live, be well
and enjoy these of my heart beloved (*visceribus*) blessedly in Christo.
I wish that your royal 3) Halls be well, your queen, the royal children
and the royal servants. For the Osiander, Wenceslaus, Schleupner, Thomas
4) and others to greet from me, have these my living letters order. The
Lord be with you. Pray for us. I also pray for you. \"I know this
well.\" Amen. Coburg, St. George\'s Day \[April 23\] 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1533.**

Coburg. April 23, 1530.

**To Catharina Jonas in Wittenberg.**

Luther replies to a letter addressed to her husband, concerning family
matters.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. II, p. 15; in the Altenburg, vol.
V, p. 6; in the Leipzig, vol. XX II, p. 556; in Walch, vol. XXI, 303 and
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 142.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have read your letter, dear Lady Doctor and
Godmother, written to your Lord Doctor Jonas, and I was almost pleased
that God has given you easy courage and good hope, both because of the
fruit of the body and the harm of the lot. Your Lord is not so easy of
heart, but is very anxious for you, and is angry, reproachful, and
cursing for the sake of the breaking of the house, and is impatiently so
near to the Blessed 5) as he dwelleth near to him for the sake of the
room. But be of good cheer; there will be no trouble with the house, for
the matter is settled. So

3\) Reuchlin had given Hesse the epithet *Rex* from the ancient Greek
word xxxxx, king. Hesse himself made frequent use of this joke by dating
his letters \"from the royal castle\".

4\) Thomas Venatorinus (actually: \"Gechauf\", not: \"Jäger\"), born in
Nuremberg in 1488, the first Protestant preacher at the Church of the
New Hospital in 1523. He was lent to Rothenburg a. T. in 1544 to
introduce the Reformation there, and after half a year returned to
Nuremberg, where he died in 1551.

5\) Licentiate Christoph Blank.

**1434**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1533 to 1537.

**1435**

I hope that God will also graciously relieve the burden of the body, and
God wills that there be a couple. But I think it will be a daughter, who
behaves so strangely, and must be too narrow for a big house; just as
mothers do, who also make the world too narrow for a poor man. Give my
regards to your dear Jost, 1) and to your grandmother, and also to
yourselves. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Given at Coburg, on St.
George\'s Day \[April 23\] An. 1530.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 153 4.**

Coburg Fortress. April 23, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2307, annex, no.4.

**No. 1535 .**

Coburg Fortress. April 23, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1750, no. 1165.

**No. 1536 .**

Coburg Fortress. April 23, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

See St, Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1754, no. 1167.

> **No. 1537**

Fortress of Coburg. Between April 23 and 29, 1530, **Luther\'s draft of
a section of the text: \"Vermahnung an die Geistlichen, versammelt aus
dem Reichstage zu Augsburg.**

The Erl. Briefw. brings this writing as \"Luthers Bedenken an den
Chnrfürsten Johann von Sachsen für den Augsburger Reichstag über die
streitigen Artikel\", und datirt (nach Förstemann, Urkundenbnch, Bd. I,
S. 66): \"zwischen 14. und 20. März 1530\", while also this piece is
regarded as belonging to the Torgau Articles. This error has Brieger in
his writing \"about the Torgauer articles\" (in the church-historical
studies for Renter, 1890) uncovered and proved, what also the Erlanger
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 391 recognized, and the

1\) Justus Jonas, the younger, born Dec. 3, 1525, the only son of this
marriage to reach manhood, later caused his father much grief and was
finally beheaded in Copenhagen on June 20, 1567, because he was involved
in the Grumbach trades.

true character of our writing. Although we are not dealing with a letter
here, we did not want to withhold from the buyers and readers of our
edition this most interesting document, to which we already drew
attention in the 16th volume, Col. 985 in the note, and think that we
can communicate it most easily here. Our time determination is based on
the following. On April 23, Luther arrived at the fortress of Coburg.
The first larger writing, which he took there before the hand, was his
\"admonition to the clergy\" 2c. On April 29, he wrote to Melanchthon
(St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2310): \"My admonition to the clergy is
advancing; both the material and the impetuosity of the attack are
growing under my hands, so that I am compelled to drive back, almost by
force, a great many lansquenets 2) who do not cease to advance
uninvited.\" We have no doubt that in our draft we encounter not a few
\"Landsknechte\" whom Luther drove back, and who are no longer found in
the Scriptures themselves at the corresponding place (St. Louiser Ausg.,
Vol. XVI, 985 ff.). Our determination of the time will therefore be, at
least approximately, correct. We have already communicated the locations
at the place just indicated completely in the note there. Bretschneider,
*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. IV, 973 f., assumes that Jonas is the author of this
draft; Seidemann, \"Lauterbach\", p. 103, Note, agrees with him.

In the Church of Christ, one demands these rewritten pieces:

First, a righteous preaching ministry, where the holy divine word is
diligently and faithfully preached and taught according to pure
Christian understanding, without the addition of any false teaching.

In such a sermon it is clearly, actually and correctly taught and
presented what is Christ and the gospel, righteous repentance and fear
of God, how to obtain forgiveness of sin, of the ability and power of
the keys of the church.

This doctrine and the whole summa of the gospel is practiced in this
church of Christ with diligent true adherence daily and without ceasing,
both in the congregation and in each Christian for himself, by
preaching, reading, comforting and exhorting, by expounding the Psalms
and all kinds of books of Scripture, as Paul writes in 1 Cor. 14.

> There we are taught about Christian freedom, how consciences are free
> in Christ.

And to obtain such teaching is had with great seriousness and utmost
diligence respect that

2\) See l. c. Col. 2310, note 2.

**1436**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1537.

**1437**

Schools for boys and maidens 1) are to be established and maintained for
the good breeding of youth.

There are also the gifts of language: Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and the
bishops do diligence so that such studia, so highly necessary to
understand the Holy Scriptures, do not perish.

There are also

> Baptism,
>
> Supper of Christ,
>
> Recognition of sin and divine wrath,
>
> Knowledge of grace,

truly

> The Holy Spirit with his gifts,
>
> Christian Love,
>
> Lessons from the cross and suffering,
>
> Teaching of right good works,
>
> Faith, hope, confession and righteous custom of absolution,

Righteous discipline of children and instruction of the youth in
catechism, as the Ten Commandments, Our Father, faith, short comforting
psalms, Beuedicite and Gratias, and narration of some sayings before the
parents\' table. Item, in the morning, when the children get up, that
they are admonished by the parents to pray righteous earnest prayer,
both publicly and secretly.

Christian litanies and prayers for all kinds of conditions and needs.

Righteous ban, that is, that some are not allowed to the sacraments for
the sake of public vices.

In the Church of Christ, the righteous are learned bishops and
preachers, mighty of the Scriptures, and, as Paul says \[Titus 1:9,
11\], equipped and skillful to teach, to comfort, and to shut the mouths
of the adversaries. Righteous diaconi who take care of the poor.

1\) In Förstemann: \"meidlich\". The copy is very faulty; in Brück\'s
manuscript it will have read: \"maidlin\".

Right, clear, certain and thorough teaching, what there is the Christian
church and \[where\] 2) it is.

Providing for the poor; proper ordering of common chests; hospital;
visiting and comforting the parishioners, all the sick, all the
fainthearted, all the afflicted; afflicted and dismayed consciences;
proper comforting instruction at the hour of death for the dying.

Rightly, clearly, certainly founded instruction from the Scriptures,
which estates or lives are divine: from authorities and their office;
from parents; what there befits to keep sons, daughters, servants,
maids, lords, subjects, husbands, all kinds of offices and estates, so
that they may lead their estate and life blessedly, chastely 3) and
divinely.

There are also orderly, proper, outward ceremonies and services, right
fasting, honest clothing, free use of food, honest churches and places
where the Word of God is preached. There are also proper external
ceremonies and services, proper fasting, proper dress, free use of food,
proper churches and places where God\'s word is preached. And this old
with right instruction of Christian liberty, and how one may divinely
use the outward services.

The present bishops ask little or not at all about these highly
necessary things, in which alone lies all power, and without which no
Christian church can be. And it is to be pitied and eternally lamented
that they do not care at all about such great things, which are proper
for right bishops to know, do not think about them or know about them,
nor do they want to be instructed or taught about them.

In the church of the pope you can find these pieces:

Doctrine contrary to the Gospel; fasts of XI 4) days; the LXX^ma^ , and
LX^ma^ , L^ma^ ; Ash midweeks put ashes on head; Quatember 5) Friday,
Saturday, Wednesday all kinds of holy office; hunger or painted fasts.

2\) In the manuscript is missing: \"where\", and in the editions still
in addition wrong punctuation: \"and she be:\".

3\) In the handwriting only: \"to\" instead of: chastely.

4\) In the handwriting: \"XC\".

5\) The Quatember (*quatuoor tempora*), in the middle of each quarter,
namely Wednesday after Ash Wednesday, Wednesday after Pentecost,
Wednesday after Exaltation of the Cross (Sept. 14) and Wednesday after
Luciae (Dec. 13), were celebrated by fasting for three days.

**1438**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1537.

**1439**

1\) and break the neck of the fasting; cover the golden plates^2)^ and
holy images with cloths; confess twice. Martyrdom Week: Shoot palms,
consecrate^3)^ palms and wort (Worth), make pylm crosses, swallow palms
for some illness, ride Christ on the donkey with his belongings, read
the whole Passion four times Latin. Green Thursday foot washing or
mandate^4)^ , Passion preaching at night eight hours. Am. silent Friday
half masses without the figure of wine; worship cross and offer four, 5)
bury cross, read Psalter at the grave day and night; sing dark prayers
with \"poor Judas\" and scold Jews. 6) Pupils bypassing with rattles^7)^
altar and washing with brooms, and putting little wax lights in five
places. Consecrate baptism^8)^ with dunking of Easter candles and many
ungodly songs. Consecrating new fires on Easter Eve. Make Easter
candles, put florins and pennies, nutmeg and the like into the wax. On
Easter take cross from tomb and sing *Advenis* 2c., storm hell, 9)
consecrate pancakes, hams, sausages, meat and eggs, procession around
churches with flags, candles, sprinkling kettle, monstrance, heaven 2c.
All are commanded to communicate on Easter Day. At the baptism all go to
vespers 2c. Christ\'s image going up to heaven

1\) On the first Sunday of Lent, an embroidered or painted blue curtain
was hung in front of the high altar, which was only pulled back on
Sundays and removed again on Char Friday. It was called the Lenten or
hunger cloth, *velum quadragesimale*.

2\) These are pictures painted on gold background. \"Pictures\" -
statues.

3\) That is, to throw palms (willow branches) on the palm donkey moved
in procession.

4\) The washing of the feet was called *mandatum* according to Joh.
13,14. f.

5\) Joh. Eberlin mentions the \"four and seven sacrifices\" among the
things with which the priests scam money.

6\) In the manuscript: \"with the poor, Judas\" 2c. Not only \"with the
poor\" were the dark prayers held, but everyone, old and young, was
involved, with great fanfare. The song: \"O poor Judas\" is well known.

7\) Because the bells were not rung on Char Friday, the students went
around with rattles to indicate the beginning of the service. See St.
Louis Edition, Vol. X VI, 988.

8\) That is, the baptismal water.

9\) See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1126, ? 83.

ren to the None^10)^ On the day of Pentecost send the Holy Spirit. ^11)^
The holidays of the saints: St. Martin\'s evening,^12)^ St. Sebastian
fast for pestilence, St. Burkhart\'s day. ^13)^ The parish week for the
poor souls. All Souls\' Day. Vigils, soul bath. ^14^) Begängniß with
many masses on many altars in one church, singing among each other and
drawing a little long for the sake of the sacrifice. Advent with
fasting. Three masses on Christmas Day, midnight mass. Cross week, and
going to the villages with crosses, item, going around the corridor.
Procession *Corporis Christi*^15)^ with great pomp, flags, candles 2c.
Decorate altars in all houses 2c. Procession on all Sundays and saints\'
days. Sing Rorate-^16)^ masses. Singing *Apparuit*, cradling the
children. ^17^) St. Michels

10\) On Ascension Day, Ps. 47 was sung at the ninth hour (3 o\'clock in
the afternoon, from which the day itself was also called the ninth, the
beautiful ninth day) and accompanied by hand clapping. Then a carved
image of Christ was pulled up into the church sky on a rope, accompanied
by the singing of Ps. 47:6 with trumpets and timpani. After that, a
lighted grimace representing Satan was lowered from above, over which
the children rushed, whipping Satan with rods and tearing him into small
pieces. Then followed the bread from heaven, small host-shaped cakes,
which were thrown down, and while they fought over it, the water of life
was splashed from above under the dense tangle, which burst apart with
shouting and laughter to the main amusement of the priests. Even the
churfürstlich Brandenburgische Kirchenordnung of 1540 still allowed this
use, but with the exception of the water pouring.

11\) By lowering a carved or even a live dove, imitating the roar of the
wind, and throwing down lighted tow to represent the fiery tongues.

12\) On St. Martin\'s Day in some places began the Advent fasts, so it
was also called the little carnival and was solemnly celebrated by
feasting (St. Martin\'s goose).

13\) The 14th of October. It was celebrated for the sake of the new
must. - The Gemeind week is the first week of October, which, like All
Souls\' Day, was celebrated by masses for the dead and visits to the
graves.

14\) Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1926, § 14.

15\) Corpus Christi Day.

16\) Not \"Rogate\", as Bretschneider assumes. The *Rorate*, named after
the introit Is. 45, 8, are the votive services in honor of the Virgin
Mary, which began on December 18, the feast of the expectation of the
birth of Mary, and lasted until December 24, and were held early in the
morning. This gave rise to great gross immorality. See Table Talks, Cap.
14, ? 44, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 308 f.

17\) These two pieces will belong together and correspond to the
\"Apparuit und Spiel\" (St. Louiser Ausg., Vol. XVI, 989).

**1440**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1537.

**1441**

Letter 1) 2c. big lies. St. Michael\'s children, who went with the
ensign, idle loose boys. Putting the bier in the church with four wax
candles. Item, the ceremonies to bury the dead with stoles, censer, holy
water 2c. Item, various vessels at funerals, both in villages and towns.
To lead childbedded women into the church. Women who die in childbirth
are also buried with their own ceremonies, under which they are led into
the church. 2)

Churches, altars, bells of various kinds; 3) cymbals, bells, organs;
images of golden plates; wooden, stone, silver images. Service of
saints, *Salve Regina* 4) and the like much. Baptismal font, *Gloriam*,
chalices, candlesticks, monstrances, flags, candles, censers, heavens
and the like. Rosary, Our Lady\'s Psalter, *Horae privates,* Our Lady\'s
Mass, doubled Rosary, *Compassio d. Virginis*. Brotherhoods: Kalend, 5)
St. Sebastian\'s, all crafts. Portatel altar in houses, Marmel, field
chapels 6) 2c. Caseln, albums, choir shirt and other church ornaments.
Holy water vessels in front of doors, in chambers, parlors, with
confidence that it will take away sins. Sprinkle holy water on the
graves of the dead, as if it should also help the dead. For this reason,
in the Oberland, a separate sprinkling vessel is placed on each grave.
2c.

St. Brigitten prayer; St. Bernard\'s verses (*versus*), which shall be
as good as 8 whole

1\) Jesus is said to have written it with his own hand and to have sent
it through the angel St. Michael to the mountain Gargarus, which is
called St. Michelsberg (compare St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1020 f.). The
same was printed in Cologne in 1604 \"with the approval of the spiritual
authorities\" and sold as a flyleaf. It protected against all kinds of
harm and helped in many hardships. - St. Michael\'s children\" are
children who (even against the will of their parents) went on pilgrimage
to St. Michael in Normandy, as for example from Schwäbisch-Hall in 1448,
on the Thursday after Pentecost, 100 boys set out on such a pilgrimage,
to whom, since they could not be restrained by their parents, the
council gave a schoolmaster and a donkey as a precaution.

2\) The corpse of a woman in childbed is placed at the door of the
church.

3\) This is Bretschneider\'s Conjecture instead of: \"Maucheley\".

4\) A blasphemous song in which all the honor due to Christ alone is
attributed to Mary.

5\) The Caland brothers got their name from the fact that they gathered
on the first of every month, the *Calendis.*

6\) \"Marmel\" are marble kissing tablets, in which there was usually a
relic. - \"Feldcapellen\" - places of pilgrimage. - In the manuscript
here is found: \"Inn heusern marmel feld, Cappellen 2c.\"

Psalter, and was thereby written to St. Bernard in red ink; Tenfel would
have taught it himself, that \[it\] would be right. Countless prayers
with red titles of indulgences, of angelic revelations. *Validi
mendicantes* \[healthy, strong beggars, beggars who went about with
excess, sitting in front of the churches and pretending to be sick, lame
and crippled; when the beadle came with the rod, they could walk.
Consecrate holy water every Sunday; consecrate salt; eat garlic
Panthaleonis 7). Consecrate salt and carry it around. Consecrate spice.
Light consecrate *purificationis*. Write on the lights on St. Agatha\'s
Day: *Mentem sancum spontaneam* 2c. St. John\'s fire. St. John\'s drink
on St. John\'s Day. Johannis Trunk, which also the princes and lords had
consecrated outside St. Johannis day, when they wanted to depart 2c.
Assumption honey, spice consecration. With the nail of Christ pennies
and florins pierced and the middle piece of gold and silver kept as a
landmark.

Own apostles choose after the little wheel or lucky loos and Wohlgerath
2c. Assumptionis the disciples with apple trees in the procession go,
all kinds of indulgences, since then was innumerable abuse. The barefoot
monks put twelve paternoster seeds on all doors 2c., with promise of
innumerable indulgences 2c. and forgiveness of sins. Neither the pope
nor the bishop watched and gave indulgence to such an impudent lie.

*Casus reservati of* the pope, sin, since no one could absolve from
because the pope 2c. Pilgrimages with vows to St. James (Jacoff) is also
groundless of abuses with innumerable chapels. The Golden Gate, the
Golden Year of Rome.

The holy blood, when the threshers from the barn, the workers from the
field, the maidens with sickles and large cloths ran from a mad arrival
9) 2c. Against such innovation, which is against all Scripture and the
Word of God, no bishop watched, but let the poor consciences be seduced.
Now the

7\) Pantaleon\'s Day (July 28) was therefore also called Garlic Day. De
Wette, Vol. V, p. 753. Lauterbach, p. 103, note.

8\) In the manuscript: \"zwolff patter noster, kornnclein, an alle
thurmen\".

> 9\) \"Arrive\" == Incursion.

**1442**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1537.

**1443**

true gospel and the old true doctrine, so Christ himself \[and\] the
apostles preached and wrote, to be a novelty and heresy! The abuse of
the holy blood is still reported today in Brunswick, where in the
monastery of St. Egidii the sanctuary is praised as if it were the blood
that Christ shed on Mount *Calvary,* for which reason indulgences are
also given out in particular, and special seals are made, on which this
title is: The Seal of the Blood of Christ.

On many pilgrimages, women and men, as well as children, have been
weighed on large wagons, leaving as much wax or grain as they weighed.

Sanctuary, which piece but completely groundless of abuses and
outrageous lies. There is Our Lady\'s milk, Joseph\'s pants, St.
Francis\' low garment, a glassful of wine, Christ made of water in Cana
Galilee 2c, the foreskin of Christ\'s circumcision 2c. St. John\'s
Gospel hanging on neck. ^1)^ Blasius light hang on neck. With St.
Anthony sanctuary lace, 2) coat girdle.

Forbidden marital status of the clergy.

The bishop\'s official \[has\] taken one florin annually from a
concubine, as in recent times the official at Halberstadt has taken in
five hundred florins of interest; so strongly have they kept their
saying: *si non caste, tamen cauto*. For a priest\'s child also one
florin. For without children the priests with their cooks were but of a
degree more holy and chaste.

Plates of the priests. Seven times, horae *canonicae,* of which the
priests themselves spoke mockingly, and said that they had poured out
several bushels of vespers and meads on stock 2c. This piece contains
unspeakable blasphemy and mockery of God.

Parson\'s will /

Legends / preach.

Traditions /

Not righteously have they preached of all the cancelled pieces, since we
said of the Christian church 2c.

1\) This protected against thunderstorms; \"Blasius light\" helped
against throat diseases.

2\) \"Senkel\" == cords to hold the clothes together.

The noblemen who went to war gave themselves to St. Jörgen 2c. prisoner,
so that they would not be captured.

Poltergeist belief.

After 3) women in Carthusian monasteries \[have been\] in their
churches, with fire wipe the dust, and \[the\] way, where they went,
burn clean again 2c.; the like in other monasteries, and that only to
the pious women 2c.

The masses hold all kinds of abuses, which are horrible and innumerable.

Consecrate churches and consecrate oil.

Item, that in the ashes the suffragan bishops painted some *characters*
from a book. ^4)^

Bells baptize, as one in the hundred or two hundred Gevattern let only
grab the rope 2c.

Altar baptize.

Kresem on Easter to get money.

Item, that the Corporalia 5) and such holy utensils had to be washed not
by women\'s hands, but by men; no Lai was allowed to touch the chalice
or the altar cloth.

Sufficiency in many ways for sin.

The great spell.

The seven number of sacraments.

Ordain priests, not to teach or preach 2c., for thus the ordaining
bishop said: *Accipe potestatem consecrandi ac offerendi pro vivis et
mortuis* 2c.

/ Tonsorists / Lectores

Consecrations /

Acolitos

/ Diaconos

/ Presbyteros

> on title of a nobleman\'s table or otherwise a partyke 2c.
>
> The suffragan bishops have performed miraculous works with churches,
> bells, altars, images 2c.
>
> From the synods, which they called *Episcopalians, they have* sent a
> printed note indicating how to chant verse 2c. and the *Benedicamus.*
> This they have called ordinem *divinorum* or *divinum.*
>
> named.
>
> Of monks we will say another time, but it is also worth remembering
> that the Barefoot monks persuaded the people that knights and counts
> had settled in the monastery.

3\) In the editions wrongly so interpungirt: \"After the,: women\" 2c. -
Erl. Briefw.: \"with fire-wiping\".

4\) At the consecration of a church.

5\) Linen cloths to cover the hosts.

**1444**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1537. 1538. 1539.

**1445**

> They let them bury their caps, thinking that whoever enters the grave
> with a cap cannot be lost. What would the apostle Paul have said
> against such shameful abuse if it had happened in his time? 2c. But
> the devil is not ashamed of any lie 2c.
>
> Epistoler, Evangelier, only ordained to carry the book and wear Diacon
> skirt 2c.
>
> The suffragan bishops fermeln and too much other childish Geberde with
> cheek beating 2c.

Oaths of those who are consecrated.

> Freedom and privileges for the priests\' houses, goods, household 2c.
>
> All this has happened with these abuses in parishes alone.

Above it is still the right *mare magnum*, 1)

what

in /

> / monasteries, / nunneries, / Carthusian monasteries, / cathedral
> churches, / sub-conventual churches

The church has been a newly invented church service with many prayers,
rules, and statutes. There is an innumerable canker of many ungodly
errors, of which we will write \[at\] another time.

About it still the bishops Officialat, Commissarien 2c.

Without all this, the Christian Church can be and exist as it was at the
time of the apostles.

The bishops want to forget these public abuses, but experience shows
what great, terrible damage this has done to souls and consciences. May
God the Lord grant that all lies and hypocrisy be put to shame, and may
God\'s Word, as before, penetrate, run swiftly and be praised, amen.

**No. 153 8.**

Coburg Fortress. April 28, 1530.

**To his table companions in Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1752, no. 1166.

**No. 1539 .**

Nuremberg. April 28, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

All kinds of news: that the Emperor has escaped from Mantua to Germany;
of the Turk; of the . State of affairs in Italy 2c.

Handwritten in the *Ms. Manlianum*. Printed in Melanchthon\'s Letters,
*ed. Peucer*. 1570, lib. I, x. 1, and in the London edition of the same,
1642, lib. I, ep. I; in Corp. ref. , vol. II, 38 and in the Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 310.

> To Doctor Martin Luther, his extremely dear father.

Hail! We did not stay more than one day in Nuremberg, because we learned
that the emperor had broken out of Mantua on the day after Easter 2) and
was hurrying to Germany with a few troops. It is firmly asserted that
the greatest danger threatens from the Turk. The affairs of the pope in
Italy are still very much hindered. For the siege of Florence has been
lifted without result, because after the Spanish garrison at Pistoja 3)
(Pistoriuin) had been overpowered and killed, the army which was in camp
near Florence hurried to Pistoja to punish the disloyal confederates.
Thus Florence was abandoned. Other tales are told here, but they are not
worth writing, about the Africans who made the entire Mediterranean Sea
unsafe and intercepted several galleys (*triremes*) from the emperor,
and the like. The constancy of our prince is highly praised, that he had
no hesitation to travel to this imperial *conventum*, and it is hoped
that this proper conduct (xxxxxxxxx) will have a

will have a significant influence on the preservation of peace. We have
been to Pirkheimer today, I and Jonas, who thinks honorably of you and
your cause; but he is a little too violently enraged against Osiander.
^4)^ Today we go on. Christ keep you; pray for us all. Fare thee well.
Nuremberg, Thursday after Quasimodogeniti \[April 28\] Anno 1530.

> Phil. Melanchthon.

1\) *Mare magnum* (the great sea) here denotes

not the two otherwise so-called bulls of 1474, in which Sixtus IV
summarized the privileges of the Franciscans and the Dominicans, which
received a supplement and extension in 1479. It stands here
appellatively.

2\) Exactly: on Easter Tuesday, April 19.

3\) five German miles northwest of Florence.

4\) Because of Osiander\'s position on the monastery question, by which
family members of Pirkheimer were affected.

**1446** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1540. 1541. 1542. **1447**

**No. 15 40.**

Coburg Fortress. April 29, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Congratulations on the birth of a son.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 9, and in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 131; in De Wette, vol. V, p. 9
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 311.

> Xxxxxxxxxx, xxxxx \[Five boys producer, be greeted\]. To the producer
> of five sons, the very great and strong gentleman Doctor Justus Jonas,
> who fights for the Gospel at Augsburg. ^1)^

Hail, you exceedingly strong producer of five boys! and I do indeed wish
you happiness with the second, recently born, Friedrich; but since you
are in a hurry to see the letters from Wittenberg yourself, I do not
want to delay your joy. Only I would like to admonish you to consider
your God\'s repentance, through which he has been compelled to give you
the joy of a new Frederick for the sadness over the first one, who was
taken from you. 2) He has shared with you; He must be borne, yes, He
must be praised. The small enclosed note was sent by my Käthe. But you
will hear everything from the letters themselves. On the first day after
our separation we wrote 3) letters to you, perhaps you will receive this
one together with those; I do not know what I wrote in them. The Lord
who gave you joy, keep you and bless you, Amen. From the kingdom of
birds and kingdom of jackdaws, on Friday after Quasimodogeniti \[April
29\] 1530.

> Martin Luther, D.

**No. 15 41.**

Coburg Fortress. April 29, 1630.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2309, annex, no. 5.

1\) The Wittenbergers did not arrive in Augsburg until May 2.

2\) The first Friedrich had died in 1529 at the age of two; the second
lived only three days, as Jonas himself reported to Luther on June 12,
not \"a few weeks\" as the Erl. Briefw., p. 312, note 4, indicates.

3\) On April 23 (No. 1535).

**No. 15 4S.**

(Coburg fortress.) (End of April 1530.)

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther makes ideas against the mass demolition of the houses in
Wittenberg, which should be carried out because of the fortification of
the city.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. S,* fol. 23. Printed by
Burkhardt, p. 494 (with the superscription: \"an Churfürst Johann
Friedrich\") and in Erl. Briefwechsel, Vol. VI, p. 314.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most
Gracious Lord! I have received the report through Doctor Brück,
Chancellor, that E. C. F. G. has graciously commanded me to do,^4)^
about the demolition of houses in Wittenberg, and I have been extremely
frightened by the same, God knows that! I also did not want to believe
that E. C. F. G. had commanded it in such a way. The merciful God also
5) protect E. C. F. G. from such cries, which would 6) fill heaven and
earth! God has so far graciously protected E. C. F. G. in great dangers.
But herewith His mercy shall cease to protect, because this plan can
almost be seen as a humanly unnecessary shield, since, without
necessity, the third part of the city is almost ruined, and, as they 7)
show E. C. F. G., so many citizens are to leave in a hurry, with wife,
child, household goods and livestock, - most gracious Lord, where to?
Wittenberg can well do without such damage to the city and without the
disadvantage of so many good people, and also without E. C. F. G.\'s
great costs and burdens,

4\) Burkhardt remarks on this letter: \"In any case, at the end of April
from Coburg, after several Wittenberg residents had already made
representations to the Elector on April 15 against the mass demolition
of the houses by Captain Metsch, who was to fortify Wittenberg Castle,
whereupon the Elector may have turned to Luther for his opinion. The
acts state that 30 family dwellings were to be torn away, which the
captain had bought for the then enormous sum of 6900 florins. At first
the owners of the houses agreed to the sale, then they remonstrated
against it. The demolition of the houses does not seem to have proceeded
in the intended manner.\"

5\) \"also\" put by us instead of: \"me\".

6\) \"that\" put by us instead of: \"that\", and immediately following:
\"fill\" instead of: \"fall\".

7\) namely the citizens of Wittenberg in their petitions.

**1448** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1542 to 1545. **1449**

If such a fortress is dared to be built, where it would otherwise be
suitable, it will nevertheless be strong enough to resist the neighbors;
in addition, because it is done without the will of the citizens, it
will certainly become an example almost like that of King Ahab with
Naboth, 1) as E. C. F. G., as a Christian prince by the grace of God,
has himself considered and ordered me to report. Several have written to
us here from Wittenberg with complaints and lamentations, 2) but we did
not want to believe it.

Therefore, most gracious Lord, I have ever asked, so I now ask most
earnestly, that E. C. F. G. would graciously consider their poor,
faithful subjects in this, and take the great cry and lamentation of the
people to heart, as this may also be enough for the annoyance and
disgrace of our Gospel, although I hope that E. C. F. G. will do more
than we desire without this. For it is easy to reckon that neither we
nor anyone else care about the land and people as much as we do about E.
C. F. G., their rightful natural sovereign, of whom they are the
property; although Satan is a master at hindering and challenging such
love and grace (as well as all other works of God). For this reason, I
do not want to say much more here, and will explain this in E. C. F.
G.\'s gracious concern.

Christ, our dear Lord and Savior, strengthen and comfort E. C. F. G., so
that we and all her subjects may be comforted thereby, and give E. C. F.
G. a heart for the project in question, so that such a trade, which is
to be ordered in Wittenberg for the sake of the houses, may be carried
out beneficially and the poor people again comforted, as E. C. F. G. may
well have it done with good grace without male displeasure. C. F. G. can
let such things be done with good grace without male displeasure, since
E. C. F. G.\'s comfort and joy is truly the comfort and joy of all of us
and should be just.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

1\) In the original: \"Nabaioth\". Meant is 1 Kings 21.

2\) This passage proves that this letter is addressed to the Elector
from the fortress of Coburg and does not belong to the year 1531.

3\) In the original: \"the\".

**No. 15 43.**

Augsburg. Beginning of May 1530.

**Johann Agricola to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Agricola thanks him for his greetings to Aquila and him, and tells that
they had joked with Aquila by prophesying that the bishop of Augsburg
(whose prisoner he had already been once) would throw him into prison.
In addition, Melanchthon had a dream: he had seen that an eagle
(*aquilam*) had been transformed by magic into a cat and then put into a
sack. When the cat cried out, Luther came over it and ordered that they
let the cat out, and so it was freed. About this dream various
interpretations were made: Some said that it meant that the Elector John
would come into great distress at this Imperial Diet for the sake of the
Gospel, from which he would only be freed by Luther\'s coming to the
Imperial Diet; others that it meant evil and murder and death for Aquila
and his family; Still others said that it meant that the emperor,
enchanted by the cardinals and sophists, could not understand the least
thing about Luther\'s cause, nor even hear it, but that after hearing
Luther and learning about the cause of the Gospel, he would be freed. -
Luther refers to this in his answer of May 15.

Printed in Kapps kleiner Nachlese, Vol. Ill, p. 363, No. 29 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 316.

**No.1544.**

(Nuremberg.) Beginning of May 1530.

**Joachim Camerarius to Luther.**

(Regest.)

With this letter written in Greek, Camerarius sends foreign sweets to
Luther on Melanchthon\'s behalf. Luther replied to him with a letter
written in \"Turkish.\" See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2314, note.

Handwritten in Munich, *Cod. Iat*. 941, p. 88b. Printed in Kolde,
*Anactecta,* p. 450 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 318.

**No. 15 45.**

**Augsburg. May 4, 1530.**

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

Jonas testifies to his longing for Luther and hopes to see him again
soon, safe and sound. The Elector arrived in Augsburg with his
councilors and theologians on May 2. The emperor\'s arrival is still
uncertain. In the meantime, the Count of Nassau has written a friendly
letter to the Elector, which testifies to the Emperor\'s peaceful
disposition. Everyone is surprised at the early arrival of the Elector,
while the other princes are still on their way, but will soon arrive.
Jonas thanks Luther for his congratulations on the birth of his son,
asks him for his intercession for his wife and child, as well as for the
Imperial Diet 2c.

**1450** Letters from. the year 1530. no. 1545. **1451**

> The original is in Hamburg, Ms. I, 90. Printed in Kolde, *Anactecta,*
> p. 121 and in Kawerau, Jonas\' Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 146 and in
> Erl. Briefw., vol. VII,

S. 318.

Grace and the peace of God in Christ! Although all these friends, Philip
and the others with whom I am now dealing, are very great and very
pleasant people, and one cannot wish for more pleasant or more sincere
people than these, and we are also dealing with a large number of great
people here, I still do not know, dearest father, since you are absent,
what kind of image of being orphaned and alone seems to float before my
eyes. That is what I wish above all things, and we all wish that we will
see you again as soon as possible, safe and sound and happy, God grant
it!

We finally arrived in Augsburg with the most illustrious prince on
Monday after Misericordias Domini \[May 2\]. The prince entered in
churfürstlichem decoration, and some ceremonies and pomp were used after
the manner of the ancestors, with Joachim Pappenheim carrying the silver
sword in front. You know the rest of the kind.

The emperor\'s arrival has so far been uncertain, as it was when we were
together, even among those who alone seemed to know about it and are
quite reliable. A young man, M. von Hutten, has been sent from our
trousers, 2) a very fast and almost winged horseman, and a very skillful
scout of these things. He has reported that the Emperor has departed
from Trent and will hold a Diet of the cities and nobility in the
Austrian region at Hall or Insbruck; however, he will hasten his arrival
because of many important causes that incite him both privately and in
family matters.

What the Count of Nassau, to whom the doors are always open not only to
the Emperor\'s chamber but also to his ears and heart, has written to
our Prince, and of other things belonging to this whole matter of
religion and the public affairs of Germany, you will learn by the letter
of Philip 3). There is nothing more gracious and kind than the piece
which is in the tender (*diplomate*) or citation of the Kai-.

1\) Fungirender Vicemarschall for his grandfather, the
Reichserzmarschall Sebastian von Pappenheim.

2\) The same is reported by Melanchthon, St. Louis edition,

3\) St. Louis edition, Vol. XVI, 650, No. 902. By this reference it
becomes most probable that also our letter was written on May 4.

sers 4) in which he promises that he will not only recognize the matter
but also seek ways of harmony with the utmost diligence. The rumor has
not reported anything 5) contrary to this. Everyone says that the
emperor will listen to both sides graciously and will not do anything
tyrannical. What is left but to ask the Lord that, as in the past, so
also in the future, the Lord himself may form the hearts of the kings
and the emperor in his hand in such great matters and rule as a faithful
builder.

Our prince is the first of all at the Diet, to the amazement of many, to
the astonishment of all. I don\'t know what the papists had said, as if
the prince feared very much for himself and began to distrust the
matter. But now, thank God, they see this fear. Let Jesus Christ
strengthen him and us. That haste seemed to many, as well as to us, not
to be wisely undertaken, but God directs these things wonderfully. Every
day we learn that this hastening brings significant fruit. Of course,
there is a great shortage of grain here, and a roll that one buys for a
heller in Wittenberg is hardly bought for a penny here. The same is true
of other things. But the loss in costs will be compensated by God\'s
grace elsewhere. The other princes are on their way. Duke George, about
which we have a certain report, has passed through Nuremberg and will
come here tomorrow: The Prince of Hesse is on his way, as Schnepf has
told us. The Electors who live on the Rhine are all expected by the
coming week. Therefore, as I hope, and as the Wittenberg Church has
requested, the Diet will have its progress; may the Lord grant that
everything be ordered and arranged for the glory of his holy name.

As far as my private affairs are concerned, by God\'s grace I received
the next day, after the Prince entered Augsburg \[May 3\], the most
desired and joyful news, which pleased me, God knows! extraordinarily,
by bringing me the good news that the fifth son had been born to me.
\[In passing: so that you would not have written in vain: These walls
which sanctified the cry of five sons;^6)^ yet this for a jest\]. And
since I

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 622, no. 890.

5\) We have accepted the conjecture of the Erl. Briefw.: *pertulit*,
accepted. Kolde reads: *pro nobis*. The manuscript is damaged.

6\) Compare St. Louiser Ausg., Vol. XVI, Anh., No. 5, where
[Luther]{.underline} uses these words, therefore we have assumed
*scripseris* instead of *scripserim*.

**1452**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1545 to 1551.

**1453**

I received your exceedingly sweet letter, 1) which announced the same to
me, namely that I would be publicly rich through such a great blessing
of God and publicly blessed. I recognize, 2) my dear father, my
weakness, yes, my sin and unbelief, and I am ashamed of the sadness over
the death of the first Frederick, under which the Lord had hidden and
concealed such a great comfort. But what good deeds of God are not more
glorious and higher than that all understanding of all men could attain!
\[In passing: What should our barrenness accomplish? The Psalms are
poems to extol the virtues, yea, the daily creations and wonders of the
so great LORD\]. To the only gracious, the only powerful, the only wise
and merciful toward us, be praise, honor and glory forever and ever,
Amen. You, my dearest father (I beg you), will pray for the childbed and
the newborn Jonaslein (*Jonulo*), that we may see them safely. For the
Diet, I ask you to pray daily (as you do). We do not see, but grasp with
our hands\.... . 3) the miracles of godly prayers and the unspeakable
victories 4) of Johannes Luther and Lippus Melanchthon and Just (Jostes)
Jonas, \"who as children fight against the pointed
sacrament-dishonor-devil and the re-devil-devil and other devilish
cunning with the 10 Commandments, Our Father and faith\". The Lord
Christ, I hope, will grant that we will soon see you yourself, best and
dearest Father. Farewell in Christ. Augsburg, Wednesday after
Misericordias Domini \[May 4\] Anno 2c. 30. J. Jonas.

\[As an aside: If the Holy Spirit did not praise the ravens in the
Psalms (Ps. 147, 9.) and in the Gospel (Luc. 12, 24.).) praised the
ravens as birds born for the common good, I would wish the executioner
(*malam crucem)* on those ravens and jackdaws that disturb your sleep,
my dear father; but what shall I wish the executioner to the ravens,
since they delight in the cross and gallows, if only it is not empty,
but full of good fellows, 5) whom not the seventh commandment nor the
law of Moses, but the Saxon mirror and (the emperor\'s) hangings (-laws)
have made a long letter. 6)\]

1\) No. 1540.

2\) Instead of *agnosce,* we have adopted *agnosco.*

3\) Here three words have become illegible due to the folding of the
letter.

4\) Here Kolde places a punctum, having previously read *orationem*
instead of *orationum*, with omission of rniraoula.

5\) That is: from bad guys.

6\) *Literam longam ex se facere*, to make a long I of oneself, that is,
to hang oneself, *Plaut, Aul.,* I, 37

**No. 1546.**

(Augsburg.) 4. May 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 650, no. 902.

**No. 1547.**

(Augsburg.) 4. May 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 690, no. 928.

**No. 1548.**

Augsburg. II May 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 656, no. 905.

**No. 1549.**

(Augsburg.) II May 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 654, no. 904.

**No. 1550.**

(Coburg Fortress.) May 12, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2312, annex, no. 7.

**No. 1551.**

(Coburg Fortress.) May 15, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther instructs him to teach Jonah the death of his newborn child as
gently as possible.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Aug.* 34. 2, fol. 103 (only the
second half). Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. I32; in De Wette, vol. IV,
p. 16 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 334.

> To the worthy man, Mr. Philipp Melanchthon, the servant and disciple
> of Christ, his brother.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I have commanded that this letter be sent
to you especially about

(Kawerau ad h. 1.). Here: to have brought to the gallows. - The last
words in the Latin text are: et\... *pensiles*. To this Kolde remarks:
\"Seems to be still something cut off at the margin\"; this we have
supplemented by *leges.* In the gap D. Enders believes to recognize:
*Cesueo*; Kawerau conjicirt: *Ceesaris,* which we have assumed.

**1454**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1551. 1552. 1553.

**1455**

My dear Philip, because no other way presented itself to me to deal with
Justus Jonas. You will see to it that he, as much as possible,
experiences the loss of the child in a gentle way. His wife and the
servant write to him that the boy is indeed ill, but in words that
greatly abhor death. But my wife writes that she was present when he
died of the same plague as his little Frederick recently. Namely, that
the child was weak, he had previously recognized enough from its birth,
and the complaint of the mother, since she was pregnant. I did not want
to write anything to him, so that I would not increase his grief, but
will keep quiet longer, as I will write at another time. We are
depressed everywhere, yet we do not despair. Perhaps this is our hour
with the woman in the Gospel \[John 16:21\], who has sadness when she
gives birth, but we will have joy when the man is born into the world.
If our word is the truth (which even the raging and nonsense of the
enemies has sufficiently demonstrated), then the matter stands well. We
are victorious and before Him. Our cause, our prayer and our hope will
be for Him; the word is certain \[Titus 1:9\]. In the meantime, comfort
the man who must be so afflicted before the world that it rejoices and
we are afflicted. The Lord be with you. May 15, 1530.

> Mart. Luther.

**No. 1552 .**

(Feste Coburg.) May 15, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 657, no. 906.

**No. 1553 .**

(Coburg Fortress.) May 15, 1530.

**To Johann Agricola in Augsburg.**

Answer to Agricola\'s letter No. 1543, which Luther sent to his Käthe
(not, as De Wette thinks: \"About a letter from Agricola to Luther\'s
wife\"). He sends an old song, which he has improved and provided with a
text, in order to have a joke with DI. Georg Rörer to make a joke.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 23b (dated June
15) and in *Cod. Gothan*. 185.

Printed in *Schlegel, vit. Langeri,* p. 143 (from the second paragraph);
in Schütze, vol. II, p. 140 (from June 15); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 36
(from June 15) and in Erl. Briefw., vol.VII, p.336.

Grace and peace! I have sent your letter, 1) my dear Agricola, to my
mistress, but I can easily guess her answer for you. For after she has
read the letter, she will soon laugh and say, \"Eh, how M. Eisleben is a
basic scoundrel!\" But I hope that Caspar Aquila has returned to you,
freed from his transformation into a cat. \"You are very bad boys to vex
the good man.\"

But I send here to you for your practice a certain song. For since I
could neither read nor write for four days, I happened to find a paper
in the secret room on which this old chant was set for three voices,
which I have cleaned, corrected and improved, and added the fourth
voice, and composed a text for it from the chorus: namely, with this
suggestion, I would like to deceive our Capellan, M. Georg, 2) that he
would receive this chant, sent to me by you, as a new one published in
Augsburg from the Cantorei for the arrival of the Emperor and Ferdinand.
But it is hoped that he could be deceived if you will praise it to me a
little, especially that you have heard that the simplicity in it pleases
many, and that you will send the rest of the text. If you are willing to
live to please me, then I will send him all of this, and if the matter
succeeds, that I will have deceived this Bavarian 3) critic and untimely
reprover (*Momum*) of music, then I will have forever taken away from
him the power to judge the music in which he is not a little pleased.
Perhaps we will also chase away some sirens from here. 4) Therefore, do
your duty here and attend to this matter diligently. More another time.
In the meantime, be well in the Lord, all of you with one another. May
15, 1530, your Martin Luther.

1\) No. 1543.

2\) Rörer.

3\) Rörer was from Deggendorf near Straubing in Bavaria.

4\) The \"sirens\" will mean the jackdaws in Coburg.

**1456** Letters from the year 1530. No. 1554 to 1558. **1457**

**No. 155 4.**

Feste Coburg. May 19, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther consoles him over the loss of his child.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 14b; in
Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 222 and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 194. Printed
in *Coelestin.* vol. 1, p. 43 (datirt May 22); in Buddeus, x. 94; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 18 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 337.

Grace and peace in the Holy Spirit, who is higher than all reason, grant
you Christ, my dear Jonas. I am a burdensome and unsuitable comforter,
which comes from the fact that I am also not at all rich in spring
thoughts and flowery heart movements, as I would like and would be
necessary for you. I am also often scorched by the wind and the heat, so
that I am like this arid and thirsty region of ours. But see that you
are strong in Christ, whose work and art, yes, whose whole kingdom is
that in our weakness strength and victory may come forth. The wicked are
joyful, they are secure, they also utter threats and seek bloodshed;
meanwhile we must suffer and grieve. All this must be done so that the
Scripture may also be fulfilled in our bodies; if it is not fulfilled,
we cannot be well, but if it is fulfilled, we shall live. You do not
suffer alone, but have comrades who also groan, almost wearied by
suffering; we are esteemed like sheep for the slaughter \[Rom. 8, 10\].
\"Is it but vain suffering, one upon another?\" because he who hates and
persecutes us neither tires nor sleeps. Then you have many and
exceedingly great gifts to oppose this One Evil, if you will but
consider it. Among these is that of which the Scripture boasts, saying
that it is something very great \[Sir. 26, 19. f.\]: \"There is nothing
dearer on earth than a chaste woman, and there is nothing more delicious
than a chaste woman,\" and \[Proverbs 31, 10.\]: \"To whom a virtuous
woman is given, she is far more noble than the most precious pearls.\"
2c. Nor do you want to be completely in lust, according to the example
of the feast \[Luc. 16:19\], and not be like the brothers of Christ in
any way, who through many tribulations have reached the kingdom of God
with

You will be taken by force \[Apost. 14,22. and Matth. 11,12\]. Therefore
I pray thee that thou bear this chastening of the Father wisely. For
there is a time to be happy, and there is a time to be sad; we gladly
accept the former, but we must not reject the latter either. The Lord
Jesus, who has taken your son to Himself and will take better care of
him than you, comfort and strengthen you, amen. From the kingdom of the
jackdaws. May 19, 1530.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1555.**

(Feste Coburg.) May 20, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 690, no. 929.

**No. 155 6.**

Augsburg. May 21, 1530.

**Urban Rhegius, preacher in Augsburg, to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Rhegius expresses his joy at the personal meeting with Melanchthon,
Jonas, Agricola and Spalatin. He was invited to the table by the
Landgrave of Heffen and discussed the whole matter of the Gospel with
him, who was well versed in the Holy Scriptures, and then two hours more
about the doctrine of the Lord\'s Supper. The prince had all the
arguments of the Sacramentarians at hand and wanted to hear their
refutation from Rhegius. In the process, he had come to the conclusion
that the prince did not hold with Zwingli, but only had a heartfelt
desire for harmony.

The original is in Hamburg, Vol. I, fol. 100. Manuscript in Dresden,
*Cod. C* 342, fol. 10. Printed in Innocent News 1745, p. 929; in *G.
Chr. Joannis, Tabularum litterarumque Spicilegium*. 1724, p. 551; in
*Corp. Ref.,* vol. II, 58; in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 124 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 340.

**No. 155 7.**

(Augsburg.) May 22, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 688, no. 927.

**No. 155 8.**

Feste Coburg. May 28, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2310, annex, no. 6.

**1458** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1559. **1459**

**No. 15 59.**

(Feste Coburg.) (End of May or June 1530.) 1)

**To Justus Jonas in Augsburg.**

Luther expresses his satisfaction that Jonas translates his
interpretation of the Prophet Jonah into Latin and thus contributes to
its dissemination, because the article of grace, of justification or
forgiveness of sins is also diligently and faithfully taught in it, as
opposed to all doctrines of works. Finally, he sweetly consoles Jonah
about the death of his son.

First printed in a single edition of the Latin translation of Luther\'s
interpretations of the prophet Jonah, which Justus Jonas had prepared
and which appeared in September 1530 with Johann Secerius in Hagenau
(see St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 836, note); then in the Latin
Wittenberg edition (1552), tom. IV, fol. 539b; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p.
174 (datirt: *mense Majo*); in Kawerau, Jonas\' Briefwechsel, vol. I, p.
174 (datirt: 1530, June); in the Erlangen edition, *exeg. opp., tom*.
XXVI, p. 36 and in the Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 347.

> To the worthy man, D. Justus Jonas, the Wittenberg theologian,
> wishes\^ Martin Luther

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I never hoped, nor did I wish, that
my little books should have any permanent name or reputation in the
world, since I have always been content if, through me as a reminder or
guide, people were moved to read and understand the holy Scriptures,
whether, since the Spirit is their guide and master, they might draw
better from the full sources themselves than they can lick from my
little books: I begin not to hate my little books so much, nor to
begrudge them the publicity so much as I have always done before, since
I see that among the great multitude of those who treat the Scriptures,
there are only few and rare people who attack them in a beneficial way,
most of them even tamper with them in a malicious way and interpret them
corruptly according to their own spirit.

For even though I am nothing, even though I am unlearned and un-German
in the spelling of my German language, I have nevertheless understood
that which is the main part of Christian doctrine and which is

1\) This letter must have been written after May 19 (No. 1554) and
before the time of the interruption of the correspondence between Coburg
and Augsburg, before June 5.

the summa of the whole Scripture, namely the article of grace, of
justification or forgiveness of sins, certainly diligently and
faithfully, so that I dare to boast in the Lord with St. Paul \[2 Cor.
11, 6.\]: \"foolish in speech, but not \[foolish\] in knowledge\". You
see yourself, dearest Jonas, how cold, how ignorant in this matter are
all those who today are outside our fellowship, and write books and
interpret the Scriptures, so that if the government of the churches were
given to them alone, one could expect nothing more certain under their
government than a kind of new papacy, where Christ would be abolished
anew with all our wisdom, which is the knowledge of the righteousness of
faith. For in their hearts the delusion of human righteousness or
righteousness by works is so stubbornly ingrained that they cannot in
any way separate it from righteousness by faith or grace. And this, of
course, is not to be wondered at. Until this day, I have experienced in
myself, through many and great struggles, how difficult and purely
divine it is for this knowledge to take root in the human heart, that we
are justified by grace and without works, and that faith in Christ alone
is the one and only righteousness of the saints of God, I say, as the
scholastics (*scholae*) speak, the essential (*formalis)* 2) and perfect
righteousness. This is far beyond the comprehension of the human heart
and the measure of knowledge and speech on earth. What would those do
who have learned nothing of these things, and imagine that they can
learn by reading the Scriptures alone, and so presumptuously, that when
they have once read any book, they are fully convinced that they have
grasped the whole matter. True, they learn by a kind of habit to say
these words: Faith justifies, works do not justify 2c. But when they
come across passages of Scripture in which this matter is taught most
beautifully and strongly, they pass over them as if they were blind,
deaf, and dumb, so that

2\) On the *formalis justitia,* see Luther\'s \"Detailed Explanation of
the Epistle to the Galatians,\" St. Louis edition, vol. IX, 175 ff.

**1460** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1559. **1461**

they also do not remember this matter with a word, and certainly by this
they sufficiently show their testimony that they have learned the words
from us, but never seriously and truly recognized the matter. But to
treat the Scriptures without this article is rather to obscure or
falsify the Scriptures, since there is almost no syllable which does not
do this, so that Christ may be known. Since I see this (as I have said),
I gladly suffer that some of my little books are added to the best books
of our time, as it were, as a covering of goat\'s hair \[Ex. 26:7\] to
the purple covering of the tabernacle, and also brought into the Latin
language, among which I also count this Jonah, which you translate. For
I have had this one thing in mind with special diligence, that I should
illustrate the power and strength of the Christian faith by some
glorious example, as far as possible, to the unlearned people. For
before there was indeed nothing easier among all prophets than this
history of Jonah, since everyone presumed to know it perfectly by a
single glance or a single hearing. But now it is of such a nature even
for the highest men in the spirit that they are forced to confess that
they have not yet learned the first rudiments in it, at least I myself,
who have interpreted it, have said only very little and barely droplets
for so great a matter, and yet I have not yet sipped these my droplets,
while those in the meantime may have swallowed the whole sea by which
Jonah was swallowed, at the same time as the whale itself, - quite a
hateful sort of people, to whom, being so soon satiated, these eternal
delights of the word of God become a disgust, of which even the angels
are never satiated, but they desire to behold the same for ever \[1
Petr. 1,12\].

Therefore you do right, my dear Jonas, that you have given yourself to
this work of translating my interpretation, especially for the sake of
the honor of the faith (as I have said), which I very much wish to be
praised in every way, on every occasion, whether this be done by my,
that is, an un-German and unlearned, or by

yours, that is, a graceful and brilliant writing. You will certainly
promote the cause of the saints of God not insignificantly and offer God
a sacrifice to the sweetest smell. And I have no doubt that this
interpretation of mine, refashioned by your talent and eloquence (with
which Christ has adorned you before others), will not only speak in
better words, but also show the readers the matter itself more
abundantly and vividly; and it will happen that henceforth the book will
not be called mine, but, after I have been robbed, yours.

This robbery will not be offensive to me, but will delight me, and I
will accept this robbery as an excellent mercy. I do not flatter you,
nor do I caress myself by speaking so boastfully, but it is my zeal that
flares up and overcomes me, seeing how the whole world neglects this
cause, nay, even resists it with all its strength and efforts, and
wishes it to be cursed and eradicated, while meanwhile the eloquence of
all tongues praises mere antics, yes, filth with such great pomp, with
such full cheeks, that before those things we can hardly hear and see
even our own.

But I hope that this work will also be useful to you, and the translated
Jonas will pay the translating Jonas with immediate wages. For he will
comfort you and heal the wound of death, by which your little Frederick
has left you as a wounded man, now already the fourth little son, who
has been snatched from you by a premature death. For in your mourning my
Jonas will say to you in every syllable: What do you mourn, Jonas? Look
at this Jonah, whom the depth of the waters and the belly of the whale
drives around in constant darkness in the whole sea for whole three
days, and who looks the fear of death without end, if he looks it
differently, and does not die rather without intermission as it were of
the eternal death and succumbs to the victorious death. Your sorrow is
great, but such a sorrow that can give room to tears and finally be
soothed by the tears that burst forth. But my fear not only does not
allow tears, but also exhausts all moisture and completely dries out the
marrow. Remember therefore, living

**1462** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1559. 1560. 1561. **1463**

Jonas, this dying Jonas, for you have not yet experienced the depth of
the sea and the belly of the whale, unless you imagine that your tears
are deeper than my sea, and your pain is harsher than my whale.

Then behold also this, how great the incomprehensible mercy of God is,
who has not only kept me alive through so many deaths, so often lost,
but has made me a well and exceedingly joyful victor and master of the
devouring sea and the digesting whale. How much more will He wipe away
these thy droplets, by which thou art a little sprinkled, not devoured,
with a lighter mercy, and make thee with other gifts a proud despiser
and king of these trailers? howbeit, if thou dost rightly estimate the
gifts already received of him, thou shalt find so many and so great,
that they might in truth be called a sea of grace with which thou art
showered, and a whale of mercy by which thou art taken, so that in
comparison with me, who is drowning in my sea and whale and can hardly
breathe a short and small breath to live, you appear as a completely
different Jonah, who is living and rejoicing in the sea and whale of
mercy and goods, and hardly feels a small drop and a small breath of the
north wind. So, I say, my Jonas will talk to you and add very much and
talk out better than I can indicate after my childhood. Therefore I will
command you two Jonas to one another, and I commend Jonas to Jonas,
knowing that as they are of the same name, 1) so also they will be of
one mind in peace and joy of spirit. That this may be with you and us
forever, may He, our peace and joy, give Christ Jesus, highly praised
forever, amen.

**No. 1560.**

Coburg Fortress. June 1, 1530.

**To Jakob Probst in Bremen.**

See St, Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2302, annex, no. 2.

1\) Erl. Briefw.: sint instead of: sunt.

**No. 1561.**

Coburg Fortress. June 1, 1530.

**To Johann Zelst, 2) preacher in Bremen.**

Ueber die Secten und Schwärmer in Ostfriesland.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 23. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 133; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 29 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 356.

Grace and peace! I write with wavy words, since I am partly ill, my dear
Johann. I have written a letter of admonition to the Count of Friesland.
I have approved of his order and advised in every respect that he should
not tolerate any sects in his country, then also punish the rebels who
break into the churches and blaspheme, as you indicate, and, if they do
it again, punish them with the penalty of rebellion. Perhaps you will
see the letter. As for what you want, among other things, from Ulrich\'s
book 3) against Heinrich von Zütphen, it seems to me that he is carried
away by anger and arrogance, although I cannot adequately understand the
matter myself; but he seems to me to be causing a dispute over words. I
do not praise this Melchior with his figure. What can I say? Man has
long since been handed over to Satan. Avoid ihu! His views are
completely rapturous, meanwhile Christ is lost among such
good-for-nothing talkers. You can see the other from the letter to Jakob
Probst. Greetings to both John (the one from Amsterdam 4) and Pelt
\[*Pelzium*\]). I am forced to be brief. I wish to treat the sixth
chapter of John, 5) if the Lord permits. You be strong. The LORD will be
with you; comfort your churches also. When I go home healthy

2\) Zelst was provost\'s chaplain at Our Lady\'s Church in Bremen. He
died in 1562.

3\) Perhaps Ulrich von Dornum, captain in Oldersum, who had made common
cause with the swarmers Carlstadt and Melchior Hofmann.

4\) *Amsterdamus* is Johann Timann, so called from his hometown. He had
been a preacher at St. Martini in Bremen since 1524. He died in 1557 -
Johann Pelt, since 1525 preacher at the Anscharius church in Bremen.

5\) Luther did not get to do this. On the other hand, during
Bugenhagen\'s absence in Lübeck, he preached on the sixth to eighth
chapters of John in Wittenberg from November 5, 1530 to March 9, 1532
(see St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 2192 ff.).

**1464**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1561 to 1565.

**1465**

we will do more, if Christ is gracious. The grace of God be with you,
Amen. From the desert, June 1, 1530, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 562.**

Augsburg. June 1, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 707, no. 932.

**No. 1563 .**

Coburg Fortress. June 2, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2306, annex, no. 3.

**No. 15 64.**

(Coburg Fortress.) June 5, 1530.

**To his wife.**

About the image of his little daughter Magdalena. Advice on weaning her.
About the frequency of visits to Luther. The glasses that Christian
Döriug sent do not fit Luther. Rumors that nothing would come of the
Reichstag.

The original is in Hamburg, Uffenbach-Wolfsche Sammlung, vol. 5, p. 1
(damaged in some places). Printed in A. von Dommer, Autotypen der
Reformationzeit auf der Hamburger Stadtbibliothek, Heft II, p. 68 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 362.

> My beloved housewife, Katherin Lutherin zu Wittenberg, for your
> attention.

Grace and peace in Christ. Dear Käthe! I have received all of your
letters. This is the fourth letter 1) that I have written to you since
John left for you. I also have Lenchen\'s copy with the box. I did not
know the hair at first, it seems so black to me. I keep where you want
to put it down and 2) blow, that \[it\] is good in the way of milings,
so that you first break it off once a day, then twice a day, until
\[it\] thus drains cleanly. Thus Georgen von Grumpach\'s mother, Mrs.
Argula,^3)^ advised me; she has been here with us.

1\) The other three letters are missing\".

2\) \"and\" put by us instead of: \"of\". - \"wehnen\" (English: *to
wean*; Low German: \"wenn\'n\") == wean. - The original should read:
\"weylinger\", instead the Erl. Briefw.: \"meylinger\", that is:
\"allmäliger\", vermuthet, what we have assumed\".

3\) Argula von Staufen.

and has eaten with me, Hans Reinicke full of Mansfeld also, and George
Römer, that we all have to go to an external place, it wants to become a
common pilgrimage here.

Tell Master Christianus that I have not seen my day of shameful glasses,
because they come with his letter; I could not see a stitch through
them. Thus the letter from all Cuntzen\'s father has not been sent to
me, nor am I in Coburg; but if I can do otherwise, I will not let it go.
You should nevertheless have your letters sent to the castrator^4)^ ,
who will probably send them to me.

In Nuremberg and Augsburg, doubts began to arise as to whether anything
would come of the Diet. The emperor is still consuming at Insbruck. The
priests are up to something, and ses\^s gehet with herbs 5) to, God
grant that the devil shit on them, amen. Let Mr. Pommer read the letter
from 6) D. Wencel. Hurry; the messenger does not want to wait. Greet,
kiss, hug and be friendly to all and to each 7) according to his state.
Early on the day of Pentecost \[June 5\] 1530. Martin Luther.

**No. 1 565.**

(Feste Coburg.) June 5, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther consoles him about the death of his daughter. About a passage of
Scripture. About the uncertainty whether the Reichstag will take place.
About his state of health. He reports the death of his father. About the
too great frequency of the visits.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 285 B. Handwritten there
in *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 19d. Printed in J. M. Krafft, Ein Zweyfaches
Zwey-HundertJähriges Jubel-Gedächtniß 2c., Hamburg 1723, p. 87; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 179; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 31 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 364.

> To D. Wenceslaus Link, the most faithful servant of the Word at
> Nuremberg, who is highly renowned in the Lord.

Grace in Christ our Lord! I have heard Peter Steckner, and have offered
to do as much as I can, as he himself will report, to help my

4\) Paul Bader.

5\) That is, with magic.

6\) The original should read \"to\"; probably a reading error.- Should
\"to\" be correct, the next letter would have to be understood, which
was sent [unsealed]{.underline}.

7\) In the original: \"jder\".

**1466** Letters from the year

1530\. no. 1565. 1566. **1467**

dear Wenceslaus. I know that your deceased little daughter, if you have
ever been a father, will now teach you what it means to be a father,
especially of the sex which, even more than is the case with sons,
excites pity very much. But you know that she is now in the kingdom of
heaven more blessed than all of us, who are a reproach of men and a
mockery of devils, then also a spectacle of the world and a temptation
of sin. Christ help us in that hour, amen.

From the passage \[1 Cor. 15:29\]: \"Why are they baptized over the
dead?\" I still have nothing other than what is in the marginal gloss 2)
of my German Testament.

I do not like to hear that the Diet is becoming doubtful, because this
is not a sign of peace, but of the wrath of God, which the bishops
provoke by their unworthiness, so that they may go to the bottom, but
not without our misfortune.

I say thank you for the small gifts sent.

I have indeed suffered from buzzing in the head before the arrival of
yours, but nevertheless, thank God, I am better, except that I must work
gently and be very idle and indulge my thoughts. I have been very sad
while writing now, for I have received the news of the death of my
extremely dear and beloved father, the elder Luther, 3) and even though
I wish him such an easy and godly death in Christ that he can rest in
peace, freed from this rage and the monstrosities of the world, my whole
inner being is significantly moved. For it was from him that God gave me
life and education. May the grace of God be with you always, amen.
Greetings to Spenglern, to whom I will write next, when I have become
more cheerful. On the day of Pentecost itself \[June 5\] 1530.

1\) In Latin: *discere,* since Luther here transferred the so frequent
confusion of \"to teach\" and \"to learn\" also to Latin.

2\) See St. Louis edition, vol. VIII, 1867.

3\) This must have happened during the course of the day, because the
previous letter, which was written \"early\" the same day, does not yet
report anything about it. Luther\'s father had died on May 29.

We will leave here and change the place because of the number of those
who come here; tomorrow we will move. Mrs. Argula von Stauffen has been
with us, and Hans Reinick von Mansfeld. \"The pilgrimage wants to become
too large here\"; the prince wants to take offense at it.

**No. 1566 .**

(Feste Coburg.) June 5, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther complains about the silence of his friends in Augsburg and
reports the death of his father 2c.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 18 b. Printed by
Schütze, vol. II, p. 137; by De Wette,

Vol. IV, p. 32 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 366.

Grace and peace in Christ! I wrote in the last letter, my dear Philip,
that we were annoyed that you let the messenger return to us empty,
since you are so many, and almost all of you are *scribaces*. Now you
have already let the second messenger return equally empty, the former
messenger of Apel, but now 4) the wagoner of the Wildprets of Coburg. I
cannot think enough about whether you are so negligent or whether you
are unwilling, since you know that we here in the desert, as it were in
a thirsty land, long for your letters, from which we can learn all about
yours. We have indeed heard that the emperor has ordered the Augsburgs
to release the recruited soldiers and to remove the chains in the
streets. 5)

The day before yesterday \[June 3\] Argula von Stauffen was here,
telling of the extraordinary pomp with which the Duke of Bavaria will
receive the Emperor in Munich, with spectacles and other new honors.
^6)^ Yes, from Nuremberg they are beginning to invite us\...

4\) Instead of *hunc* we have assumed *nunc.* - The venison for the
Elector was sent from Coburg to Augsburg. See St. Louis Edition Vol.
XVI, 909, No. 982.

5\) Both, the recruitment of mercenaries and the blocking off of the
streets with chains, had been done in order to counteract possible
tumults that might arise upon the arrival of the emperor with foreign
warriors.

6\) The description of these festivities is found in the St. Louis
edition, vol. XVI, 710 ff, no. 935.

**1468** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1506. 1567. **1469**

If this happens, it is a sign of God\'s wrath against the bishops, which
cannot be appeased, that he himself will not listen to our petitions
made on their behalf.

If the judgments about my booklet 1) should turn out differently, then
do not let that move you; my God is a God of the foolish and is used to
ridicule the wise. Therefore, I also do not care about them.

Today only Hans Reinicke has written that my extremely dear father, Hans
Luther the Elder, has passed away from this life, just -on Sunday Exaudi
\[May 29\] at one o\'clock. This death has truly put me into mourning,
which I remember not only for nature, but also for the exceedingly kind
love, because through him my Creator has given me all that I am and
have; and although I am comforted by the fact that he writes that he has
gently fallen asleep strong in the faith of Christ, the lamentation and
the memory of the exceedingly sweet contact with him has shaken my
innermost being, so that I have hardly ever despised death so much. But
\"the righteous are snatched away from calamity and enter into rest\"
\[Isa. 57:1. f.\], namely, so often do we die before we die ONCE. I now
enter into the inheritance of the name that I am almost the oldest
Luther in my family. I am now also entitled not only to the
approximation, but also to the right to follow him through death into
the kingdom of Christ, which he graciously bestows upon us all, for
whose sake we are the most miserable of all men and the reproach of the
whole world. Therefore, since I am all too afflicted, I do not write
more expansively now, because it is fair and godly that I, as a son,
should entrust such a father, from whom the Father of mercies has
received me and by whose sweat I have been nourished and formed, as I
am. Indeed, I rejoice that he lived until these times, that he could see
the light of truth. Praise be to God in all that he does.

1\) \"Admonition to the Clergy, Assembled at the Imperial Diet at
Augsburg.\" St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 945, no. 1000.

and counsel for ever and ever, amen. Other things at another time.
Greetings to all of ours. On the day of Pentecost itself \[June 5\]
1530.

Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1567.**

Coburg Fortress. June 5, 1530.

**To the abbot Friedrich Pistorius in Nuremberg.**

Luther gives thanks for a gift and gives his opinion that the oath of a
papal abbot is void.

Handwritten at Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 21 b; again there
fol. 151 b and in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 134;
in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 34; in Scbirrmacher, p. 378 and in Erlanger
Briefwechsel, vol. VII, p. 369.

> To the in Christ highly venerable Mr. Friedrich, head of the Aegidien
> monastery in Nuremberg, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord! I have received the sword you sent,
dear man, although it was not necessary to deprive you of it. Poor me, I
have nothing to give but my empty letter.

About the oath, about which you, worthy lord, desire \[my opinion\],
this is my opinion, that it is first of all devoured by itself by saying
that it happened to the bishops who enter \[into their office\] in a
lawful way. But where are such bishops nowadays, who enter in a
canonical way, and do not rather buy from Rome by simony, then enter
elsewhere as thieves and robbers, so that they slaughter and perish?
Since they are not bishops, nor do they want to be bishops according to
Christ, they could not demand such an oath, nor could anyone take it,
and it is completely null and void and must be annulled until he \[the
bishop\] enters in a canonical way, and does what the Holy Spirit
commands a bishop to do Tit. 2 and 1 Tim. 2. And so it \[the oath\] is
null and void as far as the person of the one who demands it is
concerned. Then, even if the person were fit, as even the tyrant must
keep that which has been sworn, yet the thing itself which is sworn
cannot be performed without dishonor to the name of GOD by which it is
sworn. For he requires that Christ be denied, and that

**1470** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1567. 1568. 1569. **1471**

He said that he would not allow his abominations to be carried out in
his place and that his soul would be destroyed by his corrupt obedience
to him. But if he wanted to change the matter, that is, to admit the
gospel, even to demand it, he would rightly be sworn in. 1) But they do
not, or rather they want to perish. But they do not do that, or rather
want to go to ruin. Therefore, both in person and in substance, this
oath has been nothing, is nothing and will be nothing, but must be
condemned and trampled underfoot. Let him keep it who is an abbot, that
is, who is a comrade of ruin and abomination. Aegidius no longer has an
abbot in Nuremberg 2) so that the oath has also fallen away for the sake
of the person who must take it. I consider this to be the truth, and
you, worthy lord, will take it for the best. On the day of Pentecost
itself \[June 5\] 1530. Worthy Lord,

> Your most devoted Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1568.**

(Feste Coburg.) June 7, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther complains again about the silence of his friends in Augsburg.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 23. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 139; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 35 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 370.

Grace and peace in Christ! I see that all of you have decided to plague
us with silence; therefore, so that we do not harden ourselves
unavenged, we announce to you by this letter that from now on we want to
compete with you in silence, and if you perhaps despise this, I praise
the Wittenbergers, who, although they are very busy, write three times
before you idle people write once. I have received a consolation about
the death of my extremely dear father; if you want to know it, you can
learn it from this letter of Michael Cölius 3).

1\) We have adopted the reading of *Cod. Rostoch*.: *ei* adopted instead
of *si* or she in the other editions.

2\) On July 12, 1525, Abbot Pistorius had handed over his monastery to
the Alms Office.

3\) Cölius had been court preacher in Mansfeld since 1525. He was
present at the death of Luther\'s father and also at Luther\'s death in
Eisleben, where he preached a funeral sermon. He died on Dec. 13, 1559.

see. Here I stop the pen, so that I do not make you more silent by
writing. Greetings to all of us. The grace of God be with you, Amen.
June 7, 1530.

My mistress Käthe writes that the Elbe has leaked anew, although there
has not yet been the slightest rain. Many waters are many monstrosities.
Farewell. Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1569 .**

Augsburg. June 12, 1530.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

Jonas goes on to explain at length why he and the friends in Augsburg
\"cannot be blamed\" for Luther not receiving letters. About the
imminent arrival of the emperor. He reports the death of the imperial
chancellor Mercurinus and of Count zu Salm, a famous war colonel, whose
passing at this time was to be greatly regretted. Agricola and Schnepf
had preached the main Christian doctrines in front of a large audience,
but as soon as they had taught about the Holy Communion and against the
Sacramentarians, the large number of Zwinglians there had become
extremely unwilling. The largest crowd was Michael Cellarius (Keller), a
Zwinglian. He asked Luther to write more frequent letters of comfort to
Melanchthon, who was making a lot of trouble for himself. From Daniel
Bomberg, the editor of Hebrew Bibles. Finally, he asks for a comfort
letter for his wife.

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. Vol. I, fol. 93 (very damaged). Printed
in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 126; in Kawerau, Jonas\' Briefwechsel, vol. I,
p. 149 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VII, p. 371.

> To the exceedingly faithful and loud preacher of Christ, D. Martin
> Luther, his very dear father in the Lord.

\"Doct. Martins zu eigen Handen.\"

Grace and peace of God through Christ! Since I had recently received a
letter from Pomerania in Wittenberg and then also from my house servant
4) about the death of my exceedingly dear and beloved son, who lived
only three days in this world, my dearest father in the Lord, and had
learned the same from a letter from my wife, who somewhat darkly, I do
not know from what godly dissimulation, hinted at the same case in a
gentle and coy manner, 5) Philippus and I have immediately responded to
our

4\) This will be the \"scribe Viola\" mentioned by Melanchthon in his
letter of May 22. See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 688, no. 927.

5\) Compare No. 1551. - About the things of the messenger, see No. 1557.

**1472**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1569.

**1473**

I hired a messenger at your expense, who was to run first to you in
Coburg, then to Wittenberg to my wife quickly and quickly. For I was
very worried about my wife\'s health, and therefore I had asked you in
my letter that you would deign to write a letter of comfort to her, and
in this sad case of mine, with which the Lord has again wanted to
exercise me, according to His holy will, I also awaited your answer 1)
so that there would be something with which I could calm myself. For
nothing is more pleasant to me than the conversation with you when you
are present, and your letters in your absence. But this messenger of
ours, who was sent to bring us back an answer from you, either did not
come to Coburg at that time, or he lost the bundle of letters to you on
the journey, or he is an impostor and a very great scoundrel. 2) For
since you complain about our silence in the letter \[No. 1566\] that he
brought \[to us\] 3) and demand from us the duty \[of writing\] that we
have written so abundantly through the same messenger, we can assume
nothing else than that our letters have not reached you at all, be it
that this has happened through some \[coincidence\] and little finger of
Satan or through the malice or disloyalty of the messenger. We at least
gave this one a large bundle, we wrote the name Coburg on it, \[also\]
4) the name of the captain; 5) we also dropped (*communicavimus)*
something of a \[secret, and\] 6) added: of the prince and even of the
\[pope\], so that the letters would be delivered faithfully. But now we
are all angry that they have not been delivered, and we are almost
bursting with anger. But this does not only annoy us for your sake.

1\) This answer will be No. 1559. It can be inferred from this that
Jonas did not receive Luther\'s letter of May 19, No. 1554.

2\) In any case, the messenger was innocent, because as we see from
Luther\'s letter to Jakob Probst of June 1, Luther received
Melanchthon\'s letter of May 22.

3\) Here and in the following lines the final margin of the sheet is
torn off. We have tried to fill in what is missing according to the
sense as far as we could. Here we have inserted nodis; in the following
gap: *scribendi*; in the third: *scrisimus*; in the fourth: *casu*.

4\) *etiam* added by us.

5\) *praefecti*. \... This refers to the castle of Coburg, von
Falkenstein.

6\) *myst\....* we have added *mysterio* st, the following gap is filled
by *pontificis. -* After *addidimus* Jonas himself crossed out the
words: *nostra et etium,* but Kolde retained them in the text.

whose loneliness 7) is increased by this silence of ours, however,
through no fault of ours, 8) but also for our sake and especially for
mine, who is now eagerly awaiting your extremely pleasant letters this
whole month. But now you see, my dear father, that this silence is not
to be construed against us, and we will make every effort to compensate
for this lack of letters by frequency in the future.

As far as the common matter of the Imperial Diet is concerned, the
Emperor has not yet arrived, but it is said that he will certainly be
here by next Wednesday or Friday 9) and will first celebrate the Feast
of Corpus Christi in Munich with the Bavarian princes, and yet there are
people who claim for certain that he will come here the day after
tomorrow, so that the Lutheran princes may go with the Emperor in the
pomp of the procession 2c. From both courts, that of the Emperor as well
as that of Ferdinand, many 10) Spaniards on horses, on mules, in
carriages have already arrived as forerunners, and already that brother
of Ehinger 11) has arrived, who, as it was said, has received a new
island as a gift. The latter celebrated his wedding here, and it is said
that now, after so many forerunners, the emperor will certainly be
there. The chief chancellor, Mr. Mercurinus, who recently became a
cardinal, and who was said to be of all people at the emperor\'s court
the most approvingly opposed to the Lutheran doctrine, and who with a
sincere mind sought ways to give peace to Germany, died, if I am not
mistaken, on the Saturday before Pentecost. There is some news of this
here, and it is not doubtful. It is said that he was very old, quite at
the end of his life; he had passed his 77th year. The death was not
untimely, but nevertheless, I do not know by what miraculous fate,
sudden. Since the emperor was about to leave for the Imperial Diet in
Insbruck, Mercurinus, having already packed and arranged his belongings,
had also left.

7\) We agree with Kawerau that after *solitudo* no gap is to be assumed.
The Erl. Briefw. would like to add *tua*.

8\) This much seems to be clear from this letter, however, that the
Augsburgs did not write from May 22 to June 12, i.e. a full three weeks,
despite Melanchthon\'s assurances in the letter of June 25 that he had
written every week.

9\) That is, the 15th or 17th of June, The Emperor arrived on the 15th.

10\) Kolde reads *mihi* instead of *multi*.

11\) The imperial council Ulrich Ehinger, whose brother Johann, mayor of
Memmingen, had been one of the envoys to the emperor. See St. Louis
edition, Vol. XVI, 471, No. 852.

**1474**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1569.

**1475**

He had come down from his room, had said goodbye to the landlord, and
(it is wonderful to hear) as he was about to mount the horse or the
carriage, he suddenly felt a kind of faintness and I don\'t know what
kind of pain all over his body, but the man\'s voice did not immediately
fail him, but he said: I feel that I don\'t know what kind of dwindling
of all strength is coming over me, and so he fell to the ground dead.
This has been attributed to Duke George, and our bridge has heard this
from Doctor Pistor, George\'s chancellor. Some think that the man,
exhausted by the exceedingly great and prolonged labors at court, and
broken by the worries and cares of the very great affairs, thus died,
since old age now fell heavily upon him, from the stroke, or also from
old age itself, which in itself is a disease; others think, because he
seemed to give a little too healthy and fair counsel in regard to this
matter of religion, that he had been struck by a Guelph weapon, or had
drunk a Venetian soup. However it may be, it is a sign from God that is
not very good that such a great man dies just at the beginning of the
Diet and on the journey to it. Moreover, the Count of Salm, that highly
famous count who handed over the King of France, who had been captured
in battle, to the Emperor as a defeated man and prisoner, has recently
passed away; he has also departed in these days. Behold, my dear father,
the highest man in the council and then the greatest leader in warlike
affairs are taken away almost at the same time. What those may think
whom God warns by such examples, I do not know. I certainly wish that
both of them were alive, for I hear that they were good men and lights
of the court. Also the confessor of the emperor, who also shortly before
had received the badge of honor of the Cardinal\'s hat 1), is also said
to be dead. But it is said that he died out of pure carnal sadness,
because the emperor, after he had received the cardinal dignity,
excluded him from his closer contact and did not want to have such a
great gentleman as a confessor.

But so that I may also write something to you about the condition of
this city, whose appearance is truly very miserable and lamentable,
perhaps it would be useful to first touch on something about our
preachers. M. Agricola of Eisleben, the preacher of our court, has, from
the

1\) Kolde has put a question mark on *Galeri.*

In his sermon, he dealt with several main articles of Christian
doctrine: of faith, of works, of the sacraments, and under these
articles he preached for four days against the error of the
sacramentarians. There he touched a wasps\' nest, and the crowd takes it
with the utmost displeasure that in this city the Zwinglian doctrine is
condemned or even lightly hyped. The Prince of Hesse has not yet been to
our sermons, not even with our Prince. He raised that well-known dispute
with Eisleben 2) by claiming that Eisleben had publicly sinned, I don\'t
know what, against Christian love, therefore it was not possible that he
could edify 2c. But you know that another cause could be behind it;
about that verbally, if something else is not objected to in the
meantime. The Margrave, 3) Duke Ernst of Lüneburg, the Prince of Anhalt
and several others attend our sermons. The preacher of the Prince of
Hesse, Schnepf, has so far preached in another church, St. Ulrich\'s,
before a very large audience and with the whole city in attendance, also
before a larger crowd than ours, and taught exceedingly loudly. But
today, on Trinity Day, he began to touch on the article of the
Sacrament, and said: he did not hate the persons, Zwingli rc.^4)^ or
others, but this whole doctrine was \[ungodly\]. 5) Then the crowd
suddenly began to get excited and to hiss and murmur with each other,
then they began to go straight away from the church and to give obvious
signs of an offended mind and their excitement. But Schnepf remained
firm as he had begun, \[and with\] great strength of body and spirit he
brought \[the sermon\] to an end. About the Prince of Hesse another time
orally. At another time \[more\]. Augsburg is completely devoted to a
certain Michael 6) and it swears by his words. He was in Wittenberg for
a while and went out from us, but he was not of us \[1 John 2:19\]: an
un

2\) Because of the collection of proverbs. See No. 1462.

3\) George of Brandenburg. - The \"Prince of Anhalt\" is Wolfgang, who
came in the entourage of the Elector. Cf. St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI,
661, No. 910.

4\) Instead of *et,* we assumed *etc.*

5\) We have filled this gap by *impiam*; the following one by
\[*emo*\]*tionis*; the third by *et cum*; the fourth by *sermonem* and
the fifth by *plura*.

6\) Michael Cellarius (Keller) from Memmingen, who was preacher at the
Barfüßerkirche since 1526. A stay in Wittenberg is not provable,
therefore D. Enders thinks that Jonas is confused with Martin Cellarius.

**1476** Letters from the year

1530\. no. 1569. 1570. **1477**

learned man, yet confident and presumptuous, and equipped with a
wonderful, more than Swabian loquacity. In front of him, Urban Rhegius,
Doctor Frosch and Doctor Stephan stink here in the large crowd. ^1)^ One
can hardly see two hundred listeners in Urban\'s sermons, in Michael\'s
sermons six thousand people. But this is especially peculiar to the
German people, that they are exceedingly ungrateful \[for\] 2) the
highest benefits of God, \[but at\] new things they straighten their
ears and pay the most eager attention. But so that I may also report
something cheerful in the long letter in which I am endeavoring to write
in order to do enough for that faithless messenger of ours, you should
know, 3) my \[dear father, that we are\] otherwise quite well through
the Lord; in particular, that the troubles in this common matter, as is
\[his nature,\] plague the Lord Philip quite well. He admits that these
exceedingly great things have now come to depend on no human counsel,
but nevertheless he would gladly be present at the deliberations in
heaven (as we are all minded) and would gladly give counsel to God, if
He would (as you are wont to speak) admit us as counselors. I would have
you write to him very often for our mutual comfort, yours and ours. We
pray, and in such great distresses and in such times we cry out to
heaven. What more can we do? If the prayers of the godly do not snatch
us from these powers (*imperiis*), no human advice will pull us out.

In these days the gentleman Daniel Bomben^4)^ was with us, the one whose
name you read at the end of the Hebrew Bible, who maintains at his
expense in Venice until this day well learned people in Hebrew and has
published for us already times a Bible, Concordances 2c., and he alone
has a very large Officin. He is a very educated man and has discussed
many things with us in a friendly and amiable manner; he has given
remembrance to the Kabbalah 2c.: in the word *baroschis* \[xxxxxx\]are
the years from the time of his birth.

creation of the world to the passion of Christ, and

1\) Agricola (box builder).

2\) Here we have added *pro*; in the following gap *sed ad; in the*
third *avidissime; in the* fourth scribere; in the fifth
*satisfact*\[ione\]; in the sixth *pator, nos; in the* seventh
inp\[rimis\] and in the eighth *suo more.*

3\) Instead of *scias,* Kolde has read *suas.*

4\) In the text *Bamberga*, but his name was Bomberg. In 1517, he
established a printing house in Venice devoted exclusively to Hebrew
literature, which flourished until 1550. It produced several good
editions of the Bible.

and the like. He seems to be completely judaizing in the manner of those
who, not preserved by the knowledge of godliness, hebraise too much; but
otherwise he is a very good and finely educated man. But here I stop. I
have wanted to write the greatest trifles to you, my dearest father, and
to be exceedingly garrulous after the manner of Jonah, lest you, as you
threaten, continue to be silent against us. Your truly prophetic book 5)
is read by all the godly, gods and men applaud it, only Satan is angry
and gnashes his teeth.

I ask you to send a letter of comfort to my wife, or some other small
letter, so that you will not renew the memory of the death of my son.
^6)^ The Lord mercifully visits me here and elsewhere, and also comforts
me in the most merciful way. I only now see how 7) many and innumerable
are the people for whom we, by God\'s grace, are exceedingly rich in all
spiritual blessings. Fare well in Christ. Given at Augsburg, on the day
of the Most Holy Trinity \[June 12\] in the year of the Lord 2c. 30.

J. Jonas, your son.

**No. 1570.**

Augsburg. June 13, 1530.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

Jonas reports that 500 copies of Luther\'s \"Admonition to the Clergy\"
have already been sold in Augsburg, even to opponents who had expected a
retraction. About a statement by Fabian voll Feilitzsch. Of the great
impression made by that writing, which is only reviled by the
sacramentarians. Of a joke that a citizen of Augsburg made with Faber,
and of a conversation Melanchthon had with Duke Heinrich of Brunswick,
who had spoken approvingly about various demands of the Protestants.
Finally, he expresses his condolences over the death of Luther\'s
father.

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. Vol. I, fol. 96. Printed in Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 131; in Kawerau, Jonas\' Briefwechsel, vol. I, p. 154 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 379.

Grace and peace of God in Christ! Eight days ago, a certain bookkeeper
published your book \"To those gathered here on the Reichstag

5\) The \"Admonition to the Clergy\" 2c.

6\) Instead of *renoves* in Erl. Briefw. reads Kolde: *reuiues* with
(*sic*).

7\) Here Jonas has crossed out *coeci*, which the Erl. Briefwechsel has
put back into the text after Kawerau\'s process, because it \"belongs
here after all\".

**1478** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1570. **1479**

I have brought the \"ecclesiastical prelates\" here, my dearest father,
and put out 500 copies for sale, which soon found their buyers. For they
were also taken up with extraordinary eagerness by the adversaries, who
wished to know what you would now dare to write, while you, as they
interpret it, were so much frightened by the arrival of the emperor. For
what else could they have meant than that you would now at this time be
intent on a retraction and a humble apology or could ever write
something else: which they have now, if everything does not deceive me,
with complete Lutheran pusillanimity written down perfectly and in every
respect (as the godly could only wish) well worked out, well executed
and exceedingly decided. Mr. Fabian Feilitzsch has rightly said about
the preface to the book of Christian freedom 1): If the pope and the
bishops can be reconciled so easily, why have they not been invited to
peace and concord sooner by this kind of peacemaking? But, joking aside,
my dear father, I do not doubt that the Lord has spoken through you in
this little book. We have learned by many examples that the Pharisees,
when asked in a calm manner, boast, but when scolded quite freely,
become more pliant. I thought that at this time the minds of some would
be extraordinarily irritated and inflamed to fiercer hatred by this
exceedingly frank, prickly and, as they say, very vehement writing, but
by God\'s grace I see that Christ is victorious in you, and that your
mouth and wisdom are given to you, especially in the case of adversity,
which they can neither resist \[Luc. 21:15\] nor dare to do so. In all
those who contradict us, I see that by this unexpected, admirable and
exceedingly powerful *apologia,* even the great ones are so struck that
they themselves confess that this is and always has been the very
concept of truth, so that no one can dare to contradict it, to speak
against it.

Almost only the Sacramentarians revile this book and say that you plead
for mercy with a certain art and in a hidden way, but nevertheless even
they are instructed and many of them deny that there is anything in this
book that you did not write from the best heart and with the highest
zeal and endeavor to benefit the churches and the commonwealth.

1\) St. Louis Edition, Vol. XV, 783, No- 346.

counsel. I give thanks to Christ for his unspeakable gift. I at least
hope that the Lord will hear us wretched sinners and preserve the course
of the Word under so many and so great temptations.

I mentioned the Reichstag in the other letter. Two days ago Johann
Faber, the Costnitzer, came to Augsburg, who, as one has heard from his
brother, who is a citizen here in Augsburg, has become bishop of Vienna.
When it was said that he was coming and approaching the city, a local
Augsburg citizen, who is a good Lutheran, posed as if he were a papist,
quickly mounted a horse and hurried to meet Faber, and spoke to him
while the latter was sitting on the horse, as if he could not suffer a
delay because of love. He complained to him about many things: how the
Lutheran princes had brought preachers with them who preached against
the papist religion, and he inquired of Faber whether he knew what the
emperor intended to do with the Lutherans, and so he fished out many
things from him and learned them. Afterwards, he ridiculed everything to
the utmost among his friends. \"That was quite a basic talk.\"

Today Mr. Philippus was called to Mr. Heinrich, the Duke of Brunswick,
who is in Italy 2c. He talked a lot with him about Antiochus 2) and his
thoughts and plans. He testified sufficiently that he disliked all the
counsels that Antiochus was pursuing with the Strasbourg storm and in
this whole matter with the conclusion of alliances 2c. Among other
things, this Duke of Brunswick discussed some very good things about the
common cause with Philip. For he said that he, too, had been reading the
New Testament for some time, perhaps since his return from Italy, and he
had gained much fruit from this reading: he saw that both forms were
free 2c.; the marriage of priests, the freedom of the monastic state
2c., the abolition of the buying fair 2c., the freedom in food were
articles of such a kind that could not rightly be condemned, and in
them, with God\'s help, ways to harmony could be found. But he would
never agree with those who completely abolished the sacrament of the
Lord\'s Supper, as with the Zwinglians 2c. We are all amazed at this
change in such a prince, but the Lord will perhaps work even greater
things, and we

2\) This refers to Landgrave Philip of Hesse, not to Archduke Ferdinand,
as Kolde and Kawerau think.

**1480** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1570. 1571. 1572. **1481**

We cannot yet be sure of anything, given the great variability and
diversity of the expressions of the will. Nevertheless, they are good
signs. Let us continue to cast our concern on the Lord in prayer.

D. Cochläus was at dinner with us yesterday, and he now speaks more
calmly of both forms and the articles than ever before. But during the
meal we answered quite freely to some harsh and poisonous speeches.

I received news of the death of your father, the worthy old man, through
your letter 1); I was greatly saddened by this news for your sake, but
nevertheless, since the worthy old man has undoubtedly fallen asleep in
Christ at a great age, we must give thanks to God that he has lived so
long and has departed from this life in the confession of the Gospel,
now that the Gospel of Christ has been spread through you, his son, and
this Christ has been known.

Greet, I beg you, in your letter in my name your wife, \"Muhme Lenen\",
your son Johannes and your little daughter Magdalena. Given at Augsburg,
in haste, on the day after Trinity \[June 13\] in the year 2c. of the
Lord 30.

> J. Jonas.

I ask you to remember us in your prayers, my best Father.

Tomorrow, they say, the emperor will certainly be here; tonight he will
come to Bruck, 5 \[to\] 6 miles from Augsburg.

**No. 15 71.**

(Augsburg.) (June 13, 1530.) 2)

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

Melanchthon gives as the reason for his silence that he had waited for
the fulfillment of his request that Luther write to the landgrave to
admonish him from an alliance with the Zwinglians, who reproached him
for overrunning the papists with war. About the behavior of the papists.
About the Emperor\'s request to the Elector of Saxony to come to him,
and about the Emperor\'s imminent arrival. About Erasmus\' illness and
his own worries.

A copy is found in Paris in the *biblioth. teempli St. Genovevae*,
*Cod*. D, 54^3^ . Printed in *Corp. Ref.,* vol. IV, 1008 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VII, p. 383.

1\) The letter to Melanchthon of June 5 will be meant.

2\) In the copy, the letter is undated. The date, however, is certain
from the previous letter, because there as well as here it is reported
that Melanchthon had talked with Duke Heinrich of Brunswick
[today.]{.underline}

Hail! The waiting for your letter to the landgrave has tormented me so
much that I could not write anything in the meantime. 3) I asked you to
write a letter to him so that he would not plunge into the ungodly cause
of the Zwinglish-minded (xxx xxxxxxxxxxxx).

For he is extremely at odds with everyone over this matter. Today, Henry
of Brunswick has complained to me very severely about the disputations
of the landgrave in this matter, and asks that we make every effort that
he not be separated from us. The Zwinglians are extraordinarily
persecuting him. Here they publicly boast that they will attack the
empire. Such a great rage has taken possession of their minds. And you
are regarded by many as having prophesied in your booklet about the
spirit of Münzer. ^4)^ It is undoubtedly driving that party. Our
adversaries triumph as if they had completely defeated us. We cannot yet
guess anything about the emperor\'s will, at least he has not made
anything known about it yet. He has absent-mindedly disputed with us by
summoning our prince to him, but with this condition that he should not
have an alliance. 5) I believe that he still suspects that there is an
alliance with us. The emperor will be here within two days. Erasmus is
dangerously ill and it is said that he is profoundly insane by some kind
of madness. I am almost consumed by the most miserable worries.
Therefore, you will ask Christ for us.

**No. 15 72.**

Augsburg. June 18, 1530.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

Detailed report on the emperor\'s entry into Augsburg and the
negotiations with the princes that immediately followed. The emperor had
brought fifteen doctors from Spain. After the death of Mercurinus, there
was no hope for a union. The pope had promised money and warriors to
suppress the Lutherans. Melanchthon was tormented by worries,

3\) On May 22, Melanchthon had made the urgent request that Luther write
to the Landgrave (see St. Louis ed., vol. XVI, 689, s 4). It was not
until June 20 that Luther complied with this request, but sooner than
this letter had reached his hands, for he did not receive it until June
21 or 22, and, being incensed at the long silence of his friends in
Augsburg, at first did not want to read it at all (cf. Melanchthon\'s
letter to Luther of June 26, St. Louiser Ausg., vol. XVI, 896, no. 975).

4\) This is \"Ein Brief an die Fürsten zu Sachsen von dem aufrührischen
Geist,\" St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, **4,** No. 763.

5\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 697.

**1482** Letters from the year 1530. No. 1572. **1483**

but the fruit of the church\'s prayer was felt under all the threats.
The emperor had forbidden preaching, but in the next few days the
opponents should see from the articles to be handed over that the
evangelicals confess the gospel of Christ. At the end a short message.

The original is in Hamburg, Vol. I, fol. 212. Printed in Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 134; in Kawerau, Jonas\' Briefwechsel, Vol. I, p. 157 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VII, p. 385.

> To the true and faithful apostle of our Lord Jesus Christ, D. Martin
> Luther 2c., my father, who is most dear to me of all men.

\"Doctor Martins at Your Own Hand.\"

Grace and peace of God in Christ! Just on St. Vitus\' Day, the day
before the Feast of Corpus Christi, the Emperor, whom the Estates of the
Empire had been expecting for about two months, has now entered
Augsburg. ^1)^ How his majesty was met, how the emperor was also
received outside the city with a speech by the Cardinal of Mainz, and
about all the very great splendor, we are sending you a German text
written by Spalatin, 2) although I know that you do not care much about
these things. Through this messenger, my dearest father, you shall have
this about the entry for the time being. 3) The princes of Bavaria led
the emperor with five hundred well-equipped horsemen, equipped with
spears and dressed in red. In the center of the city the monks and the
canons, these two most poisonous enemies of the word here, received the
emperor with bells and organ sound, dressed in Aaronic clothes, but 2c.;
these antics and powerless and despondent mockeries against the gospel
are not unknown to you. Three things I have in mind in all the pomp: the
Emperor\'s gesture, our Elector, who carried the sword in front, and in
which place the Cardinals (*Cardines*) 4) of the Holy Roman Church went.
Next in front of the Emperor rode our most Serene Elector, who carried
the silver sword. The other Electors went ahead, then the Emperor came
alone under

1\) About the Emperor\'s entry into Augsburg compare the documents in
the 16th volume of the St. Louis edition, Col. 708ff, No.935ff.

2\) Perhaps this is the relation found in the St. Louis edition, Vol.
XVI, 732, No. 937.

3\) This sentence finds its understanding in the fact that Jonas had
first written *mittemus*, which was later corrected to *mittimus,* after
he had received Spalatin\'s relation, as we see from the postscript.

4\) Campegius, Matthew Lang of Salzburg and Bernard of Cles of Trident.

a completely golden umbrella roof, dressed in a golden robe, with horse
blankets set with precious stones, with a golden sword decorated with
precious stones 2c., in short, in a more than royal splendor. The
emperor was followed first by King Ferdinand on the right and Cardinal
Campegius on the left. Outside the city, when the procession (pompa) was
ordered, it was long argued whether the legate should go a *latere*
before the king or vice versa, but the times have won the victory, which
in the present changes 5) have a very great force. The Cardinal had to
bear it with equanimity that he went to the side of the King. When one
came into the city, the Cardinal did not bless anyone by hand movements,
fearing that the foreign and Welsh blessings would be mocked, since our
Germans have learned the sanctity of the Welsh and their concern for
religion 2c. and indeed have become thoroughly acquainted with it,
especially here in the neighborhood of the Alps. Outside the city,
however, when the princes who had gone to meet the Emperor were already
greeting him, Cardinal Campegius gave them all a free blessing by the
movement of two little fingers. When the other Electors fell on their
knees, the Elector of Saxony, standing, received or rather spurned the
blessing that was stored in the Cardinal\'s hand (*Cardinaliciae
chirothecae*). Being asked by the Margrave if he would not also bend the
knee, he answered: \"I let the rogue have a good year!\" 2c. Before GOD
one should bend the knees. While they were arranging themselves and now
approaching the city, almost five hours passed, \"and there was such a
crowd that many gentlemen, also our young lord, rode home from the order
before to the inn, so that there would be room for the other stuff\" 2c.
The emperor therefore entered the gate at eight o\'clock in the evening
or in the middle of the eighth hour, the procession and the cavalry were
led through the middle of the city to the cathedral church, and barely
at nine o\'clock he arrived at the inn. When the other princes and
bishops left, each to his own inn, our Elector, Margrave George, the
Elector of Lüneburg, and Hesse were immediately asked to stay, for the
emperor had something he wanted to present to them. So much so, they
decided to attack those who would not suspect this 2c. These princes,
however, the emperor asked immediately mjt the saying of the living

5\) In Kolde : *imitationibus* instead of: mutationibus.

**1484**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1572.

**1485**

Stimnie (vivae *vocis oraculo*, as the jurists speak) that immediately
the next day our preachers should desist \[from preaching\]. Something
has been added of the procession of the feast of Corpus Christi 2c. Of
these things, therefore, consultations are now taking place at court and
with us, 1) and yet God would that you were with us; how we would like
that, the Lord Philip and the rest of us, or that we had your counsel
and opinion! But now this is over. The Prince did not go along in the
Corpus Christi procession, nor the younger \[Prince\], nor Margrave
George, nor the Hessian, nor Lüneburg 2c. The emperor brought 15 Spanish
doctors, monks and others. Today Ziegler wrote from Ferrara to Philippus
\[about the same\] 2). He writes that those Spaniards are ignorant of
godliness and \[of the Scriptures\]. Cornelius Schopper,^3)^ whom you
know, that eloquent man whom the expelled King of Denmark had with him
at Wittenberg, has talked quite confidentially with Philip and with me
about the common cause. He says that now that Mercurinus, the only
author and mediator of peace, is dead, he despairs of \[establishing\]
harmony, because the Welsh are pressing the emperor against the
Lutherans with such impetuosity, and the pope promises troops of war,
money, auxiliaries and assistance of every kind, and that for a long
time, against the Lutherans. Although frightening rumors about the Turk
have been spread by quite reliable people, in the meantime one keeps
silent about it (dear God, what blindness Christ gives to His enemies!),
and yet one sees that this is of all the greatest evil that Germany is
facing. We are attacked here by Pharisaic certainty, by Pharisaic
contempt, arrogance and hatred, and with quite satanic arts. The Lord
Philip, as you know the man, is miserably tormented by the worries and
cares of such a great cause, and we all also learn here in a good school
what it is that the godly are full \"of the proud

1\) Cf. the concern of the Saxon theologians, St. Louis edition, vol.
XVI, 680, no. 923.

2\) The Erl. Briefw. notes: \"There is a small word missing at the
beginning of the line, of which only *d can* be read, the rest has been
torn out by the letter folding.\" We have *de iis* conjicirt. The gap
immediately following, where a word has become indissoluble by an ink
blot, we have filled in by *scripturae.*

3\) Schopper (Schepper, *Scepperus*), after your King Christiern of
Denmark ran out of money, entered the service of the Emperor, who made
him Secretary of State.

ridicule and the contempt of the hoped-for\". ^4)^ But we see daily,
under so many threats and afflictions of the Pharisees, the fruit of the
prayers of our Lutheran church and the power and effectiveness of the
catechism and the children\'s litanies. You, my dear father, continue to
pray as you do. The Lord has made us rich through you. We have the
Psalms, we have Paul, of whom we now see that it is clear and revealed
to us, although it is now closed and completely sealed to so many
doctors and wise men and mighty men.

Today, on Saturday, the Emperor, by a public proclamation made by four
trumpeters and by the voice of the herald, 5) has ordered the cessation
of all preaching on both sides throughout Augsburg, both ours and the
papists, for a time, until the matter is recognized, and only the bare
text of the Gospel is read before the Emperor and the princes. \"This
will make much gossip.\" But, my dear father, do not believe the rumors
of the great crowd unless you see our letters. We will, God willing,
hand over articles in the main next Tuesday \[June 21\] (as I hope),
then they will see that we freely confess the Gospel of Christ. I would
like you to write a letter of comfort to the prince soon. Farewell in
Christ, my dearest father, and greet your wife and your little son and
your daughter and \"Mume Lene\". Given in haste at Augsburg, on the
Saturday after Trinity \[June 18\] in the year of the Lord 2c. I ask
you, my dear father, to pray constantly for us.

From the bottom of your heart, your J. Jonas.

\"The Bishop of Mainz is holding his own until now, as is Duke Henry of
Brunswick. Things are on the right track.\" May the Lord have mercy.

Greetings, I beg you, in my name to M. Veit. Mr. Spalatin sends you the
history of the chanting at the emperor\'s entry. Philip and Mr. Agricola
greet you. I would like you, my dear father, to send very frequent
letters of comfort to Philip, but only in general, that he may be of
good cheer, since the greatness of the matter is such that it must be
governed not by human but by divine wisdom. Again, be well, my dearest
father.

From the heart your Jonas.

4\) Ps. 123, 4. The last words find written in Hebrew.

5\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 749, no. 944.

**1486**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1573. 1574. 1575.

**1487**

**No. 15 73.**

(Augsburg.) June 19, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 734, no. 938.

As we can see from the eighth volume of the Erlanger Briefw., p. 2,
which has come into our hands in the meantime, the original has the time
at the end: \"Sonntag post corp. xxxxxxx\" \[Sunday post corp.
xxxxxxx\]. \[June 19\] and the signature: xxxxxxxx.

**No. 1 574.**

Feste Coburg. June 19, 1530.

**To Caspar von Teutleben in Wittenberg.**

In a joking tone, Luther reports news about the Emperor\'s relations
with Venice, Florence, the Pope and France.

From *Acta Comit. August.* at the Helmstadt Library, in the Leipzig
Supplement, p. 63, no. 100; in Walch, vol. XXI, 305; in De Wette, vol. I
V, p. 37 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 154.

Grace and peace in Christ. Respectable, esteemed Doctor and dear good
friend! That you and your dear Sophia are well, I am glad to hear from
the bottom of my heart. I have no new newspaper to write to you, because
our Junkern Schweigler in Augsburg do not write anything to me, which
disturbs me not a little, and I know that your dear brother-in-law and
my good friend, Mr. Nicolaus Amsdorf, should become extremely angry with
them, if he knew that they had become such Schweigelinge, especially at
this time; he should also become a judge over them.

From hearsay I have heard that Venice has sent and given many hundreds
of thousands of florins to the Emperor, and Florence has offered five
tons of gold; but they will not accept them for the sake of the Pope,
who has promised to give body and goods to the Emperor, likewise the
French also at his *par ma foi,* as the Pope *in nomine Domini,* and is
*sanctissimum foedus,* a delicious thing in cap: *Non credimus*. But I
have heard from Doctor Martin Luther himself: If Venice, Pabst, and
Francis become good emperors from the heart, and do not put all their
money and goods into it (for there are three persons in one being, of an
incomprehensible anger and hatred against Imperial Maj. Maj., with
hypocrisy, lies and deceit), 1)

1\) These brackets are set by us.

until either they go to the bottom (that God help them), or bring the
pious noble blood of Carolum in fear and distress, then he wants to have
lost an ear and an eye. For *par ma foi* cannot forget the accident
before Pavia; so the Lord *in nomine Domini* 2) is first of all a born
whale, that is already too much; secondly he is a Florentine, that is
even worse; thirdly a whore child, that is the devil himself; and cannot
be as happy about the disgrace in sacked Rome as he is; the Venetians
are nothing else, because Venetians, that is said enough, also have
reasons according to their wickedness to take revenge on Maximilian\'s
blood; *haec omnia in cap.Firmiter credimus*. But God shall still help
the pious Carolo, who is a sheep among wolves, Amen. Greetings to your
dear Sophia. Hereby commanded by God, amen. *Ex Eremo*, on the 19th day
of June, Anno 1530.

Martin Luther.

**No. 15 75.**

(Feste Coburg.) June 19, 1530.

**To Hieronymus Weller in Wittenberg.**

Luther thanks Weller for taking care of his son and comforts him in his
melancholy.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst.* 108, fol. 25; in *Cod.
Rostoch*; in Gotha, Cod. 402. 4. fol. 185 and in Hamburg, Ms. 46. 4.
fol. 34. Printed in *H. Welleri* opp., p. 204; in Schütze, vol. II, p.
141; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 39 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 4.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have received two letters from you, my dear
Jerome, both of which were truly very pleasant to me, but the second one
much more pleasant than very pleasant, in which you write to me about my
son John that you are his teacher, but he is an industrious and diligent
student. I would indeed, if I could, very gladly do something again to
please you; what I am not able to do, Christ will repay. In addition,
Magister Veit has indicated to me that you are sometimes plagued by the
spirit of sadness. 3) These

2\) Pope Clement VII. Compare Table Talks, Cap. 27, § 10 and § 44. St.
Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 851. 870.

3\) In later letters of July and August 15, Luther also consoles Wellern
in his melancholy. Compare the Table Talks, Cap. 26, ?43 and ?44, St.
Louis edition, vol. XXII, 807 ff.

**1488**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1575. 1576.

**1489**

Affliction is most injurious to young people, as the Scripture says
\[Proverbs 17:22\], \"A saddened spirit dries up the bones,\" and
everywhere the Holy Spirit forbids this sadness, as Eccles. Sal. 11:9,
\"Rejoice, young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart be good\'er
things in thy youth\"; and shortly after \[v. 10\], \"Put away sadness
from thy heart, and put away evil from thy body.\" So also says
Sirach 1) Cap. 30, 22-25: \"Do not make yourself sad, and do not trouble
yourself with your own thoughts. For a merry heart is a man\'s life, and
his joy is his long life. Do good to thyself and comfort thy heart, and
drive away sadness from thee. For sadness kills many people, and yet
serves nowhere.\" So also Paul tells all the Corinthians \[2 Cor.
7:10.\] that the sadness of the world works death. Therefore, above all
things, you must firmly insist that these evil and sad thoughts are not
of GOD, but of the devil, because GOD is not a GOD of sadness, but a GOD
of comfort and cheerfulness, as Christ Himself says \[Matth. 22, 32.\]:
\"GOD is not a GOD of the dead, but of the living.\" But what is living
but being joyful in the LORD? Therefore get accustomed to such thoughts
here, so that you immediately drive them away and say, \"The Lord did
not send you. This plea is not from the one who called you. In the
beginning the struggle is hard, but through practice it will become
easier. For it is not you alone who must endure such thoughts, but all
the holy people; but they fought and prevailed. So do not give way to
evils, but face them all the more confidently. 2) The highest task in
this fight is not to look at these thoughts, not to investigate them or
to follow their *objects, but to* despise them like the whistling of a
goose and to pass them by. He who has learned this will be victorious,
he who has not learned it will be defeated. For sound at them and
dispute with them until they desist or give way voluntarily, that is,
irritate and strengthen them. As an example serve you

1\) Also here, as in the previous place, *Ecclesiast*. (Eccl. Sal.), but
it should be read *Ecclesiastic*. (Sirach) should be read.

2\) *Virg. Aen.*, lid. VI, v. 95.

The people of Israel who overcame their serpents, not by looking at them
or by wrestling with them, but by averting their gaze and looking
elsewhere, namely at the bronze serpent, were victorious. This is the
right and certain victory in this fight. Therefore, my dear Jerome, see
to it that you do not let these thoughts settle in your heart. Thus a
certain wise man answered a man who was thus afflicted, saying, \"How do
such evil thoughts come into my mind!\" He said, \"Let them fall out
again.\" This man taught by a very good saying. And another answered
someone who asked the same question: You cannot prevent the birds from
flying over your head, but you can prevent them from nesting in your
hair. 3) Therefore, you will be quite right if you joke with others or
do other pleasant things, and then do not feel guilty about the joke.
For God does not like that very trivial sadness. For the sadness because
of sins is short and at the same time pleasant because of the promise of
grace and the forgiveness of sins, but that is of the devil and without
promise, but a mere sorrow about useless and impossible things that
concern God. More when I will have returned. In the meantime, may you
greet your brother 4) to whom I had begun to write, but the messenger
hurried. I will write to him at another time and to Schneidewein
(xxxxxxxxx) and to others. I commend your student to you. May the Spirit
of Christ comfort and gladden your heart, Amen. June 19, 1530, your
Martin Luther.

**No. 15 76.**

Feste Coburg. June 19, 1530.

**To Peter Weller in Wittenberg.**

Luther thanks him for moving into his house with his brother during his
absence, and reports on the Imperial Day of the Jackdaws.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. I, p. 143; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 38 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 7.

3\) The same history is found in the St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 445, §
200 and in the Tischreden, Anh., s 19, ibid, vol. XXII, 1662 f.

4\) The letter to Peter Weller (the following number) was nevertheless
finished and left with him.

**1490** Letters from the year 1530.

No. 1576. 1577. **1491**

> To the learned and at the same time godly jurist Peter Weller, his
> brother in the Lord.

\"Grace and peace!\" Since the messenger, contrary to expectations,
postponed his departure by an hour, best Peter, I wanted to send you
this letter at least as a greeting, since we still have no certain news
from Augsburg. First of all, I thank you for having moved into our house
with your brother during our stay abroad, and for having become the
comrade and protector of mine, so that they may live all the more
securely and in better hope. I also rejoice that they are in your trust,
and I will do nothing better than to please you and your brother
wherever I can. I am indeed quite well, except that so far I have
suffered not a ringing but a thundering in my head, and I cannot
discover the cause. But of this at another time.

The great ones: of our Reichstag run around cheerfully, or rather they
sail and navigate the skies with their innate rudder. Early in the
morning they set out for war in a hurry, armed with unconquerable beaks;
thus they grant us peace throughout the day before their boastful songs
of victory, while they plunder, rob, ravage, devour, for all have become
men of war against the fruits of the earth. In the evening they return
with very great triumph, joyful and full of victories, and they sleep
wearily, but gloriously and victoriously, even gently. The other day we
crept into their courts to see the splendor of their empire. But they
were very afraid, suspecting that we had come to destroy their works of
art: there was shouting and trembling, a miserable sight of the
frightened. When we saw that we had frightened the likes of Achilles and
Hector, we began to clap our hands and to throw our hats up bravely,
thinking ourselves avenged if we could thus mock them and frighten them
in various ways, merely by movements and gestures. And so much for
revenge. This in jest, but in truth I believe that it means something
(*allegoriam* esse) or is a prophecy, that so with the

Words of GOD those right birds of prey (*Harpyias*) tremble, not the
dates, 1) but, reversing the word, the nobles who now screech to
Augsburg 2) and parrot. God grant, amen. Fare well in the Lord.
Greetings Georg von Grumpach. 3) From my desert, June 19, 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1577.**

(Feste Coburg.) (19 June) 4) 1530.

**To his son John.**

Luther expresses his joy that his son is learning well and tells him a
story about a beautiful garden for pious children.

Handwritten in Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 212 (with the date April 22)
and at Zwickau in the Rathsschulbibliothek. Printed in the Wittenberg
edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 442; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. V, p.
268 (wrong 298); in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p. 403; in the
Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 558; in Walch, vol. XXI, 328; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 41 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 156.

Good and peace in Christ, my dear son! I like to see that you are
studying well and praying diligently. So do, my son, and continue; when
I come home, I will bring you a beautiful fair.

I know a pretty funny garden, where many children go inside, have golden
skirts on, and read beautiful apples under the trees, and pears,
cherries, spilling and plums; sing, jump and are cheerful; have also
beautiful little horses with golden bridles and silver saddles. Then I
asked the man who was in the garden, \"Where are the children? He said,
\"They are children who love to pray, to learn and to be pious. Then I
said, \"My dear man, I also have a son named Hänsichen Luther. Wouldn\'t
he also like to come to the garden and eat such beautiful apples and
pears, and ride such fine horses, and play with these children?

1\) Dale Dohle. \"The dates\" - \"the nobles\", this is how we have
tried to render Luther\'s play on words: *monedulas* - *Edelmannos.*

2\) Here Luther has the self-made word: yuiritisantes, which reminds of
*quirites* and could perhaps be translated by \"romanisiren\", instead
of: *quiritantes*.

3\) Cf. no. 1564.

4\) This date is almost certainly derived from the comparison with the
beginning of No. 1575.

**1492** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1577 to 1581 . **149Z**

Then the man said, \"If he is fond of praying and learning and is pious,
let him also come into the garden, Lippus and Jost 1) also, and when
they all come together, they will also have pipes, timpani, lutes, and
all kinds of strings, also dancing, and shooting with small crossbows.

And there he showed me a fine meadow in the garden, prepared for
dancing, there were all kinds of golden pipes, timpani and fine silver
crossbows. But it was still early and the children had not yet eaten, so
I could not resist the dance, and said to the man: \"Oh, dear sir, I
will go quickly and write all this to my dear son Hänsichen, so that he
may pray diligently and learn well and be pious, so that he may also
come to this garden; but he has a maid Lene, whom he must bring with
him. Then the man said, \"Let it be so, go and write to him like this.

Therefore, dear son Hänsichen, learn and pray confidently, and tell
Lippus and Josten to learn and pray, too, so you will come to the garden
with each other. Herewith to the Almighty God, and greet Muhmen Lenen,
and give her a penance on my account. Anno 1530.

Your dear father

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1578.**

Feste Coburg. June 19, 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2314, annex, no. 8.

**No. 1579.**

Feste Coburg. June 19, 1530.

**To Gabriel Zwilling in Torgau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2316, annex, no. 10.

**No. 1580.**

Feste Coburg. June 19, 1530.

**Veit Dietrich to Luther\'s wife.**

Dietrich gives news about the fate of Luther and his comrades. About the
sent picture of Lenchen. How Luther received the death of his father and
about a dream of Luther related to this death.

1\) Philippus Melanchthon and Justus Jonas, both born in 1525.

Printed by *J. Fr. Mayer, de Cath. Lutheri con*

*juge dissertatio, Hamb.* 1699. 4, p. 56 and in the same \"Unsterbl.
Ehren-Gedächtnis Frauen Catharinen Luthern\". Franks, and Leipz. 1724,
p. 109 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 12.

Grace and peace from God. Kind, favorable, dear Doctor! Know that the
Lord and we 2) with Him are still fresh and healthy from God\'s grace.
God grant you also all good with your children. You have done a very
good work by sending the doctor the counterfactual, because he forgot a
lot of thoughts with the picture. He has pasted it on the wall above the
table, where we are eating, in the prince\'s chamber. \-- When he first
saw it, he could not know her for a long time. Well, he said, Lena is so
black! But now he likes her, and the longer he looks at her, the more he
thinks she is Lenchen. She looks more and more like the Hänsichen with
her mouth, eyes and nose, in sum with her whole face, and she will
become like him. That\'s what I wanted to attribute to you this time.

Dear Doctor! I beg you not to worry about the doctor, he is, praise God,
fresh and healthy, has forgotten about his father in the first two days,
although it made him very angry. As soon as he looks at Hans Neinken\'s
letter, he says to me: \"Well, my father is dead, too! Then he quickly
takes his psaltery, goes into the chamber, and cries enough that his
head was awkward the next day. Sint he let himself remember nothing
more. On the Saturday before Exaudi 3), the groom was our guest for the
evening, where the doctor, among other things, recounted how he had
dreamed the next night, how a large tooth had fallen out, so large that
he could not have been surprised enough. On the Sunday after that, the
father was dead. I did not want to leave this undisclosed to you,
please, accept my service in the best way. With that, God, Hans and
Lenchen and the whole household are commanded. \-- My George will give
you three guilders, which you can take until we get more. On Sunday St.
Veiten \[June 19\] at Coburg.

> M. Veit Dietrich of Nuremberg.

**No. 1581.**

Feste Coburg. June 20, 1530.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1960, no. 35.

2\) Namely Veit Dietrich and Cyriacus Kaufmann.

3\) That is, May 28 (not June 4, which the Erlangen correspondence
offers); the day after, Luther\'s father died. - The \"Kastner\" is Paul
Bader.

**1494**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1582. 1583.

**1495**

**No. 15 82.**

Feste Coburg. June 20, 1530.

**To Erhard Schneps in Augsburg.**

Luther expresses his joy that the Landgrave has agreed to attend the
Imperial Diet. He sends the previous letter to the landgrave, with the
request to hand it over to him himself and to help support it verbally.

Handwritten in Gotha, Oock.\*185. 4. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p.
145; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 44 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 15.

> To the highly venerable man, Erhard Schnepf, the faithful servant of
> the Word in Hesse, his extremely dear brother.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It is also a joy to me, as it is to you, my
dear Erhard, that your prince has not despised this Diet, but has
arrived; otherwise he would have weighed down not only himself with
unbearable hatred, but also the whole cause of the Gospel, which is
otherwise already sufficiently suppressed by these swarming spirits. The
Lord testifies by such evidence that he is with us, and we see that our
sighing accomplishes this, that the God of the humble and afflicted does
not abandon us to the end, who gives that temptation may gain an end \[1
Cor. 10:13\]; to him be praise and glory forever and ever, amen.

I have written a letter to this prince of yours, which you see before
you, and if it is convenient for you, deliver it yourself, and if it is
necessary, strengthen him with words. I can neither hope nor despair as
far as his faith is concerned; therefore, perhaps I have not admonished
him urgently enough, nor even duly enough, as the matter requires, that
he should avoid the pestilences of those people and the quite trivial
enticements of Satan. One thing I rely on in the whole matter is that
Christ Himself promised to hear our prayers, as it is written \[Ps.
145:18.\], \"The Lord is near to all who call upon Him, to all who call
upon Him earnestly\"; and again \[Ps. 34:18.\], \"When the righteous cry
out, the Lord hears.\" Yea, and the same commandeth he also, saying
\[Ps. 50:15.\], \"Call upon me in trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shalt praise me.\" This shall be a wall of brass

1\) Amen. May the grace of God be with you; be strong in Him and be well
in Him, and at the same time be mindful of me in your prayers, just as I
am mindful of you. From the desert, June 20, 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 15 83.**

Nuremberg. June 21, 1530.

**Andreas Osiander to Luther.**

About the Imperial Diet in Augsburg before the handover of the
Confession.

The original is in Hamburg, Vol. I, fol. 98. Manuscript in Dresden, Cod.
C 342, fol. 13 b and at the Stadtbibliothek zu Bremen (not \"Bern\" as
the Erl. Briefw. says), Ms. a. 11. Printed in K. and W. Krafft, Briefe
und Documente. 1875. p. 67 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 16.

> To the worthy man, Christ\'s servant, D. Martin Luther, his brother in
> Christ.

Grace and peace from God the Father and from our Lord Jesus Christ,
amen. Since I had received the opportunity of this messenger, which I
could certainly assume would reach you, dearest brother in Christ, I
could not avoid writing something to you, although I had nothing worthy
of your ears, and also feared that I would sin against the common good,
since I know that you are never idle. The emperor has finally come to
Augsburg; we have nothing new yet, except that our people have neither
wanted to take part in the pomp on Corpus Christi, nor have they given
themselves up to free preaching; I say, however, of all our people who
have so far received and held the word. However, there was a fierce
battle over the sermons, the end of which was that all preachers were to
be silent, except for those of the emperor, for he promised that he
would decree those who would teach loudly, but ours retained the right
to preach in their own inns. But this you may know better. It is said
that Margrave George, our neighbor, said with great frankness before the
emperor that he would rather lose his gray head than either deny God\'s
word or be deprived of it. The emperor had answered: \"not 2) to cut off
the head, not to cut off the head!\" because he understands neither
German nor Latin properly, to our great detriment and to his shame, what
he had said.

1\) *Horat. epp., lib*. I, ep. I, V. 60.

2\) Krafft reads: \"more\".

**1496**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1583. 1584.

**1497**

also recognizes. For he would wish to do without any other language and
any kingdom, that he might speak German properly.

We cannot yet foresee what will happen, nor do we have any certain
advice, only that we ask God to help our cause and have confidence that
this will happen. I have been compelled to write a letter of defense or
advice these days as to how our people should behave, 1) in the opinion
that I thought that I, too, would travel there. 2) I do not yet know
what will happen; certainly I cannot produce anything worthy after
Philip, whose confession (*Apollogiam*) I have seen and consider very
good. While I was leafing through the Acts of the Conciliar above, I
came across a passage of Clement\'s *Apostolicae,* in which the
communion with wives is clearly advised, even commanded. 3) This is the
fifth and last letter, and yet the papists do not only keep such null
and void things, but also publish them. I liked this passage very much
because it can be shown by this evidence that there is nothing under the
name of Clement that is what I would like very much, although this
passage seems to be suitable to ridicule, revile, and hypocritize the
papists. Your last letter,^4)^ although short, has been very pleasant to
me, also for future use and benefit. By the way, since the matter that
is being negotiated at the Diet is difficult, let us pray to the Lord
that He may protect His Church, which I know you will do, but may you
also pray for us that we may not forsake the Lord, for He will not
forsake us. Fare well in Christ our Lord. Given at Nuremberg, June 21,
1530, your Andreas Osiander.

1\) On June 15, the Nuremberg envoys in Augsburg had sent home the draft
of the Augsburg Confession and asked for \"the opinion and concerns of
preachers and jurists\" about it (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 105, No. 723).
In addition to Osiander, the jurist D. Hepstein also submitted a council
proposal (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 153, No. 751).

2\) On June 28, during the night, Osiander arrived in Augsburg (*Corp.
Ref.*, Vol. II, 153).

3\) Here is meant the passage in the Pseudoisidoric 5th letters of Pope
Clement I, which Gratian also included in his *Decretum* (*Dec. P. II,
caus. 12., qu. I., c.* 2). The Pseudoisidoric Decretals were published
for the first time in the work: *Conciliorum quatuor generalium etc. ed.
Jac: Merlinus. Paris*. 1523, also *Colon*. 1530 (our place here T. I,
fol. 12b).

4\) This letter is missing.

**No. 15 84.**

Feste Coburg. June 25, 1530.

To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.

News from the Imperial Diet in Augsburg. Luther is busy with the
translation of Ezekiel.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbriefe, No.
64. Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol. 36; in
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 40 and again fol. 49 b, and in
*Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 146; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 181; in De Wette, vol. IV, p.47 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 18 f. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1376.

> To the man to be highly honored in the Lord, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann,
> Bishop of the People at Zwickau, his brother and superior.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have ordered my people in Wittenberg, my
dear man, to send to you in Zwickau all the news that they have received
from us, from which you will know what is happening in Augsburg at this
Imperial Diet. I hope that all this has reached you, because I do not
have time to write everything to everyone. Let us only pray diligently,
as we have done hitherto, remembering how our fathers were saved. \"The
hand of the Lord is not shortened\" \[Is.59, 1.\], then the matter is
not ours, but his; he will surely hear us.

I have written to your brother Valentin, 5) and comforted him as much as
I could; you will see to it that the letter is given to him. I have
leisure here now and am working on the translation of Ezekiel; in the
meantime I am also doing some other things.

The papists indeed raged mightily, but our prince, gifted with an
admirable constancy, confessed Christ freely. Likewise also Margrave
George. The unbelievable mildness of the emperor is praised
extraordinarily; he seems to be provided by God with a good angel. You
will learn more from Wittenberg. In the meantime, you too pray for me,
you man of God; in His mercy, be well for eternity, Amen. From the
desert, on Saturday 6) after John the Baptist\'s day \[June 25\] 1530.

Your Mart. Luther.

5\) This letter is missing.

6\) Walch translated *Sabbatho* by \"Sunday\".

**1498** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1585. 1586. **1499**

**No. 1585.**

(Augsburg.) June 25, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

First, Luther\'s displeasure at the long silence of his friends in
Augsburg. Report of the kind behavior of the emperor and the hatred of
the other princes. Unfriendly behavior of the Salzburg Cardinal against
Melanchthon. The Augsburg Confession is to be delivered on this day.
About the proceedings at the Imperial Diet so far. About the Turk 2c.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 34 b; in
Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 255; in Munich, *Cod. Bavar*. II, 638; and in
Petersburg at the public library, Cod. H 842, fol. 17. Printed in Manlii
farrago 402; in *Epp. Phil. Mel. libellus* III, *ed. Ch. Pezelius,
Brem*. 1590, p. 142; in *Coelestin*. I, 138; in *Corp. Ref.,* vol. II,
125, no. 736 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 20.

Hail! Your letters, in which you complain about our silence,^1)^ have
caused us great suffering. For we have written quite abundantly every
week, 2) but I do not know by what fate the misfortune has been added to
our very bitter and lamentable sorrows in which we find ourselves here,
that we have been condemned to take the blame upon ourselves that you do
not write to us.

I have written you the beginning of the Imperial Diet. 3) The emperor
greets our prince quite graciously, and I wish that our people would be
more polite towards him. God would have you admonish our younger prince
about this by letter. There is nothing milder at the emperor\'s court
than the emperor himself. All the others hate us in the cruelest way.
These days I have been with the Salzburger, who plagued me with a very
long and oratorical account of all the troubles that have taken place in
these years. He attributes all these troubles to us, and attached to it
an epilogue written entirely in blood.

Today, the articles of our Confession will be handed over first, for
which God may grant happiness and prosperity. For up to now, all time
has been spent on the preparatory work (*prooemiis) for* the Imperial
Diet, on the presentation, on the exposition of the common evils, on the
determination of the order in which the matters to be discussed are to
be carried out. This is proceeding slowly, as is natural with the
Germans. In Rome, after the meeting

1\) No. 1566 and No. 1568.

2\) Since Melanchthon had written on June 12 and 19, but Jonas on June
12, 13, and 18, he could not remember the previous three-week silence.
Cf. No. 1571.

3\) No. 1573.

in Bologna 4) was finished, a female mule threw a young, and the same
had feet which were not of one kind. You see that this signifies the
downfall of Rome through *schismata.* There is nothing new about the
Turk, but it is reported here that he is still preparing a move at home.
Our adversaries are indeed threatening us in such a way that they show
that they have completely forgotten the Turkish danger. The Landgrave
approves of our confession and has signed it. You will achieve much, I
hope, if you fortify him with your letter about the Lord\'s Supper.
Brenz sat with me when I wrote this and wept with me; he told me to
write a greeting to you in it. Fare well. On the day after St. John the
Baptist \[June 25\].

**No. 1586.**

Augsburg. June 25, 1530.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

About the letter matter already mentioned several times, with a detailed
explanation that the letters must either have been misappropriated or
lost. Jonas sends a printed description of the imperial entry. From a
conversation of Melanchthon with the Cardinal of Salzburg and a
statement of the imperial secretary Cornelius Schopper. - This letter is
written earlier than the other of the same date, St. Louis edition, vol.
XVI, 817, no. 957.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Acta Comitiorum,* Oocl. 42. Printed in
Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 138; in Kawerau, Jonas\' Briefw., vol. I, p. 160,
no. 180 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 22.

Grace and peace of God in Christ! Since we already have, my dearest
father, the worst and most cunning devils here at Augsburg on the
Imperial Diet, and are plagued by their servants daily in many ways, as
in the midst of the enemies and, as Christ says \[Matth. 10, 16.\], in
the midst of the wolves, this has also greatly increased our pain and
sadness, that we see from your last letter to Urban 5) and from the
letter to Doctor Caspar that our letters have not yet been handed over
to you. Nor can we think what a punishment (mulum) this is to our
misfortune, that at this time, when we most desire that our letters to
you should be

4\) namely of the emperor with the pope.

5\) Urban Rhegius. The letter is missing; it will probably be the answer
to No. 1556 - \"Doctor Caspar\" is probably the electoral physician D.
Lindemann. The chancellor Caspar Müller, whom Kolde and D. Enders seem
to us excluded by the fact that he (as far as we know) was not a doctor.
The letter is missing.

**1500**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1586.

**1501**

and receive yours in turn, in any case Satan wrings them out of our
hands against our will and while we resist, as it were. From this I can
assume nothing other than that he would like to increase your evil
temptations, my dearest father, and deprive us of the comfort that we
are now seeking so much and only. I have written four long and detailed
letters to you within fifteen or at most twenty days. ^1)^ I alone have
written to you about the death of my son Frederick; 2) I have also
written of the death of Cardinal Mercurinus, the Grand Chancellor, and
of many other things in other letters 3); then also recently we,
Spalatin and I, have written in many words and at length about the
Emperor\'s entry. 4) May God again grieve those scoundrels who have
either misappropriated or lost the letters they have received. 5) Every
day we go from our inn to the court to the chancellors\' tables. 6) Not
a day goes by that we do not inquire whether they have messengers to
Coburg, and if messengers are available, we do not let any go
empty-handed without our letters. But we see that you are almost
somewhat angry with us, who (the Lord knows) are without fault, and are
constant in writing, and rather too verbose than negligent. We have made
this known to Chancellor Brück, that the Prince sent this messenger on
horseback, who will return here, and we ask and implore you for
Christ\'s sake to make haste to inform us how many letters you have
received within a month, or during this time that we are here. 7) That
messenger, whom we sent at our expense 8) and to whom we had to give
four gold florins, was not sent for the sake of my wife and ours, but
for your sake. Now we have impressed this upon him above all things,
that he should faithfully hand over the bundle of letters for you to the
castle keeper at Coburg. Since that scoundrel returned and brought only
a short letter from you 9),

1\) The number of letters, four, is correct, but Jonas has forgotten
that three weeks passed between the first and the second letter.

2\) In the letter of May 22, lost to us. Cf. no. 1569.

3\) No. 1569 and No. 1570.

4\) No. 1572.

5\) From Luther\'s reply to this letter, dated June 30, it is clear that
these accusations against the messengers were unfounded.

6\) Brück and Christian Baier.

7\) Luther answers this in the letter of June 30.

> 8\) The same brought the letter of May 22 to Luther. 9) Perhaps the
> letter No. 1568.
>
> When we asked him whether he had received more detailed letters from
> you, he seemed to talk timidly and somewhat darkly, and while he was
> talking, something of a bundle of letters, which he had left behind at
> Torgau, slipped out of his mouth. But afterwards, when we cornered the
> scoundrel, we could get nothing else out of him than that he swore
> that he had delivered the letters to Coburg. You will kindly let us
> know how the matter stands, so that we can take revenge on that wicked
> scoundrel and monster for our pain, if he has dared to deceive us. He
> should go straight to prison or, if he is convicted, be nailed to the
> cross, for I hate nothing so much as this wickedness and disloyalty of
> rude people.

As far as the Imperial Diet is concerned, we have written everything to
you in detail, at least what we have learned so far and which is of some
importance, so that if I repeated it now, it would perhaps appear as
something old. But about the Emperor\'s entry, if Spalatin\'s and my
letter may not have reached you, I will send you the description of the
pomp, which has been printed here.

10\) Recently, the Cardinal of Salzburg summoned Philipp Melanchthon
through Wolfgang Stromer of Nuremberg for a private conversation. When
the latter, since it was already the second hour of the night, had
returned well plagued by him, he told early in the morning what they had
spoken with each other. He said: \"I have heard nothing but the most
extreme threats and almost a death sentence. You will hear wonderful
things about this orally, dearest father, how certain they are, as if no
God were alive, how they rely on human power, how we seem to them to be
ants and flies.

We both, Philip and I, have also been to Cornelius Schopper, who was
formerly at the court of the exiled King of Denmark, but is now the
Emperor\'s secretary. He said, as he is wont to joke, \"if we had
money,\"^11)^ we could easily buy any religion we wanted from the Welsh;
but if we had no pennies, our cause would be a dry and barren one. For
he says that it is not possible in any way that

10\) This paragraph and most of the following is also attached to Letter
No. 965 in the 16th volume of our edition in all previous editions,
except in the Erl. Briefw., which places the said letter on June 30.

11\) These words, which we have highlighted with speech marks, are in
brackets in the editions.

**1502** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1586 to 1592. **1503**

the emperor, who is now so surrounded by cardinals and bishops, could
approve and accept another religion than the papist one; so the old one
is persuaded to him. In short, they rely on men and ridicule Christ. The
Salzburg had said to Philip, after hearing the word \"conscience\"
(*conscientia*): \"Ah, conscientia! what conscientia, conscientia! The
emperor will not suffer a mean disorder!\" But the wretched people do
not know how the name of the Lord is a strong fortress and a wall of
brass, a strong armor against all the power of the devil and the world.
The Lord has so far given us strength and courage against those threats,
and has so far glorified the gospel of His Son by the greatest miracles,
as we also see in the suppression of the peasant rebellion. If he is our
help, they will not touch us with a finger, and if people touch us, they
will not be able to harm us. Everything will turn out for the best. Fare
well in Christ. Given at Augsburg, on the Saturday after the Octave of
Corpus Christi \[June 25\] Anno 1530.

From the heart, your Justus Jonas, Doctor.

**No. 15 87.**

Augsburg. June 25, 1530.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 817, no. 957.

**No. 15 88.**

Augsburg. June 25, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 752, no. 946.

**No. 15 8 9**

(Augsburg.) June 26, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVl, 896, no. 975.

**No. 1590 .**

Coburg Fortress. June 27, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 894, no. 974.

**No. 1591 .**

Coburg Fortress. June 27, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther asks him to carry letters received from Wittenberg to Augsburg,
reports that \"the Confitemini\" is being sent by him to Wittenberg for
printing, and asks him to get oranges for his wife.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 147; in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 50 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 37.

> To the highly venerable man, Mr. Wenceslaus Link, his brother and
> superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! The messenger who suddenly and unexpectedly presented
himself, my dear Wenceslaus, hurried so that I myself did not have time
to write to our people in Augsburg. Therefore, we have only handed over
to him the letters received from Wittenberg, which are to be brought to
you, and I beg you, when you have received them, see to it that they are
faithfully and safely sent to Augsburg. For I believe that you can
easily do this there, since you have a lot of messengers at your
disposal. Another time, when there will be time, I will also write to
you and others in more detail. The psalm \"Confitemini\"^1)^ is laid out
for Wittenberg and is to be printed with an eloquent explanation, so
that it will displease me. In the meantime, greet everyone, Mr.
Spengler, the abbot, Michael, Joachim, Eoban, 2) Osiander. If you could
get my Lord Catharina \"a shock\" of oranges or about that much from
good people, I would gladly pay her. She often pesters me with letters
about this and says that they are not at Wittenberg. Fare well with your
vine and your exceedingly lovely grapes. From the silent desert, on
Monday after St. John\'s Day \[27 June\] 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1592 .**

Augsburg. June 27, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 898, no. 977.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1174.

2\) The \"Abbot\" is Friedrich Pistorius; Michael is Röting (Roting,
Rötinger) ; \"Joachim\" is Camerarius; \"Eoban\" is Hesse.

**1504**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1593 to 1601.

**1505**

**No. 1593 .**

Augsburg. Around this time 1530.

**Johann Agricola to Luther.**

(Fragment.)

The story told here is found in Spalatin\'s writing: \"Etliche
Historien, so sich auf diesem Reichstag zugetragen\" 2c., in the St.,
Louiser Ausg., Bd. Luther himself uses the same in his writing: \"Wider
den Meuchler zu Dresden\" (Against the Assassin at Dresden), St. Louis
edition, vol. XVI, 1706, § 14. What is reported in the second paragraph,
ibid. col. 743, § 1, is inserted in the written answer of the Protestant
princes to the emperor.

Manuscript in Munich in *Cod. Bav.*, Vol. II, p. 653; in Copenhagen,
Als. 1393, fol. 287 and in Trier, Ms. 1800, No. 236. Printed in *Corp.
Ref., Vol.* II; 147 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 40 f. - If
Bretschneider\'s assumption is correct that Luther\'s letter to Agricola
of June 30 (St. Louiser Ausg., vol. XVI, 750) is the answer to this
letter, one must assume that the statement was already made on the day
of the delivery or the reading of the Confession, June 24 or 25, and
reported to Luther immediately thereafter. The Erlanger Briefw. places
our letter on June 27.

Excerpt from a letter written by Johann Agricola at the Imperial Diet in
Augsburg. 1530.

One of the highest princes said in an assembly of princes, aroused by
anger: \"They have inserted a writing, written on white paper with black
ink. If we were emperors, we would answer them with a writing written
with rubrics 1).\" To this another answered: \"Lord, if you want that,
you must be careful that the presilge does not splash under your eyes.\"

Our prince replied to the emperor\'s prohibition of sermons in the
houses, saying that he could not do without the word any more than he
could do without daily bread.

**No. 1594.**

(Feste Coburg.) June 29, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 901, no. 980.

**No. 159 5.**

Feste Coburg. June 30, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 820, no. 958.

1\) *rubricae (Pand.*); the titles of the laws were written in red.
Therefore Luther has in his relation: \"with blood\".

**No. 1596 .**

(Feste Coburg.) June 30, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 905, no. 981.

**No. 159 7.**

Feste Coburg. June 30, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 908, no. 982.

**No. 159 8.**

Feste Coburg. June 30, 1530.

**To Johann Agricola in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 750, no. 945.

**No. 1599 .**

(Coburg Fortress.) June 30, 1530.

**To Johann Brenz in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 910, no. 983. \'

**No. 1600.**

Feste Coburg. June 30, 1530.

**To Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1758, no. 1180.

**No. 1601.**

(Augsburg.) June 30, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 900, no. 979. - According to the
sources available to us at the time, we have dated the letter there from
June 27, where Burkhardt also places it in his regest, p. 179. - The
following is to be added to the locations given there: Handwritten in
Wittenberg in the seminary library; in *Cod. Jen.* n. 25; in *Cod.
Rostoch*; and at Copenhagen, Ms. 1393, fol. 256 (undated). Printed by
Baxmann in Zeitschrift für historische Theologie 1861, 20; by *Bindseil,
Suppl*. *ad. Corp. Ref.*, p. 62, no. 77 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII,
p. 62. - The inscription reads: \"An D. Martin Luther, his exceedingly
dear father.\" The beginning of the letter: \"We sent two special
messengers to you this week, through whom we wrote what had happened
here so far. And after that, nothing has happened that is noteworthy.\"
The second sentence of the second paragraph reads thus: \"I cannot even
guess what we have to expect, with such great hatred of the enemies,
with such great ignorance of the court on whose judgment we depend. I do
not find a man there,

**1506** Letters from the year 1530. No. 1601 to 1606. **1507**

who is also gifted with only mediocre erudition. Therefore, help can
only be expected from God\" 2c. The news about the Turk comes before the
report about the events in Altenburg. The letter closes with the words:
\"Be well. On the day after Peter and Paul \[June 30\]. - Philip.\"

**No. 1 602.**

(Augsburg.) (June 30? 1530.)

**Spalatin to Luther.**

(Fragment.)

Of the arrival of the queens of Hungary and Bohemia in Augsburg and of a
so-called prophet in Strasbourg.

Manuscript in Gotha, *Cod. Bavari*, vol. II, x. 653 and at Copenhagen,
Ms. 1393, fol. 286 (with the superscription: *Excerpta ex literis M.
Georgii Spalatini ad Martinum Lutherum*). Printed in *Corp. Ref.*, vol.
II, 157, no. 753 (without the name of the addressee) and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 64.

The Queen of Hungary and the Queen of Bohemia both arrived at Augsburg
at the sixth hour on the day before Petri and Pauli \[June 28\], and
were not received by any of the princes or rulers, whether this was
because the emperor so willed or for some other cause unknown to us.
Everyone was very frightened by the thunderstorm that occurred in
Altenburg on Corpus Christi, especially because after the lightning
strikes there was a great flood in the middle of the night.

John Baptist, the Italian, a prophet to many until now, was in
Strasbourg during the last Lent and proclaimed not only that city but
also all of Germany doom if they did not repent. He said that he would
go straight to Ferdinand to admonish him and threatened him with extreme
destruction if he did not convert to God, even daring to claim that
otherwise he would be delivered into the hands of the Turks and executed
with an axe. It is not necessary for me to write how few are on our
side, and how many are either on the side of the Pope or of the
Sacramentarians.

**No. 1603.**

(Augsburg.) (June 30? 1530.)

**Jonas to Luther.**

(Fragment.)

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 883, no. 965. - All manuscripts and
prints have appended to this letter as a conclusion what is found in our
edition vol. XVI, 885 (line 8 v. o. to the end). However, the piece in §
3 and § 4 is a part of Letter No. 1586 (see the note towards the end
there); § 5 belongs to the letter No. 1586.

(according to the text, which the Erl. Briefw. brings) as postscript to
it and § 6 is contained in No. 1587 (St. Louiser Ausg., Vol. XVI, 819, §
5). The Erlangen Briefw. has therefore omitted this here. - Knaake,
Kawerau and Köstlin take June 27 as the date of this letter; the *Corp.
ref.* dates it \"about June 29,\" the Erlanger Briefw.: \"(June 30,
1530)\" and the Copenhagen manuscript has the date: \"July 1.\" Since,
as is often the case, the letters from Augsburg were sent together to
Luther by messenger, the Erl. Briefw. decides for June 30. By the advice
of the theologians for the Protestant princes mentioned in this letter
(s 3), which is dated only from the 28th, the dating of June 27th is
excluded.

**No. 1 604.**

Augsburg. June 30, 1530.

**Andreas Osiander to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Osiander reports his happy arrival in Augsburg, rejoices in the company
of the other theologians, and speaks hopefully of the Emperor\'s
gracious disposition.

Manuscript in Munich, *Cod. germ. lat.* 940, p. 468. Printed in *Hummel,
epp. eccl. hist. saec*. XVI, toru. 1, p. 36; in Kolde, *Analecta* p. 141
and in Erl.

Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 70.

**No. 1 605.**

Coburg Fortress. July 1, 1530.

**To the abbot Friedrich Pistorius in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1178.

**No. 1606 .**

Coburg Fortress. (Beginning of July? 1530.)

**Luther\'s concerns about quite a few articles.**

The only thing that is certain about this objection is that it was
written about some of the so-called Torgau Articles, that is, the
disputed articles that form the basis of the second part of the Augsburg
Confession. \"As to the time of writing (says the Erl. Briefw.), it can
only be asserted that it must have been written before Luther\'s letter
to the Elector of Aug. 26, in which Luther comments in more detail on
some of the questions occurring in our report. It was produced by
questions submitted (by the Elector through Spalatin?), which were sent
to Luther (with a missing accompanying letter). Possibly they are the
articles about which Veit Dietrich writes to Müller; then they would
have to have arrived and been answered between Müller\'s presence at
Coburg, end of June, and the date of Dietrich\'s letter, July 17.\"
Förstemann lets them be placed at Wittenberg in the time from March 14
to 20; Bretschneider places our concern \"about March 26,\" Brieger, and
him according to the Erl. Briefw., to the time assumed by us.
Bretschneider, Förstemann and Knaake

**1508**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1606.

**1509**

consider Melanchthon to be the author, whereas Brieger says: \"At first
glance, Luther presents himself as the author: no one else has
understood how to write.\" He is joined by the Erl. Briefw. agrees with
him, and we are of the same opinion. Also the *Cod. Rostoch*.
(Schirrmacher, p. 147) ascribes it to him, in its superscription: \"D.
M. Luther\'s other concerns.\"

From the enclosures to Brück\'s Geschichte der Religionshandlungen auf
dem Reichstage zu Augsburg im Jahre 1530 (im Weimarschen Archiv, Reg.
L 1. 41, Bl. 329) in Förstemanns Urkundenbuch, Vol. I, p. 93; in *Corp.
Ref., Vol.* IV, 981 and again Vol. XXVI, 189; in Schirrmacher, p. 147
(from *Cod. Rostoch.*) and in Erl. Briefw., vol.VIII, p.72.

The first article, of both forms of the sacrament.

If one wants to act here, that only the one form should be confirmed,
then our most gracious Lord should not and cannot grant at all, since
the clear Scriptures of the evangelists and St. Paul stand, so that even
the adversaries confess this, and have nothing more to plead, except
that it was not decided by the Christian church. So it is also certain
that all Christendom throughout the world and the holy fathers and
bishops have used both forms in unison for over a thousand years, and
even today no one knows from whom or where the One Form has been caught,
and nothing about it is written in Pabst\'s laws. They vehemently
dispute that nothing new should be started without the command and order
of the Christian church. To this it should be said why they have not so
far resisted that the One Form should not be torn down, which is a right
evil innovation against the clear Scriptures. In the same way, they
should have resisted many other evil new things, where they did not want
to suffer any innovation. So this is not an innovation, but a return of
the old previous custom of the whole Christianity, and obedience of the
Gospel.

The other article, from the priest marriage.

Here our most gracious Lord cannot allow the priests to live without
marriage, as before. For there is strong scripture that God created man
and woman to multiply, Genesis 2 and 3.^1)^ And Paul 1 Corinthians 7:9:
\"It is better to be free than to be married.

1\) Rather Gen. 1, 28.

Suffer rutting.\" Thus it is well known what terrible abominations of
fornication and unchastity have resulted from the forbidden marriage.
Also, such forbidden marriage has arisen not only without the approval
of the Christian Church, but also against the Concilia, especially
against the highest *Concilium Nicaenum* and *Constantinopolitanum
sextum,* out of pure sacrilege and violence of the pope, which the
priests in German lands have opposed and resisted for a long time.

Above this, the Pope and his own rights do not punish the marriage of
priests more severely than with deprivation of the priesthood, nor do
they consider it heresy, nor do they put anyone under ban for it. Now,
however, it is not only considered heresy, but also condemned,
persecuted with sword, fire, ban and all plagues as the highest heresy.
From the beginning of the world it has never been heard in any nation or
country that anyone should be put to death for the sake of marriage and
not rather be honored. And among Christians, should one approve of this
against their own Scriptures and established rights? Our most gracious
Lord cannot permit such great abominations, nor can he make his
conscience partake of them. So every prince must see to it, as he is
obliged to do, that where marriage should be forbidden, especially in
these last weak times, that no vices such as the Turkish or Curtisan
ones come into their lands, as has happened in some countries.

And whether one could not obtain more, that one leaves the marriage to
the parish priests, and remain canons, as they remain. For priests must
keep house, which is impossible without a wife.

The third article, from the fair.

Our most gracious lord cannot and may not grant that he should leave the
corner masses and purchase masses, as they were before, in his lands, or
re-establish them. But the parish masses, where there are communicants,
they are held in German or Latin, my most gracious lord shall base that
they shall remain. For all the scribes among them consider the mass to
be such a work that a priest, even if he is godless and unbelieving, may
do for reward for the benefit of all Christendom, both for the living
and the dead and for all creatures.

**1510**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1606.

**1511**

tur, which is a public idolatry. Whether they might now want to mend and
gloss a lot, this need not strengthen such scribes\' idolatry. For such
glosses were not invented in those days, otherwise there would have been
far fewer masses. For there is nothing in heaven or on earth that
acquires forgiveness of sin or God\'s grace without united faith in the
Word of God, for the sake of which Christ instituted the Mass, as he
says: \"Do this in remembrance of me. Since the corner masses, even the
most holy ones, and the masses for sale are all based on the
aforementioned idolatrous reason, that one wants to help people through
them, as through a good work, no one can approve or help to establish
them with a good conscience. Thus, even in the first Christianity and in
the oldest fathers, there are no such idolatrous masses.

So it is obvious that the masses are of no use for the dead, for whom
they are most of all instituted, because the dead must of course be
justified and blessed by their own faith, like all other saints. Rom.
10, 10: \"With the heart one believes, then one becomes righteous\" 2c.
Nor do the words in the Lord\'s Supper suffer, since Christ says, \"Eat,
drink, do these things.\" Now the dead cannot eat, drink, and do these
things with us. But it is shameful that we should eat and drink for the
dead. *Oportet coenam esse seu actum illum communem. Ergo non est
sacrificium*.

The fourth article, of ordaining or consecrating.

There is no better means of unity in these matters than for the bishops
to relax their oaths and duties in order to bind the ordinands to
ungodly doctrine and to life without marriage, because in this way they
would remain in their dignity and rule, and would get enough priests.
But where they do not slacken, they must fall and perish. For what are
now learned and skillful fellows, they do not want to burden themselves
with such oaths, driving and godless doctrine. And in the end they will
come to the point that ordination and ordaining will no longer be done
by the bishops, but as it is otherwise due.

The fifth article, from the Pabstthum.

If the pope wants to be lord or sovereign, we let that happen, for we do
not consider how great an honor or good he has, but desire that he leave
the gospel free for us (as he is obliged to do). If he does not want to
preach it himself, nor promote the word, as would be right, then he may
be and do what he wants on his conscience; it is not our business.

The sixth article, from monasteries.

It is also not due to our most gracious lord to restore the monasteries
and to fill them with monks or nuns, and he may say: I have not
appointed the monks and nuns, nor have I ordered them to go out, nor
have I ordered them to go in again, nor have I granted them permission
to go. Summa, our most gracious lord should only throw such an article
from himself.

The seventh article, from confession.

It is to be granted that the parish priests are ordered not to
administer the sacrament to anyone who has sought and requested
absolution beforehand. For the absoluteness, because it is God\'s word
and command, should not be despised. However, there must be a
declaration (preclarification) that, in order to receive such
absoluteness, it is not necessary for people to choose all sin.

The eighth article, from fasting and difference of food.

Because they themselves, the popes and clergy, did not keep the fasts
before and still do not observe them, we do not know what to do with
them.

The ninth article, by the Sacramentirans. ^1)^

. Our most gracious Lord shall help to condemn the Sacramentarians 2) as
erring heretics, regardless of whether they refer to a concilium, or
shall do more. Because they do not want to or cannot hold with us, they
thereby separate themselves from us, and do not want to give us any
more.

1\) In the manuscript wrong: \"Sacraments\".

2\) Manuscript: \"Sacramenter\".

**1512**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1606 to 1613.

**1513**

We do not need to be afraid to accept their offer, as if our doctrine
were still uncertain; but we must be certain in such a common public
article, which must go daily by custom. If their plea and reason have
been sufficiently heard, recognized, and settled, that they may not
boast, they will be condemned unheard and unrecognized.

**No. 1607.**

(Augsburg and Feste Coburg?) (Around the same time? 1530.)

**Melanchthon\'s and Luther\'s concerns about the staggering of bishops
and the primacy of the pope.**

The original is found in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. E,* fol. 37, No. 2,
p. 160. The beginning seems to be missing. Printed in J. J. Müller, der
ev. Stände Protest. p. 834; in Förstemann, Urkundenbuch, vol. II, p. 75
(around July 13); in *Corp. Ref.,* vol. II, 318 (end of August); in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 117 (in July); and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VIII, p. 77. In Seckendorf, *Hist, luth. lib.* II, p. 159b only
Luther\'s text. Burkhardt, p. 181, in his regest, places our concern in
the second half of July.

Melanchthon\'s concerns.

But that imagined Gradus are *humane traditiones*, may be indicated
manifold.

Christ always punished the disciples when they asked which one should be
the chief among them.

Item, Paul commands Timothy to set bishops, does not send them to Petro.

Item, Paul says, \"If it be revealed to him that sitteth, let him that
is in front hold his peace.\"

Item, the Primatus is never held, is also not possible to hold, because
there must be Christians in all the world. Now the *ecclesiae* in India
have never come to Rome to have their bishops confirmed.

Item, Jerome and others write that presbyter and episcopus is one
degree.

Luther wrote on the back of the sheet:

Yes, because the Pope wants to enter into such things (as I said), I
think we Lutherans want to help protect and handle his honor and
supremacy better than the emperor himself and all the world. For we
could do it without a sword, with God\'s word and power, which the
emperor cannot finally maintain with his fist without God\'s power.

**No. 1608.**

Coburg Fortress. July 3, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 913, no. 984.

**No. 1609 .**

(Coburg Fortress.) July 5, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 914, no. 985.

**No. 1610.**

Coburg Fortress. July 6, 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 881 f., no. 964.

**No. 1611.**

Coburg Fortress. July 6, 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 914 f., no. 986.

**No. 1612 .**

Coburg Fortress. July 6, 1530.

**To Cardinal Albrecht, Elector of Mainz.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 916, no. 987.

**No. 1613 .**

Coburg Fortress. July 8, 1530.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

Luther explains his Petschaft to him.

Printed in the Hallische Theile, p. 345; in \"Waarhaffte Contrafactur
*D. Martini Lutheri* Seeliger gedächtnus: wie dieselbe von Lucasser
Cranichen dem leben nach gemacht; Neben Außlegung sein Herrn Lutheri
geführten Wappen, Jnmassen er solche Herrn *Lazaro* Spenglern,
Rahtschreibern der Statt Nürmberg überschrieben. Männigklichen zu gutem
in diesem Jubeljahr 1617. wider an den Tag gegeben\". (An engraving of
Luther, on which he holds his coat of arms in his left hand-the letter
is below the engraving); in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 558; in
Walch, vol. XXI, 307; in Haußdorff\'s Leben Spenglers, p. 170; in
Junker\'s gold. and silver. Ehrengedächtniß Lutheri, p. 228; in Richtet,
*Geneal. Luther.* p. 661; in *Schlegel, vit. Langeri*, x. 146 k; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 79 and in the Erl. Ausgabe, vol. 54, p. 168. Latin in
G. Serpitius, Prüfung des Hohensteinischen Gesangb., p. 68 and in
Hallische *Suppl. Epp. Lutheri*, p. 199.

**1514** Letters from the year 1530. No. 1613 to 1617. **1515**

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, favorable, dear lord and friend!
Because you desire to know whether my petition is right, I will show you
my first thoughts for good company, which I want to put on my petition
as a sign of my theology. The first shall be a cross, black, in the
heart, which would have its natural color, so that I would give myself a
reminder that faith in the crucified one makes us blessed. For if one
believes from the heart, one becomes righteous. Whether it is a black
cross, it mortifies, and should also hurt, but it still leaves the heart
in its color, does not corrupt nature, that is, it does not kill, but
keeps alive, *Justus enim fide vivet, sed fide crucifixi*. But such a
heart shall stand in the midst of a white rose, indicating that faith
gives joy, comfort and peace, and in short, puts in a white, joyful
rose, not as the world gives peace and joy, therefore the rose shall be
white, and not red, because white. Color is the color of spirits and of
all angels. Such a rose stands in the heavenly field, that such joy in
spirit and faith is a beginning of the heavenly joy to come; now already
comprehended in it, and grasped by hope, but not yet revealed. And in
such a field a ring of gold, that such blessedness in heaven endures
forever, and has no end, and is also precious above all joy and goods,
as gold is the highest, most precious ore. Christ, our dear Lord, be
with your spirit unto that life, Amen. *Ex Eremo Grubok*, 1) 8. Julii
MDXXX.

**No. 1614.**

(Augsburg.) July 8, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 886, no. 966.

**No. 1615.**

Augsburg. July 8, 1530.

**Johann Brenz to Luther.**

Brenz thanks Luther for Letter No. 1599, which has strengthened him
greatly, and asks him not to be too concerned for Melanchthon.

1\) From now on Luther uses this anagram of \"Koburg\" more often.

Handwritten in London, *British Mus. Add*. Ms. 21,524, fol. 16. Printed
by *Humrnel, Epp. eccl. hist.,* tom. II, p. 36; in Hartmann and Jäger,
\"Brenz,\" vol. I, p. 458; in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 142 and in Erl.
Briefw,

Vol. VIII, p. 90.

Hail in Christ! I have received your letter, my dear husband who is
always highly esteemed in Christ, and it is impossible to express with
what joy of heart I have received it and have been strengthened in my
heart by it. I can never give you the thanks you deserve, nor pay you
back for the great benefits you have shown us through Christ. If I owe
anything to anyone on earth, I owe it to you. Therefore, my dear father
(xxxx), continue to comfort the afflicted and to uplift the saddened.
There is no cause for you to be anxious about Philip in your heart. He
is afflicted, he is sorrowful, and he carries sorrow, I confess. But
these griefs and worries amount to driving him to pray all the more
fervently. For what can you pray if the matter does not touch your
conscience? how can you strengthen faith by the promises if faith is not
challenged by adversities? Therefore, Philip has good hope in the Lord.
He has with him at home the Reminder, the Holy Spirit, so that he does
not need the remembrance of me, a wretched man. How the matter of faith
stands, I assume, has been written to you, dear sir, by others. Our
confession has been heard by the emperor. We daily await the confession
or rather the *invective* of the adversaries; what will happen after
that, the Lord knows. You continue, as you are doing, to support the
exceedingly good cause by your prayers. Fare well in the Lord. From
Augsburg, on the day of St. Kilian \[July 8\], Anno 1530, yours, Joh.

**No. 1616.**

Feste Coburg. July 9, 1530.

**To Heinrich Gnesius, pastor in Ichtershausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2146.

**No. 1617.**

Feste Coburg. July 9, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 814, no. 956.

**1516**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1618 to 1627.

**1517**

**No. 1618.**

Coburg Fortress. July 9, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 927, no. 991.

**No. 1619.**

(Augsburg.) July 10, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

News from Augsburg.

**No. 1621.**

Feste Coburg. July 13, 1530.

**To D. Johann Rühel in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 926, no. 990.

**No. 1622.**

Feste Coburg. July 13, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 931, no. 993.

Manuscript in Ms. *Manlii*, p. 24. Printed in *Mel. epp. ed. Peucer,
lib*. I, op. 8; *ed. Lond. lib.* I, x. 5; in *Coelestin*, torn. II, n.
209; in *Corp. ref.*, vol. II, 178 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
96.

Hail! Two days ago we gave letters to the Coburg messenger; because I
saw him here yesterday, I easily beat him to it. Our Arnold returns home
from the Mecklenburg court. Spalatin has written you the advice 1) of
the Spanish greats about our cause, which in my judgment is very
honorable. The sister 2) of the autocrat (\"xxxxxxxxxxxx), a woman of
very heroic character, of peculiar godliness and modesty, endeavors to
conciliate the brother against us, but must do so in a shy and reserved
manner. Only the peasant 3) rages extraordinarily and incites the
Emperor that nothing may be left to us, which I have learned from Legate
Campegius himself; and only the wicked count for \'something and are
stronger in the worst cause than the good in the best. It seems that
this will happen, that the emperor orders that everything be put back on
the old foot (*in integrum*) until a concilium has judged these
disputes. The adversaries have not yet answered, so we have nothing
certain. This the adversaries only hiss among themselves. Farewell and
pray for us. It is not necessary for you to write to each one, for by
one letter you will do enough for all. July 10.

P. M.

**No. 1626.**

Coburg Fortress. July 13, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 926, no. 989.

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 880, the penultimate paragraph.
Also in Spalatin\'s Annals, p. 143 f. The letter is missing.

2\) Queen Mary of Hungary.

3\) Duke George of Saxony.

**No. 1623.**

Coburg Fortress. July 13, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 929, no. 992.

**No. 1624.**

Feste Coburg. July 13, 1530.

**To Spalatin in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1759, no. 1181.

**No. 1625.**

(Coburg fortress.) (July 13? 1530.)

**Meanings about the abolition of the mass and monastic life 2c.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1724, no. 179.

**No. 1626.**

(Augsburg.) July 14, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1010, no. 1008.

**No. 1627.**

Coburg Fortress. July 15, 1530.

**To Jonas, Spalatin, Melanchthon and Agricola in Augsburg.**

Luther wants them to distance themselves from the Diet; nothing can be
expected from the refutation of the opponents; they have achieved enough
with the lecture of the Confession.

Handwritten in Berlin in the royal library, *Ms. germ. in fol.* 15 and
in *Cod. Rostoch* Printed by *Coelestin*, tom. II, p. 231; in *Buddeus*,
p. 155; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 96; in Schirrmacher, p. 365 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 112. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1208.

**1518** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1627. **1519**

> To Justus Jonas, Georg Spalatin, Philipp Melanchthon, and Johann
> Agricola Eisleben, his peers, at Augsburg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! We received the letters brought by Arnold
and the Coburg messenger yesterday, and I believe you already have the
answer of the adversaries, 1) which, as you write, is expected from you,
namely: Fathers, fathers, fathers, church, church, custom and habit you
will hear, moreover, nothing from the Scriptures, and trusting in these
arbiters and witnesses, the emperor will make his pronouncement against
you. Threats and boasts will follow to heaven and hell. But the Lord
will give you mouth and wisdom. By the way, as you write: \"Of other
things verbally in a short time\", 2) so do. More has happened than was
expected, namely you have given to Caesar what is Caesar\'s and to God
what is God\'s: To the emperor a perfect obedience, in that you have
appeared with such great cost, trouble and complaint; to God the chosen
sacrifice of the confession, which will break through into all the
courts of kings and princes, which will reign in the midst of his
enemies and go out into all the lands with its sound, so that those who
do not believe will have no excuse; namely, this will be the fruit of
the silence commanded at the beginning of the Diet. If now this reward
is added, that according to the testimony of the adversaries no article
of faith has been violated, then we clearly obtain more than I have
desired, namely we are freed from the shame of the heretic\'s name. May
Christ Himself confess us as you have confessed Him, and glorify those
who have glorified Him, amen. Therefore, I absolve you from this kingdom
day in the name of the Lord. \"Always home, always home!\"

Do not hope for concord or slackening, and even I have never asked God
for it, knowing that it is impossible.

1\) The confutation was not read until August 3.

2\) Compare No. 1614. - As we see here, Luther draws *brevi* to the
preceding, not to the following; perhaps he did it jokingly.

but only that they would allow you to teach and grant peace. Since they
themselves remain in their godlessness, even if they wanted to help us,
how could they? 3) If the emperor wants to issue an edict, he may issue
it after all; he also issued one at Worms. We will hear the emperor as
emperor, not further, not beyond. What is this disguised (*larvatus*)
emperor, the peasant,^4)^ to us? Here the same will create council, who
has opened the door of the emperor and the kings to our confession, and
if the emperor will push with force and weapons, which I do not hope, he
will again create council. We will give way to the true emperor, but if
the disguised emperor should do something, it will be something else.
Therefore, obtain permission \[to leave\] from the emperor by leaving
the prince\'s councilors there, who can cooperate in the remaining
matters. Our cause is settled, and you will not accomplish anything
better or more fortunate beyond that. That Campegius throws the power to
dispense high, 5) to this I answer with the words of Amsdorf: \"I shit
the legate and his lord in his dispensation, we want to find
dispensationes enough.\" Since the Lord commands, do not concern
yourselves with the servant\'s dispensation, if otherwise such a great
robber and attacker of the realm can be called a servant. \"Home,
home!\" The LORD JEsus uphold and comfort you who have labored for His
name\'s sake and have been afflicted enough, Amen. From Grubok, Friday
after Margaret \[July 15\] Martin Luther, D.

3\) We have framed this sentence as an interrogative sentence.

4\) Duke George. - We have put a comma in front of rusticus; this
prevents De Wette\'s misunderstanding: *Caesar rusticus*, that is, \"the
emperor acting under Duke George\'s influence\". *Larvatus Caesar*
belongs together, *rusticus* is apposition.

5\) This refers to a passage in Melanchthon\'s letter to Veit Dietrich
of July 8 (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 174): \"Campegius says he can permit
the use of both forms and the marriage of priests; with regard to the
monks, he says, since the key is not lacking, it cannot be dispensed.
There you hear the new religion of the popes. Only now they ask where
the key is missing, whereas before, since this question was transitions,
he could solve and bind everything.\"

**1520**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1628 to 1631.

**1521**

**No. 1 628.**

Coburg Fortress. July 15, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther awaits the return of the friends from Augsburg. The rage of Duke
George had been humiliated by repeated fires in Dresden.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv. Handwritten in *Cod.
Dessav*. No. 202; in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 57 d; in
*Cod. Ratzenb*.; in the

*Cod. Rostoch*; in Berlin, Ms. in fol. 15; in Cod. Jen. a, fol. 224 and
in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 68. Printed in *Coelostin*, tom. II, p. 230; in
Buddeus, x. 153; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 151; in De Wette, vol. IV, pp.
97f.; in Schirrmacher, p. 131 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 114.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1205.

> To his extremely dear brother in Christ, M. Georg Spalatin, the
> steadfast confessor of God at Augsburg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I await you here, my dear Spalatin, on your
return, and happily, that is, condemned to restitution by the emperor\'s
edict. But come in the name of the Lord; he who has overcome the gates
of hell has also overcome the threats of men. Add to this that in a
special way the threats of the peasant 1) went up in fire in the armory
in Dresden, 2) and now for the second time in the same city 45 houses
burned down. He is sufficiently warned from heaven. But I praise the
Enceladus and Typhoeus equals 3) bravery of the man who dares to face
the thundering, even the lightning. For the lightnings, which have
struck the towers of the godless places 4) at Alteuburg, are a good
omen; and if they had struck godly ones 5),

I\) Duke George of Saxony.

2\) *Monach. Pirn. ap. Mencken* II, 1546 reports: \"Anno 1530, Tuesday
after Valentini (15. Febr.), when Duke Jörge of Saxony was at
Leuteromicz (Leitmeritz ?) with Kunige Ferdinands, burned abe at the
Slosse the baking house, that at Getreit and tins 2c. trefflichen
damage. And in the same year on the eighth day *ascensionus Domini*
(June 2) burned at 40 houses abe behind the Badestobe na bei der
Brucken.\"

3\) Enceladus and Typhoeus, giants who wanted to push Jupiter out of the
sky, but were hurled down by lightning and buried under the Aetna, but
there they still breathe and spit out fire.

4\) Luther means the church of the canons in Altenburg.

5\) The reading *pias* is very striking to us; it can only refer to
turres. One would expect *pia* \[*loca*\], not: *pias* \[*turres*\]. -
Sagittarius reads *pios* == godly people.

I would believe that this was done by Satan because of his hatred of the
Word and baptism; but by these signs (although they followed) the death
of the dean was to be blamed (*oompulsari).* Christ keep us the prince,
amen. I am extraordinarily troubled by the displeasure of not being able
to be with you in body, and if it had not been a temptation against God
to subject me to so many dangers of the journey, you would certainly
have seen me present long ago. The grace of GOD be with you, Amen. From
Grubok, 1530, the 15th day of July. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1629 .**

Augsburg. July 15, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 890, no. 971.

**No. 1630**

(Augsburg.) July 15, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 944, no. 998.

**No. 1631 .**

Feste Coburg. 15.^6)^ July 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther suspects that restitution will be demanded of the Protestants and
that, if they do not comply, an edict of the emperor will be issued in
the name of Duke George. He exhorts his friends to be quite confident in
the face of this, if they only obtain the confession from the opponents
that no article of faith has been violated.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 55; in Copenhagen,
DIs. 1893, fol. 301 (dated July 13); in *Cod. Rostoch*; in Berlin,
königl. Bibliothek, Als. Sorm. fol. 15 and in Cod. Jen. d, fol. 19.
Printed by *Coelestin*, tom. II, 230d; in Buddeus, p. 154; in De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 98 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII? German by Walch, vol.
XXI, 1206 f.

6\) De Wette has correctly resolved the date designation at the end of
this letter: the *tertia post Margarethae, by* \"July 15\", because, to
count according to Latin, both the teriuluus u, quo and the termnus ad
quem are included; therefore, the resolution of the Erl. Briefw.: \"16.
? July\" is not correct. The reasons, which he also gives for the 16th,
are not conclusive.

**1522** Letters from the year 1530. No. 1631 to 1634. **1523**

Grace and peace in the Lord! So I suppose, best Jonas, that you have
already received the answer of the adversaries and are urged to the
restitution; if you do not admit this, then a commandment of the emperor
will go out, which will be enforced by the wisdom of the peasant 1) and
will be full of it. And why should we not let these water bubbles
blossom with equanimity? If they did not do such a thing, what disgrace
would they not carry away from this imperial day? Therefore, let us
grant them these threats and water bubbles. What do they harm? They
cannot think anything else or higher than that their threats are
terrible, since they know that they will achieve nothing by force and by
deed. I would say that we would be quite ungrateful if we did not
indulge them in these boasts, especially if they admitted to us that we
had not violated any article of faith. Would that God would make this
word quite firm and certain, and that you would receive certain
confessions and testimonies. \"Let us make use of them, what is the
point?\" For when this word becomes certain, it will be a divine voice
that has escaped from these fools, who have been overcome by the truth,
quite unawares. He who has admitted this upper sentence (*majorem*) must
also admit the lower sentence (*minorem*) and such a conclusion
(*sillogismum) as those* people do not see now. Only be strong and stand
firm manfully until they realize that their threats are not omnipotent.
Then it will be different; so I think. Greetings M. Eisleben, Spalatin
and all. For I make use of your permission (dono) that I do not need to
write a letter to every single one. From Peter Weller you will hear
everything that is going on in Wittenberg. From the desert of Grubok, on
the third day after Margaret \[July 15\] 1530.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1632 .**

Feste Coburg. July 19, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 924, no. 988.

1\) *sapientia rustica*, that is, by Duke George.

**No. 1633**

Feste Coburg. July 20, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1761, no. 1182.

> **No. 1634**

Feste Coburg. July 20, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther expresses his satisfaction that his letter to the Cardinal at
Mainz (No. 1612) has been approved for printing in Nuremberg. Von der
Widersacher Wüthen. His \"Revocation from Purgatory\" is in print; the
writing \"Von den Schlüsseln\" is in his hands.

Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 152; by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 104 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 124.

> To the highly venerable man, Mr. D. Wenceslaus Link, the faithful and
> \'righteous servant of Christ at Nuremberg.

Grace and peace! I am pleased, my dear Wenceslaus, that my letter 2) has
been approved for printing by you. For I sent it somewhat timidly,
fearing that, in view of the dubiousness (*religio*) of this city, they
would not allow mine to be printed. In the meantime, I hope, those
inciting sentences of the adversaries 3) will also have arrived, because
it is firmly decided that, since they continue to rage in this way, I
too will again put on my horns,^4)^ and confront these papers in the
fury of my anger, so that they have something they are looking for,
namely, causes to rage and make noise. For that they now cry out in this
way, they do so because they are idle and lack causes. Their lies about
purgatory 5) are now printed here in Wittenberg. I now have their lies
about the keys under my hands. You pray for me

2\) The letter to Cardinal Albrecht, St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 916. -
At Nuremberg, censorship was exercised on the part of the council.

3\) This will mean the writings listed in our edition, Vol. XVI, 944,
No. 997. Cf. idiä. No. 998.

4\) The explanation of *cornua sumere* by: \"gain courage\", which the
Erl. Briefw. after *Ovid*. *ars amat.*, I, 239, does not fit here.

5\) \"Luther\'s Revocation of Purgatory,\" St. Louis edition, vol.
XVIII, 874. \"Luther\'s Writing of the Keys,\" idla. Vol. XIX, 902.

**1524**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1634 to 1639.

**1525**

and the whole church of God, and be at ease in the Lord. But greet me
thy flesh, the vine itself with its exceedingly dear grapes. From the
desert Grubok, which you, great prophet, have so quickly turned back.
July 20, 1530.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1635.**

Augsburg. July 20, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

Privately, a demand has been made to the Protestant princes that they
abandon their cause; they have responded to this. The confutation has
not yet been announced. Question about the vows and about human
statutes. Report that Oekolampad has written a dialogue against him.

The original is in Munich, *Cod*. I, 275. Printed in the *Epp. Mel. ed.
Pezel, lib.* Ill, p. 141; in the *ed. Lond. lib*. Ill, ep. 68; in the
*ed. Lugd. Bat*. 1697, lib. VI, p. 309; in the *Corp. Ref.,* vol. II,
217; and in the Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 125.

> To D. Martin Luther, his extremely dear father.

Hail! I hope that you have received the bundle of our letters in which
we have written what is going on here. In the meantime, nothing new has
happened that would be worth reporting. Nothing has been decided about
our matter, and the opinions seem to me to be extraordinarily diverse.
Sometimes some are willing to be fair, but these are soon reversed by
the calumnies of ungodly people.

Privately, the princes have been asked to abandon our cause. ^1)^ Our
people answer today, and explain to the emperor that they are prevented
by their conscience (*religione*) from betraying this cause. The
refutation of the opponents has not yet been presented to us.

To the questions I ask you to answer me. Because also for the sake of
vows it is dangerous in this trade. If one may do a work of
thanksgiving, one may also do a vow in the same opinion. Therefore it
will follow that the vows are services or latrieen (xxxxxxxx), as they
are called in the schools, and noth

1\) See Förstemann, Urkundenbuch, vol. II, p. 93 ff. As far as the
Elector of Saxony is concerned, see St. Louis edition, Vol. XVI, 932 ff,
No. 994 and No. 995. Melanchthon says that the answer will be given
\"today\", while Spalatin places it on July 21. The delivery will be
postponed by one day.

must be held in the appropriate manner. I sometimes argue about this
matter with my comrades, so you will do us all a pleasant service if you
answer this.

Oecolampad has written a dialogue against me, as it seems to me, more
carefully than he usually writes; I will bring it with me when God leads
us back there one day. I beg you, write again about the statutes of men.
I have indeed learned that, as Paul says \[2 Tim. 3, 5\], they have the
appearance of wisdom, and yet, when one looks into them, they are vain,
and at the same time they plague the consciences through this
appearance. Fare well. At Augsburg, July 20. xxxxxxxx.

**No. 16 3 6**

Feste Coburg. July 21, 1530.

To Melanchthon.

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1013, no. 1009,

**No. 1637.**

Feste Coburg. July 21, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2323, annex, no. 15.

**No. 1638.**

(Coburg Fortress.) July 27, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1454, no. 1073.

**No. 16 39.**

Feste Coburg. July 27, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther testifies to his good courage regarding the outcome of the
matter, and gives vent to his displeasure with the enemies.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 70. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 156; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 110 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 138.

Grace and peace in Christ! With joy I read your letter, my dear Jonas,
in which you show that you have no doubt about this matter, and it is
clearly God\'s gift who testifies that he is still with you. Indeed, we
now learn what it is for the righteous to live by faith, and by faith
alone.

**1526** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1639. **1527**

Faith. For what is left to us by which we can stand and live but this
very faith, since all our works and words are so miserably destroyed and
beaten to the ground that we not only do not deserve thanks for such
great good deeds, by which we have helped the whole world, but also
receive all evil for all good. If we were to live by works, where would
our life be? But faith will not be beaten to the ground like this, nor
will it be suppressed; if it reigns, we will surely live and not die,
because the Word we believe lives forever and says to us (John 14:19):
\"I live, and you also shall live,\" because \"the life is in Him, and
the life is the light of men\" (John 1:4). I believe, in fact, that in
the meantime, as I write this, this matter has come to a conclusion
(*epitasin*), and the emperor has threatened all horrible things, (that
is) that you, too, have survived the battle with the highest danger. And
yet God wanted me to be there, although in fact I am not absent. Yes,
Satan himself sometimes gives me such a good in the morning that I would
rather suffer the whole nights. \"Well, God has laid a great matter
before us,\" even though he knew that we are nothing but earthen vessels
\[2 Cor. 4:7\]; \"he also help us,\" that his power may be glorified in
our weakness. He began it, may he also complete it, so go to the
heavenly bodies. Hail to thee, O boy, for thy valor! 1) \"Who else would
know what is world or devil?\" They have denied God against the first
commandment, they have blasphemed the name of God against the second,
they have corrupted His word against the third, they have trampled
underfoot the reputation of parents and authorities against the fourth,
they kill and wage war against the fifth. What shall I say about the
sixth? In the seventh they are thieves, in the eighth false accusers.
And what do they not do and speak in the most shameful way? Above all
these they condemn us as heretics to hell, and demand from us the right
of possession over all these things, namely, that we should worship all
these things, justify them, praise them, and do the

1\) *Virg. Aen. lib*, v. 641.

We condemn ours, which is contrary to it, so that they have not even
given us a hair\'s breadth, we have conceded everything to them:
\"Aren\'t they fine fellows?\" who would like us to take part in such
things and be overwhelmed with the terrible horrors of the murders,
which have already been committed and are still to be committed on
innumerable souls, bodies and things, which have been bought by
Christ\'s blood. It seems to me that Satan clearly sees his end, and out
of unbelievable rage shows us his utmost and perfect foolishness in this
last spectacle. For who should not gladly stake his life on it, who
should not be hopeful in this matter, who should not boast and be happy
for such a glorious and in many ways exceedingly clear display of
godliness and innocence? To be sure, we must expect a more. \"If thou
shalt believe (he says \[John 14:40.\]), thou shalt see the glory of
GOD.\" But we already see a great part in the so great judgment and
vengeance of God, and it does not take place that we pity those
Amalekites with a foolish devotion like Saul \[1 Sam. 15\]. Without
God\'s will and man\'s will they want to perish, they ridicule our pity,
condemn our pleas, exhortations, enticements, even persecute us with
death and hell: they do not want the blessing, let it stay away from
them; they want the curse, let it come to them, and they must be before
the Lord always \[Ps, 109, 17, 15\]. If they are worthy of mercy, much
more Christ, whom they pursue with such great rage that, if they
themselves did not perish, Christ would necessarily perish. But I would
rather that Christ reign than those people, if one of the two must be
desired at all, and both cannot be preserved. Let Pharaoh perish, if
Israel cannot be redeemed in another way. But here the pig teaches the
Minerva. May the Lord, for whom you labor and work, look upon your
sacrifice as He looked upon Abel\'s sacrifice, and may your burnt
offering be fat \[Ps. 20:4.\], that you may see Cain inerrant and
fugitive \[Gen. 4:12.\], Amen. Respectfully greet my lords Andreas
Osiander, Johann Brenz, and those.

**1528** Letters from the year 1530. No. 1639 to 1644. **1529**

which Augsburg honors for their faithful works with banishment and all
evil (as much as there is in them), D. Urban Rhegius, Johann Frosch and
Stephan Agricola. \"So shall the world do\", otherwise it would not be
world, nor of its God 1) enough faithful people. From the desert,
Wednesday after Jacobi \[July 27\] 1530.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1640.**

Feste Coburg. July 27, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 1006, no. 1005 b.

**No.1641.**

Feste Coburg . July 27, 1530.

**To Johann Agricola.**

Luther expresses his displeasure at the nonsensical behavior of the
adversaries.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 68; ibid. *Aug.*
11.10, fol. 154 (undated) and

*Aug*. 19. 15, fol. 296b (undated). Printed in Literar. Wochenblatt,
Nürnberg 1770, vol. 2, 301; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 154; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 182; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 114 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 143.

Grace and peace in the Lord! That our adversaries turn to invective and
seek to provoke the emperor is a sign that they realize that they have
no right cause, and this is something old but long known with Satan,
that when he has overcome the truth, he turns the minds away to other
things, so that in the meantime the cause is neglected. This is what his
tool, Eck, did to Carlstadt in Leipzig, and often elsewhere. It is
incumbent upon us to push against this on the matter itself and not to
suffer that this cunning spirit distracts us. For only now do they say
that I said \"muzzlers,\" but they do not say how highly I exalted the
emperor and all the authorities, while they did nothing but revile,
thunder down, and curse the rulers, the majesties themselves, as Peter
did \[2 Ep. 2:10\].

1\) namely of the devil. In the editions is: voi, capitalized.

2\) In the first translation of Isaiah Luther had given Is. 3, 4. like
this: \"Maulaffen shall be their masters\", where he later put:
\"Kindische shall rule over them.\"

has predicted. But also this foolishness of theirs wants to be revealed.
It is God who makes them fools. My father said: \"Whom God wants to
afflict, he first closes his eyes. I mean, he has closed their eyes!\"
They already seem to me to be clearly no longer human, but even
inveterate devils; \"they want to go too sharp, they like to get sharp.
I do not believe that since the beginning of the world a more
unreasonable and nonsensical demand has been heard than this, that they
desire that all should be restored and all theirs accepted and all ours
condemned, after they themselves have confessed that much of ours is
true. For what would that be but to demand that it should be said
throughout the world that even the apology of our confession,^3)^ which
is commended by them, has been utterly denied by us? Truly, I am not a
little comforted by this vengeance of God, who helps us, on His enemies.
He has begun to repay them and will not cease until he consumes them,
since they are incorrigible and insolently tempt God, beaten with
unbelievable fury and nonsense. Our Lord Christ uphold and rule you by
His Holy Spirit, Amen. From the desert, Wednesday after Jacobi \[July
27\] 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1642.**

Augsburg. July 27, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1018, no. 1010.

**No. 1643.**

(Coburg fortress.) Around the same time 1530.

**Luther\'s Concerns of the Angular Mass.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1004, no. 1005a.

**No. 1644.**

(Augsburg.) July 28, 1530.

**Melanchthon au Luther.**

Melanchthon returns to his question about the human statutes. He sends
questions, the enjoyment of the

3\) \"Apology of the Confession\" still stands here for the Confession
itself.

**1530** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1644. 1645. **1531**

The first part of the book is a list of the questions concerning the
Lord\'s Supper under One Form, which were put to him by the court
preacher of Queen Mary of Hungary, in order to have Luther answer them.

Manuscript at Gotha in *Cod. Bav.* I, 968; in *Cod*. *Rostoch*. and in
Hamburg, Ms. 46, quarto, 15th. Printed in *Manlii farrago*, p. 118; in
*MeI. epp., lib*. Ill, p. 141; *ed. Lond*. Ill, ep. 67; in *Corp. ref.*,
vol. II, 233; in Schirnnacher, p. 368 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol.
VIII, p. 150.

To Doctor Martin Luther, the theologian.

Hail! Yesterday we left Wellern, well laden with letters, who, however,
if I calculate correctly, will not precede this messenger. I have not
written to you about the cause of the statutes, but about the final
cause: whether such customs, or works chosen by the saints without
God\'s certain command, can be services of God or, as the schools say,
latrieen (xxxxxxxx). As if Bernard, who is already right, chooses a
certain fast or order in this opinion, that he gives thanks to God
through this work, if he judges rightly. I think that he is mistaken.
Therefore, the fifth cause of the statutes 1) that I put in the note
written to you does not apply.

I am sending you the questions that today the confessor (xxxxxxxxx) 2)
of the sister of self

The queen has presented the documents to the queen with the stipulation
that they be transferred to you, and your judgment on them is expected.
He has appeared to us as a man of the greatest sincerity, and the queen
seems to be very God-fearing to all. Therefore, you will answer, and I
ask you to take the letter for the best, in which the questions are
continued and continued. For what other things can I write to you about?
We have nothing new here. Farewell. July 28.

Enclosure.

**Queen Mary\'s Questions \[July 28\].**

**Anno 1530. Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2228, before Luther\'s reply to the above
letter.

This supplement is found in *Cod. Rostoch*, Schirrmacher and Erl.
Briefw. with Melanchthon\'s letter, is missing in the *Corp*. *ref.*

1\) St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, 1012, No. V.

2\) D. Johann Henkel von Commerstadt, court preacher of Queen Mary of
Hungary. She had to dismiss him from her service, as well as her other
Protestant officials, when she became governor of the Netherlands at the
beginning of 1531, after the death of her aunt Margaretha.

permanent piece before Luther\'s reply in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 159
(perhaps in August) and in Schütze, vol. II, p. 208. Handwritten in
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod*. *Helmst*. 108, koi. 42 b; same *Cod*. *Aug.* 20. 2,
koi. 124 and in Munich, *Cod*. *CIm*. 944, koi. 130. In, German
Uebersetzung vor der Antwort Luther handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod.
Helmst*. 108, koi. 73; in Nuremberg, *Cod*. *Solger*. 70, koi. 51 b; in
Dresden, *Cod*. *Solger*. 0 351, koi. 70 and in Copenhagen, AIs. 1393,
koi. 299. Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 437b; in
the Jena edition (1566), vol. V, p. 262b; in the Altenburg edition, vol.
V, p.397; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XX, p. 265; in Walch, vol. XXI,
2742; in \"Etliche Trostschriften,\" Jen. 1554, p. 108 and in
*Bindseil*, *colloquia,* tom. Ill, p. 27. A different Latin text for the
questions, which, however, corresponds exactly in content to the one we
have given, is given by *Coelestin,* whom the Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII,
p. 153. We leave it with the one.

**No . 1645.**

(Augsburg.) July 28, 1530.

**Johann Agricola to Luther.**

Agricola reported that the Diet was dragging on because the opponents
could not find anything in the Confession that went against the faith.
The emperor, too, dragged everything out in long discussions and always
expected an answer from Rome about the writings of the evangelicals.
Bucer and Capito tried to win people over to their opinion.

Printed in Kapp, kl. Nachlese, vol. Ill, p. 361 (of July 27) and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 153 f.

> To D. Martin Luther, his most beloved father.

Peace from God! I rejoice that the God of this world has nothing in this
matter of the Gospel that he can blaspheme through his sophists, the
swine and dogs. And this one thing, namely, that they find nothing in
the confession (*Apologia*) of our faith that disputes any article of
the faith, seems to me to drag out the business of the Diet, for the
opponents have not yet answered. The emperor drags everything into long
and serious deliberation. Now the answer of the Roman pope about the
assertion of the confession and several other articles, which we
recently handed over to the emperor, is expected again. For they are
moved in many ways by the word which the Lord speaks through our mouth.

Capito and Bucer, with whimsical arts and wiles, seek to draw all whom
they can to their opinion, so much so that they have also invited
Henkel, the preacher of Queen Mary, that they might boast of him for a
time. Brenz suffered to be summoned to a new parley, and

**1532**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1645 to 1649.

**1533**

See, they immediately start the rumor that Brenz is with them. Thus they
seize everything they can in every way to strengthen their doctrine,
which is based on weak and powerless grounds of proof. Fare well,
dearest father. On the day of Pantaleon \[July 28\] 1530.

> Your Eisleben.

**No. 1646.**

(Augsburg.) July 30, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 992, no. 1001.

**No. 1647.**

Coburg Fortress. July 31, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 899, no. 978.

**No. 1648.**

(Coburg fortress.) (July 1530.)

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 416.

**No. 1649.**

(Feste Coburg.) July?^1)^ 1530.

**To Hieronymus Weller in Wittenberg.**

Luther again consoles him for his melancholy.

Manuscript in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. HeImst*. 108, fol. 105; in *Cod.
Rostoch*. and in Gotha, *Cod*. 432. Printed in Vollern opp., x. 208
(from 1546); in *Annales litterarii Helmstadiens*. 1784, tom. I, p. 481;
in Schütze, vol. II, p. 19; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 186 and in Erl,
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 158 f.

Grace and peace in Christ! My dearest Jerome, you must firmly believe
that this challenge of yours is from the devil, and that you are so
afflicted because you believe in Christ. For you see how safe and happy

1\) The Wolfenbüttel manuscript and De Wette put this letter on November
6. Already Köstlin, M. Luther, vol. II, p. 654 ad p. 214, remarks: \"The
letter cannot be from Nov. 6, but comes from a time, when Weller was
with Luther\'s wife in Wittenberg, but Luther was absent.\" Kolde, M.
Luther, Vol. II, p. 592 ad p. 339, says that it is \"from your summer\";
in any case it is to be put a considerable time before August 15.

He has made the most ferocious enemies of the gospel, such as Eck,
Zwingli and others. We must have the devil as our adversary and enemy,
all of us who are Christians, as Peter says \[1 Peter 5:8\]: \"Your
adversary, the devil, goes about\" 2c. Best Jerome, you must rejoice
over this challenge of the devil, because it is a certain sign that you
are holding a gracious and merciful God. You will say: this challenge is
heavier than you can bear, and you are afraid that it will overcome and
oppress you so much that you will fall into blasphemy and despair. I
know this trick of Satan: if he cannot overcome someone by the first
attack of the temptation, he tries to tire and weaken him by constantly
stopping him, so that he falls and confesses that he is defeated.
Therefore, as often as this temptation befalls you, beware that you do
not engage in disputation with the devil 2) or indulge in these deadly
thoughts. For this is nothing other than giving in to the devil and
succumbing, but you must take care that you most strongly despise these
thoughts given to you by the devil. In this kind of challenge and
struggle, contempt is the best and easiest way to defeat the devil, and
make an effort to laugh at the adversary and seek out someone to talk
to. You must flee loneliness in every way, because then he seeks to suck
you in particular, and stalks you when you

2\) Köstlin, M. Luther, Vol. I, p. 115, correctly states this rule of
Luther, that mau should not get involved in the accusations and
disputations of the devil, but despise them. The same canon is taught by
Cordatus No. 467, St. Louis edition, Vol. XXII, 813, K 51. Wrong in
Preger, Tischreden Schlaginhaufens, p. 23, No. 67 and, due to the wrong
reading offered there: \"more (mer) skillful\", also in the argument p.
XVII. The other codices offer: \"nit skillful\", an erroneous
translation of *non aptus in* Cordatus. This should have been given, as
it is in our edition, by : \"not laid on\", not inclined. Following in
Preger\'s footsteps, Lösche, *Analecta Lutherana* etc., p. 242 f., No.
372, has even changed the correct reading \"nit\" to \"mer.\" If Preger
and Lösche were right, then in the example given of the bishop\'s
sister, she would not have said: \"I have forgotten her \[the
thoughts\]\", but would have had to say: Now I have been clever enough
to dispute with the devil. This, however, would have completely
overturned Luther\'s rule.

**1534** Letters from the year

1530\. no. 1649. 1650. **1535**

alone. The devil is overcome here by mocking and despising, not by
resisting and disputing. Therefore, you must play jokes and games with
my wife and the others, so that you destroy these devilish thoughts, and
be careful that you are of good cheer, my dear Jerome. This challenge is
more necessary to you than food and drink. I will tell you what happened
to me once when I was about the age you are now. When I first entered
the monastery, it happened that I was always sad and afflicted and could
not get rid of this sadness. Therefore, I sought advice and confessed to
Doctor Staupitz (I like to mention this man) and told him how terrible
and frightening thoughts I had. He said: \"You do not know, Martin, how
useful and necessary this challenge is for you, because God does not
train you like this for nothing; you will see that he will use you as a
servant to accomplish great things. And so it happened. For I have
become (for this I may rightly say of myself) a great doctor, which, of
course, I would never have believed would happen at the time when I
suffered this challenge. This will undoubtedly happen to you as well:
you will become a great man; just see to it that you are of good and
strong courage in the meantime, and be sure to remember that such
sayings, which especially occur to such learned and great people, are
not without prophecy and foreshadowing. For I remember that once a
certain man, whom I comforted over the loss of his son, said to me:
\"You will see, Martin, that you will become a great man. I have often
remembered this saying, for such words, as I have said, have a
foreshadowing and prophecy in them. Therefore, be of good and strong
courage and throw away these extremely terrible thoughts completely. And
as often as the devil plagues you with these thoughts, immediately seek
conversation with people, or drink a little more copiously, or engage in
jokes and antics, or do something else cheerful. Sometimes you have to
drink more, play, joke, and even do some little sin out of hatred and
contempt for the devil, so that we don\'t give him an opportunity to

We must not become conscience-stricken over the smallest things,
otherwise we will be defeated if we are too anxious to sin in something.
Therefore, if the devil should ever say, \"Do not drink,\" you should
answer him thus: \"But I will drink primarily for this reason, because
you forbid it, and even drink abundantly. Thus one must always do the
opposite of what Satan forbids. What other reason do you think I have
for drinking \[wine\] so freely, chatting quite freely, eating more
often, than to taunt and torment the devil who had set out to torment
and taunt me? Would God that I could commit some excellent sin just to
taunt the devil, so that he would see that I acknowledge no sin and am
not aware of any sin. We must completely put the whole law (*decalogus*)
out of our eyes and hearts, we, I say, whom the devil so attacks and
torments. If then the devil once holds our sins against us and makes us
guilty of death and hell, then we must say thus: I confess indeed that I
am guilty of death and hell; what then follows from this? So you will
also be eternally damned! Not at all, for I know someone who has
suffered and done enough for me, and his name is Jesus Christ, the Son
of God. Where he will remain, there I will also remain.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 165 0.**

Feste Coburg. 1 \[August\] 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther complains about weakness of the main that keeps him from working.

Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 205 (without date); by Veesenmeyer,
kleine Beiträge zur Geschichte des Reichstags zu Augsburg. 1830. p.38;
in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 120; in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 119
and in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 161.

Grace and peace in our Christ! I have not been able to write at length,
my dear Philip, so the weakness of the head holds me captive, so that I
can neither read letters with certainty, nor endure the light. It is
nothing that you invent, I do not care for my health, as you have me in

**1536** Letters from 1530. no. 1650. 1651. 1652. **1537**

the letters that Peter Weller has brought with him,^1)^ accused. I am
quite idle here, only that the battles of the thoughts give me something
to create, through which I think, however, rather to find recreation. It
is the angel of Satan who beats me so with fists. But since I have
suffered so many deaths for Christ, I will also bear this sickness of
the head for him, or rather a day of rest (*sabbathum*). About the
statutes and the questions about the final purpose 2) at another time,
if I can. In the meantime, greet everyone and hope in the Lord. From the
desert, on the first of August\] 3) 1530.

**No. 1651.**

Feste Coburg. August 3, 1530,

**To Justus Jonas in Augsburg.**

Luther recommends his nephew Cyriacus Kaufmann to him, asks him to
interpret the 128th Psalm, and reports his own work 2c.

Printed by . Schütze, vol. II, p. 160; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 121 and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 162.

Grace and peace in Christ! Here comes on my order my nephew Cyriacus,
best Jonas, who wants to look for Hans von Jena^4)^ in this play. You
will take pains to see if he might find him. I did not want it to be my
fault that the young man, who is in such a neighboring place, should
return home without having made this splendor, so that there would be
something he could tell to posterity, since the Germans are sloppy in
writing histories. Peter Weller has told us in how great idleness you
live. Hem! (I say) does he not interpret the \[128th\] Psalm, *Beati
omnes*? I do not know, he said. See, my dear Jonas, what you do. I
admonish you that you use your head while you can and that you do not
use your head.

1\) On July 27, Peter Weller had left Augsburg, as we can see from
letter No. 1644. Therefore, our letter cannot be from July 1. On July
31, Weller had not yet returned to Coburg. See No. 1647.

2\) Instead of *fici sectionibus* we have adopted Knaake\'s Conjectur:
*finis quaestionibus.*

3\) In Veesenmeyer and De Wette in the text: prima *Julii,* but the
latter has dated the letter \"August 1 or 2\".

4\) About \"Hans von Jena\" see St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1079, note
2.

Have time, so that when the stone comes as an avenger, you will not be
able to do so afterwards. I also have plenty of leisure and time now,
but the weakness of my head does not allow me to use them; perhaps I
have also earned this through a previous fault. So far, I would like to
have borne this negligence and carelessness of yours by acknowledging
your diligence in writing me so many letters, for which I thank you. But
I also demand the promised interpretation, so that you do not return
home empty from Augsburg; otherwise I will interpret it myself, but not
without harm to your name. I have the 117th Psalm 5) under my hands,
\"Praise the Lord, all nations\", and I will try my word richness
(*verbositatem*) on it. For I have had to lay down the work of
translating the prophets. I have only finished the Hosea, by stealing
the hours for it and seizing the bright moments, and have been forced by
the same complaint to interrupt also the Ezekiel. Greetings from me to
all of us in the Lord. That I like Bucer\'s and his artifices, I have
also written before; 6) that they may be disgraced who disgrace and
blaspheme the Son of God! About Campanus I have heard with pleasure what
Philip has written. 7) What you also hear about Carlstadt, 8) tell me
also. The Lord be with you, amen. From the desert, where the Diet of the
Jackdaws has long since ended, and the wars that have been waged have
largely ended, much more quickly than your Diet, which has not yet
begun. Given on the 3rd day of August, 1530, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1552.**

Coburg Fortress. August 3, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1019, no. 1011.

5\) St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1136.

6\) In No. 1637, St. Louis edition, Vol. XVI, 2325, § 6.

7\) To Veit Dietrich, July 28 (not 26), *Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 228:
Campanus had been imprisoned by the Fiscal at Lüttig; whether he would
suffer the death penalty was still uncertain. Campanus did not die until
1574.

8\) Carlstadt was then in Zurich, where he was employed as Diaconus at
the hospital.

**1538Letters** from the year 1530. No. 1653 to 1656. **1539**

> **No. 1653.**

Coburg Fortress. August 4, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1082, no. 1012.

**No. 1644.**

(Coburg Fortress.) (August 4, 1530.) 1)

**Luther\'s answer to the five questions presented to him about Holy
Communion.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2228.

**No. 1655.**

Coburg Fortress. August 5, 1530.

**To Chancellor Brück in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1764, no. 1185.

**No. 1656.**

Augsburg. August 6, 1630.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

Report on the reading of the papal confutation and the fears attached to
it. About the death of the Imperial Prince and the illness of Duke
George of Saxony.

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. I, fol. 102. Handwritten in Dresden, C.
342, fol. 6. Printed in the Fortgesetzten Sammlung der Unschuld. Nachr.,
Jahrgang 1745, p. 7; in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 144; in Kawerau, Jonas\'
Briefw., vol. I, p. 173 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 176.

> To the highly famous man, D. Martin Luther, his very dear father in
> Christ.

\"D. Martino Luther zu eigen Handen.\"

Grace and peace of God in Christ! Now, my dearest father, after six full
weeks of deliberation by the adversaries, they finally delivered the
refutation (*confutationem*) of our confession to the Emperor last
Saturday \[July 30\]. For from so great

1\) The preceding letter is the reply to letter No. 1644, to which the
questions are enclosed, therefore this letter, which answers the
enclosure, will have gone out at the same time as the reply to the
letter.

Doctors and such great men the eternal truth and wisdom of God can be
refuted and captured exceedingly easily, as the Pharisees are an example
of, who were sent away ashamed, confused and dumb, because they had
asked whether one may give interest \[to the emperor\] 2c. \[Matth.
22,16.ff.\] This answer of Eck, Faber\'s 2c. was now read out last
Wednesday \[Aug. 3\] before the emperor and the estates of the empire,
2) with a preface and postscript added in the name of the imperial
majesty, as you will see from the German note inserted here. This
reading also lasted two whole hours, but with an unbelievable
reluctance, weariness and disgust of some of the more sensible
listeners, who complained that they had almost been driven out by this
quite cold, hackneyed little song (*cantilena*), and were
extraordinarily annoyed that the ears of the emperor had been bothered
with such a large pile of useless things under the title of Catholic
doctrines. The Queen Mary\'s Chaplain 3) told us that they had improved
theirs five times, cast and recast, embossed and recast, and yet at last
a shapeless and confused mixture had arisen, and a mixture as when a
cook pours several soups together. At the beginning, they put together a
tremendously large book,^4)^ as Faber is a wordy compiler; the book grew
by the amount of invectives and lies. But the emperor eliminated the
third part of the book during the first improvement, so that hardly
twelve or sixteen leaves remained, which were read. Our people asked for
a copy or a duplicate; the emperor took it into consideration for the
following day. Yesterday many expected nothing but condemnation by
edicts, but the Mainz and some others advocated that a kind of truce be
made, or some semblance of peace, until a future concilium. And
yesterday the younger prince returned from a certain great one quite
cheerful and serene. There is hope that at least for this time this
postponement will be obtained,

2\) By the imperial secretary Alexander Schweiß, in the same room of the
Palatinate in which the Confession had been read out, the so-called
Capellen-Stube, in which the emperor usually had church services held.

3\) Johann Henkel.

4\) Spalatin, Annalen, p. 148, reports: \"There were probably two
hundred and eighty leaves in the first one, but the Emperor is said to
have shredded and rolled it so that no more than twelve leaves remained.
Maj. is said to have so shredded and rolled it that no more than twelve
leaves remained.

**1540**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1656 to 1661.

**1541**

Lest our doctrine be condemned, or our other things. In the meantime,
God, who in many ways and graciously hears the prayers of the godly,
will perhaps guide the emperor\'s heart differently, and cause him to
consider more carefully many things of which he has heard here, so that
they are neither contrary to godliness nor to respectability. God and
our Father in Heaven shows daily that the success of the counsels lies
in the prayers. \"I hope that the children\'s leetania and the praying
at table of many poor orphans\" in the Lutheran Church \"will come
closer\" to the throne of majesty and mercy, than from the beginning of
the world all the roaring and the *horae canonicae of the* canons 2c.
You, my dearest father, continue to pray and to ask, to knock, and we
will receive more than we can now think or ask.

The Emperor received the news at this Imperial Diet by mail that his
son, the Infant in the Cradle, who had the name Triumphoferdinandus, had
died in infancy. When the letter was read, which brought the news of
this sad case, the good emperor said: The Lord has given it, the Lord
has taken it, the name of the Lord be praised.

Duke George is ill, I don\'t know what kind of illness, they say he is
suffering from the dysentery that is raging here now. But they say he
will get well again; may God the Lord convert him or improve him by some
such cross! By the next messenger we will be able to inform you whether
the Diet will last beyond the month or not 2c. Farewell, my dearest
father, and let us and all our people be commended to your prayers,
especially the common cause. For we see and grasp almost with our hands
the fruit and effect of your prayer and the presence of your Spirit.
Again, farewell. Give my best regards to Veit, and by letter to your
wife and all yours. Given in haste at Augsburg, on the Saturday after
Peter\'s chain celebration \[Aug. 6\] in the year of the Lord 2c. 30.

> From the bottom of your heart, your J. Jonas.

\[J. Sturm (Storm), our herald and leader to the Diet of Worms, holds
and speaks of you here with us in the most honorable way.

**No. 1657.**

(Augsburg.) August 6, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1079, no. 1024.

**No. 165 8.**

(Augsburg.) (August 6, 1530.) 1)

**Joachim Camerarius to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Camerarius reports that he came to Augsburg mainly to see Melanchthon.
He was able to tell him many things about the events at the Imperial
Diet that were unknown to him, because in Nuremberg they talked about
them much more than in Augsburg. He praised Melanchthon very much for
his bravery and steadfastness.

Handwritten in Dresden, C. 342, fol. 11. Printed in the Fortges.
Sammlung, Jahrg. 1746, p. 165 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 183.

**No. 1659.**

(Augsburg.) August 8, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1080, no. 1025.

**No. 1660 .**

(Coburg Fortress.) August 14, 1530.

**To his wife.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1084, no. 1028.

**No. 1661.**

Coburg Fortress. August 15, 1530.

**To his wife.**

Since letters from Augsburg have arrived in the meantime, he adds this
letter to the previous one. In the postscript, he complains about the
laxity of the book printers.

From the original in *Cod*. *chart.* 379 at the library in Gotha, fol.
13 in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 132 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p.
187.

> To my dear Lord, Mrs. Katherin Lutherin zu Wittenberg, to hand.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Käthe! When I had closed the letter,
I received these letters from Augsburg.

1\) Burkhardt, p. 174, places this letter in his registry in \"April?\",
which cannot be correct, since the Imperial Diet only began in June.
When Camerarius came to Augsburg cannot be determined. The last letter
that Melanchthon wrote to him in Nuremberg is dated July 10 (not July
26, as *Corp. Ref.,* Vol. II, 228, No. 803). On August 13, he was back
in Nuremberg (*Corp. Ref.,* Vol. II, 275). That our letter is from
August 6 is clear from the mention of the letter carrier in the previous
number.

**1542** Letters from the year

. No. 1661. 1662. **1543**

I would endure the messenger to take her with him. From this you will
probably hear how things stand in Augsburg with our cause, almost as I
wrote in the other letter. Let Peter Weller read it to you, or he Johann
Pomer. May God continue to help as He has graciously begun, amen. Now I
cannot write any more, because the messenger is sitting there ready to
go and hardly waiting. Give my regards to our dear sack. I read your
letter to the Kastnerin 1) and she thanks you very much. I have ordered
Peter Wellern to see to it that Hans Polner 2) is obedient. Greetings to
Hansen Luthern and his schoolmaster, 3) I will write to him soon.
Greetings to M\[uhme\] Lehnen and all. We are eating ripe grapes here,
although it has been very wet this moon outside. God be with you all,
amen. *Ex Eremo, die Assumtionis Mariae* \[Aug. 15\] MDXXX. *Mart.
Luther.*

How distressed I am that our printers are so shamefully negligent with
the copies. I send such copies in so that they should soon be ready,
because they make me a storage fruit out of them. If I wanted to have
them like this, I would have to know how to keep them here with me. I
have written to you that you should take the sermon 4) (where it has not
been started) from Schirlenz and give it to Georgen Rau. I can well
think that Schirlenz hardly has to lay his large copy with paper. If
this has not happened, then make it happen soon, and the sermon will be
produced in the most beneficial way.

**No. 1662.**

Coburg Fortress. August 15, 1530.

**To Hieronymus Weller in Wittenberg.**

Repeated comfort against the spirit of sadness.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, 606th Sslrnst. 108, fol. 80 d; in Gotha,
606th 402; in Cod. Rostoch, cf. Schirrmacher, p. 215, and again, cf,

1\) The wife of the Schösser Paul Bader \"zu Coburg, a Hiltener by
birth.

2\) Hans Polner from Mansfeld is the son of Luther\'s sister, who came
to Wittmberg to study theology.

3\) Hieronymus Weller. Luther fulfilled his promise to write to him on
the same day with the next letter.

4\) \"Sermon on keeping children for protection.\" St. Louis Edition,
Vol. X, 416.

P.380. Printed in *Welleri opp.*, p. 205; in *Coelestin.*, torn. Ill, p.
28; in *Buddeus*, p. 182; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 130 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 188.

German bei Walch, vol. XXI, 1211.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although I have forgotten, my dear Jerome,
what I wrote to you in the previous letter 5) about the spirit of
sadness, and perhaps now write the same, so that I always play on the
same string, 6) I will nevertheless, since all our temptations must be
common to all, and without doubt, as I suffer for you, so also you in
turn suffer for me, also repeat the same. As there is one and the same
adversary, who hates and persecutes each individual brother of Christ
for the sake of the individual, so we are also one and the same body, in
which each individual suffers for each individual, and this only because
I worship Christ; so it comes about that in this way one is compelled to
bear the other\'s burden. Therefore see to it that you learn to despise
him. For you have not yet sufficiently learned this spirit, the enemy of
spiritual happiness. And be sure that you do not bear this alone, nor do
you suffer alone. We all bear with you, and all suffer in you. God, who
commanded, \"Thou shalt not kill,\" certainly testifies by this
commandment that he does not want these sad and death-bringing thoughts,
but living and exceedingly joyful thoughts, as also the Psalm declares
\[Ps. 30, 6.\], saying, \"He delighteth to live,\" and Ezekiel \[Cap.
33, 11.\], \"I have no pleasure in the death of the sinner, but rather
that he should repent and live.\" Whereas 2c. Since it is therefore
certain that God is displeased with such sadness, we have a firm
consolation that if we cannot be free of this evil spirit (*daemonio*),
we will suffer it more easily, strengthened by the powers of God. I know
that it is not in our power to remove these thoughts if we want to, but
I know again that they will not get the upper hand, because it says
\[Ps. 55, 23.\]: \"He will give the righteous

5\) No. 1649.

6\) *Horat, ars poetica,* v. 284 (not 356, which the Erl. Briefw.
offers).

7\) Instead of *illius* in the editions, we have assumed *illis* with
the Wolfenbüttel and Rostock manuscripts.

**1544** Letters from 1530. no. 1662. 1663. 1664. **1545**

not leave you in trouble forever\", if only we learn to cast our concern
on him. But the Lord Jesus will stand by you, the strong fighter and
unconquerable victor, amen. From the desert, August 15,^1)^ 1530.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1663.**

(Feste Coburg.) August 15, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1082, no. 1027.

**No. 1664.**

(Coburg fortress.) First half of August 1530.

**Concerns about how the Protestant estates should behave.**

This document is found only in *Coelestin*, tom. Ill, p. 42, without
indication of its source, and printed from it in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VIII, p. 191. - The determination of the time results from the following
considerations: It is, as can be seen from the V. Stück, written after
the reading of the Confutation on August 3. On August 15, the Select
Committee of the Fourteen was formed, in which the negotiations were
conducted that were to serve as a basis for a settlement. The Emperor
had thus abandoned the intention of deciding on the matter alone.
Therefore, the order to raise this concern can only fall in the period
from August 3 to 14.

Luther\'s opinion on the question of what the Protestant estates should
do when the imperial majesty again demands that the judgment on the
matter of religion be left to him.

I. Let the speech begin immediately with the first beginning of the
purified doctrine, and by the careful repetition of all circumstances
let it be recalled to the Emperor\'s memory by what necessity and
occasion the Protestant estates were driven and moved to it, that they,
after having renounced papal idolatry, and having eradicated and
rejected from the church the ineffectual foundations of godless
superstitious customs and human statutes, have accepted and taken upon
themselves to defend this doctrine, which they knew to be

1\) Cölestin, Buddeus and De Wette date this letter from August 10, but
as the previous letter shows, our letter cannot have been written
already on Aug. 10.

According to the writings of the prophets and apostles, based on them
and confirmed by them.

II\. the opinion and sum of the letter \[to this Imperial Diet\] 2) may
be diligently insisted upon, namely that the Imperial Majesty has
promised in the same that he will hear and recognize the cause of both
parts and will make an effort that the discords of the church will be
settled, the disputes will be settled in kindness and love, and just as
all fight under the one banner of Christ, so also all unanimously
confess one faith. If the opinion of this letter were not enough, there
would be many who would put the cause of it and all the blame on the
emperor; the Protestant princes would rather prevent this than allow it
in a foolish way.

Thirdly. Let it be added that the Estates have good hope that the
Imperial Majesty will not make any presumptuous pronouncements about the
state of religion before the matter is decided, nor will he arrogate to
himself such a prestige that he will raise himself to the position of
judge and arbitrator over God and his word.

IV\. However much the emperor may claim for himself the judgment of
religion, the Protestant estates cannot in any way consent to this
demand, since there would be danger that the emperor would determine
something of this kind, which would be quite unlike and inappropriate to
the word of God, while it is written \[Gal. 1:8\] that even if an angel
came from heaven and taught a different gospel, one should not believe
him. Since we are forbidden by God\'s command to believe the words of an
angel, it behooves us even less to grant or favor the emperor than a man
who strays from the path of the divine word.

V. Since the Confutation had been read to the Protestant estates in the
name and by authority of the Emperor, one could easily assume that the
Emperor was not alone on the side of the adversaries,

2\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 622 ff, ,No. 890. The passage referred
to by Luther is found there Col. 627.

**1546**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1664. 1665.

**1547**

but he is also the party himself. Therefore, even according to the rule
of his ancestors, His Majesty is by no means free, or permitted, to take
the judgment into his own hands on matters that he publicly presents as
his own.

**No. 1665.**

(Feste Coburg.) August 20, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther recommends Matthias Auner to him and complains that his letters
written to Augsburg are being distributed. In the postscript, the report
that the 118th Psalm had come out, but that he had received only two
copies of it, which he sent immediately.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst.* 108, fol. 82d; in *Cod.
Rostoch*, cf. Schirrmacher, p. 240, and ibid. again, cf. Schirrmacher,
p. 361. Printed in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1734, 162 and ibid. 1737,
378; in De Wette, vol. IV, p.134f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
104. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1212.

> To his exceedingly dear brother in the Lord, Philip Melanchthon, the
> faithful servant and disciple of Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I had nothing to write, my dear Philip, only
had to serve this man who is going to Augsburg, I don\'t know because of
what old affair with the Dukes of Mecklenburg 2c. He has persistently
asked me to recommend him to the Lord Chancellor. But I, who know that
this time is inopportune for such things, do it unwillingly. And
therefore I recommend him to you, that you assist him, as the matter and
opportunity give, or rather advise him away. He is a citizen of
Schmiedeberg, Matthias Auner, the father of the wife of the poet
Sibutius, 1) whom you know, a completely blameless man.

It is a quite extraordinary complaint of all from Wittenberg that my
letters, which I wrote to you, have been made known 2). The whole blame
is put on Magister Veit. He is indignant and suffers injustice; but
others accuse Caspar Müller, who took everything away from Magister
Eisleben.

1\) So xootissao Kikntlnao is to be translated. Sibutius Wax posta
iauroatus. About him see No. 562.

Ä) Probably not in print, as De Wette thinks.

> and sends them to Leipzig to all D. Stromer. Thus the communication of
> letters continues, and one orders the other to keep it secret until
> they are in enemy hands everywhere.
>
> which are carried here about our cause.
>
> Hold victory dances (*tripudiant*, as you would

The church is called the \"Wittenbeer\" because it is in bad shape, and
because of Philip\'s sadness and sorrow. The people of Wittenberg are
sorry and annoyed about this. I am writing this so that you may want to
improve this somewhat. I have no interest in my letters being circulated
or published. Then I gladly allow the adversaries to rejoice before the
victory, as they have always done up to now, by rejoicing when they have
done evil, and being glad in the case of foreign evil, so that they
perish from the bottom and forever.

I had no time to write to the others. This night I have been tormented
by toothache and bothered with it. I await your return with pain, then I
wish to know what Christ has done with your devils in the meantime. I
hope for worldly peace, but only faintly. About the departure of the
landgrave verbally. Greetings to all of us. I had also forgotten this:
it is thought that some of you are writing to your house in Wittenberg
and to their comrades or good friends things that they do not have from
our letters; this increases this excitement. Whether George or Erasmus
does this, I do not know. God be with you, amen. August 20, 1530, your
Martin Luther.

Finally, my Psalm Confitemini^4)^ is printed and published, and ours
have sent me two whole copies with a part of the book of Justus Menius
5) and my Sermon of the Schools. \"They would have been out of line to
send me so many copies; that they may honor God!\" I myself have none,
nor have I had time to read it over,

3\) \"Georg\" is probably Rörer, and \"Erasmus\" Reinhold from Saalfeld,
who was in Wittenberg in 1529 and had a number of students under his
supervision. Later he became professor of mathematics.

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1174.

5\) Luther\'s preface to this book is found in the St. Louis edition,
vol. XIV, 306. - The \"Luther\'s sermon that one should keep the
children to school,\" ibid. vol. X, 416.

**1548** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1665. 1666. 1667. **154A**

since one was promised to the abbot, 1) the other to Eoban Hesse, and
have sent it to them with this hurried messenger. Perhaps you will have
it sooner than I. 2)

**No. 1666.**

Coburg Fortress. August 20, 1580.

**To the Abbot Friedrich Pistorius at Nuremberg.**

Luther sends him the 118th Psalm, which he dedicated to him.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 836 and in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed by *Coelestin*, tom. Ill, p. 406; in *Buddeus*, p. 185
; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 136 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 106.
German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1214.

> To the venerable and highly venerable man, Mr. Friedrich, right abbot
> of St. Aegidien in Nuremberg, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord. Venerable abbot, highly venerable in
Christ! I send you, dear father, this Psalm Confitemini, which is
published under your name. For I have no other service with which to
earn your favor or to give thanks for your kindness. But I have begun to
secretly fear that perhaps, with your danger, your name will be carried
around together with my damned and cursed name, as I have written
before, and in this way, as much prestige as I have under your name, as
much dishonor and hatred will be in store for you under my name. If this
should be so, I ask forgiveness and beg off my imprudence, which may be
easily excused for the sake that I have done whatever it may be, not in
the desire to do harm, but in the simple and pure mind, however it may
be, to show myself grateful. And I know, by the exceeding goodness of
your heart, you will gladly forgive me.

1\) Friedrich Pistorius at Nuremberg, to whom the psalm is dedicated.

2\) De Wette dates this postscript: \"Probably from Aug. 22. But because
of the \"hurried messenger\", Matthias Auner, who delivered this letter
to Melanchthon, and no doubt also took the two following letters
together with the copies to Nuremberg, this date cannot have taken
place.

show. They have not sent more copies from Wittenberg now 3) than these
two, one of which I have sent to Eoban Hesse, the other one to you, dear
father, not both to send something great, but to keep my word.
Otherwise, I would also have been very happy to send \[copies\] to the
Syndicus Spengler and all Link, quite excellent men. But I sent them by
this hurried messenger, so that I myself have not even read them over,
nor do I have a copy for the time being, until several are sent. May the
Lord Jesus, our light and salvation, enlighten you and keep you with us
until that day, amen. From the desert, 20.^4)^ August 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 166 7.**

Coburg Fortress. August 20, 1530.

**To Eoban Hesse in Nuremberg.**

Luther sends him a copy of the 118th Psalm and speaks highly of Hesse\'s
arrangement of the same Psalm.

Printed in *Eob. Hessi opp. famil.*, p. 269; in Schütze, vol. Ill, p.
169; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 137 (of Aug. 22) and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VIII, p. 197 f.

> Martin Luther sends his greetings to Hel\[ius\] Eoban Hesse.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I send my psalm, best Eoban, which I
promised, stained with my slobber. For I have also received yours 5)
with your exceedingly sweet letter, have also read it with joy and
thanksgiving, and read it over again daily. I do not demand, nor do I
wish, that you like mine as I like yours, even though it is the same
psalm. For I do not want to be compared to a poet in any way, as I
neither should nor can. For you are the king 6) of poets and a poet of
kings, or, to put it more correctly, a royal poet and a poetical king,
you who have written that royal psalm.

3\) Already on Aug. 14, Rörer sent a copy to Roth in Zwickau.

4\) The manuscripts have this correct date, while the editions (except
for the Erl. Briefw.) offer Aug. 22.

5\) Compare No. 1486.

6\) See No. 1532.

**1550**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1667. 1668. 1669.

**1551**

poet so beautifully in a language foreign to him. I thank you that you
make me happy with such pleasure and comfort. And God would that it were
in my power that I could again do something to please you. I have become
a lean and unprepossessing (*sordidulus*) theologian from a brilliant
and fat sophist. Besides this meager and bad (*sordidam*) theology, I
have nothing. This you will accept instead of a gift and service, and in
my name greet the queen with the princes (*regulis*) kindly from me.
Greet Wenceslaus in my place. At another time I will write to him, now I
could not, because the messenger hurried, and I had all night I do not
know what kind of pain in a tooth, so that I am also a little sluggish
to write. May the Lord rule and keep you all with us to His glory, Amen.
From the desert, 1530. ^1)^

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1668.**

(Augsburg.) August 22, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 1401, no. 1057.

**No. 1669 .**

(Augsburg.) (August 23, 1530.)

**Spalatin to Luther.**

Urgent request for an answer. Spalatin hopes that they will not have to
stay in Augsburg much longer, since the Elector has already sent some of
their luggage home. In Italy, someone is writing vehemently against the
pope. Rumor has it that the pope is under siege in Engelsburg.
Melanchthon seems to want to give in too much to the opponents,
therefore Luther\'s quick answer is necessary. From a letter of Erasmus
to Melanchthon (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 288). The Confitemini has not yet
arrived.

Printed in *Verpoorten, sacra sup. aevi analecta,* Coburg. 1708, p. 65
(erroneously as addressed to Wenc. Link) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII,
p. 201. - The date results from the report of the Nuremberg envoys to
the Council, August 23 (*Corp. Ref.,* vol. II, no. 855, col. 302): \"The
Elector of Saxony dispatched his troop of chests and others on four
wagons yesterday \[i.e., Aug. 22\].\" Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 152, places
our letter on August 25.

1\) There can be no doubt that this letter was written on the same day
as the previous two.

Through your Cyriacus 2) and Martin, the servant (*clientem*) of the
Fuggers, perhaps a more. Now we very much desire your answer. We hope
that we will not stay here very long, for yesterday several carts were
sent ahead with boxes and sacks of coats, perhaps so that we could
travel home all the more quickly. God willing that everything, whatever
it may concern, be settled in such a way that both the word of God and
the common peace of all Germany may remain with us. Today I heard from
the mayor of Esslingen 3) that someone has risen in Italy who is writing
very sharply against the Roman pope. There is also a rumor that the
Roman pope is besieged and locked up in Engelsburg by the Orsinians and
Columnsians, which gives us all great pleasure. Philip Melanchthon,
tired of the incredible malice and impiety of the adversaries, seems to
want to concede them something too much. Only you answer us immediately
what we can safely and without injury to the honor of God and His word
and our blessedness indulge in, and whether, if they insist, we should
ask the legate and the emperor for permission 4). Today Philip has
received a letter from Erasmus, given at Freiburg on August 17,^5)^ , in
which he writes immediately at the beginning: \"if his letters had any
influence, nothing less would happen than that a war would be
undertaken. He had not been ordered by anyone in the name of the Emperor
6) to be present at this Imperial Diet. He had written neither to the
Emperor nor to Ferdinand in this Imperial Diet, so that he would not of
his own free will interfere in such a dangerous trade. It was also not
hidden from him that there were certain people at whose discretion this
matter was being handled, who did not want him very well. Certainly, Eck
placed some of his sentences among the heretical ones, 7) only that
instead of \'Erasmus\' he says: Instead of \'Erasmus\' he says: \'a
certain one\', which he would never have expected from him\". He also
uses these words: \"However, no private insult will drive me to be the
instigator of a war.

2\) Cyriacus Kaufmann, Luther\'s nephew.

3\) Holdermann.

4\) This refers to the *moderamen Catholicorum of* August 19. See St.
Louis, Vol. XVI, No. 1046, Col. 1386.

5\) The *Corp. Ref.* sets this letter for August 18.

6\) Instead of *ut nomine Caesaris,* we have assumed *nomine Caesaris,
ut,* in agreement with the letter of Erasmus.

7\) in Eck\'s 404 theses. See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 651, note 5.

**1552** Letters from 1530. no. 1669 to 1673. **1553**

should. I have long since demanded to leave Germany, and now necessity
is forcing me to do so. Here we hardly have anything to eat or drink.
^1)^ What would happen in the war?\"

All of us greet you with love and reverence. I have not yet been able to
see or read your beautiful Confitemini.

**No. 1670.**

Coburg Fortress. August 24, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 2317, annex, no. 11.

**No. 1671.**

Coburg Fortress. August 24, 1530.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1400, no. 1056.

**No. 1672.**

(Augsburg.) August 25, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1451, na. 1070.

**No. 1673.**

Augsburg. August 25, 1530.

**Martin Bucer to Luther.**

Bucer wrote that after reading Oecolampad\'s dialogue, he had come to
the conclusion that there was no real opposition between them and
Luther, which he tried to justify. Melanchthon had put Bucer\'s opinion
into articles that he sent him. But he, too, had summarized his opinion
in articles, through which Luther would hopefully become more inclined
to restore unity, especially since the progress of the Gospel was also
being hindered in France by the existing discord. - Luther did not
answer this letter.

Printed in *Buceri scripta anglicana etc.. Basileae* 1577, fol., p. 692,
with the supplement, also in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 209.
Without the supplement in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 149. The supplement
alone with very different text and datirt: *fere 25. Jul.* in *Corp.
Ref.,* vol. II, 224. German in Neudecker, Urk., p. 156 and in
Schirrmacher, p. 351.

1\) Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 152, gives this sentence in his regest: \"In
Augsburg there is a lack of food.\" He has overlooked that these words
belong to the letter of Erasmus, and therefore refer to
[Freiburg.]{.underline}

> To the most distinguished proponent 2) of the pure doctrine, Mr.
> Martin Luther, his teacher, who is to be revered very highly in the
> Lord.

The grace of the Lord be upon you, most reverend teacher! Although it
has always seemed to me that there is not so great a difference between
the opinion of ours about the reality of Christ\'s presence in the
Lord\'s Supper and yours as is commonly believed, after having recently
read the Dialogue of Oecolampad 3) in which he sets forth the opinions
of the ancients about this matter, I believe I have become certain that
there is absolutely no difference among you. For since you do not
maintain that Christ is in the bread spatially (*localiter*), and
acknowledge that, although Christ is in one place in heaven according to
the body (*corporis modo existat*), he can nevertheless be truly present
in the Lord\'s Supper by words and signs, I do not indeed see what is
contrary to your opinion, that ours maintain that the bread is a sign
and figure of the body of Christ, and that he is in some place in
heaven. For they acknowledge that the bread is a sign and figure of the
present Christ, not of the absent one, and that through the sacred
emblems (*symbolis*) not only the memory of him but also Christ himself
is truly made present (sisti). I have discussed this with the highly
learned man, Mr. Philippus, who has put my opinion into articles,^4)^
which he sends to you.

I also send you the articles in which I have understood the same
opinion, adding, however, the way in which Christ is perceived as
present in the Lord\'s Supper, namely, with the eyes of the mind
(*mentis*). Likewise, that it is primarily the work of Christ himself
that he presents his body and blood to us in the Lord\'s Supper,
although he makes use of our ministry for this purpose. For I know that
those of us to whom I had to send these articles were not deterred by
anything else in your way of speaking.

2\) Kolde offers *assertori*, which we have assumed, the Erl. Briefw.:
*amatori*.

3\) *quid de Eucharistia veteres tum Graeci, tum Latini senserint,
DiaIogus etc.. Autore loanne Oeco*

*lampadio, Anno* M.D.XXX. 14 sheets in 8.

4\) The articles written down by Melanchthon, according to Bucer (*ex
ipsius ore*), can be found in *Corp*. Keim, Schw. Refgesch., p. 232,
says about them: \"Hardly at home from the conversation with
Melanchthon, Bucer found that he had spoken too Lutheran and had touched
on the doctrine of ubiquity. So he himself now put article\" 2c.

**1554**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1673.

**1555**

They think that it 1) ascribes to the work of the servant and to the
signs (*symbolis*) that which is Christ\'s alone, then also unites
Christ\'s body with the bread either naturally or spatially, which
Oecolampad has abundantly testified in his dialogue. In order that this
addition may not be offensive to you, I have made use of the words of
Cyril and Chrysostom, which make all this understandable. 2) Since you
are fighting primarily for the true presence of Christ in the Lord\'s
Supper, which we admit, I implore you, for the sake of the glory of
Christ, which is too much obscured by this unfortunate discord between
us, to allow the holy harmony between us to be restored. We say (and
this is the matter at issue) that ours have not contested anything else
than that Christ\'s body is said to be either naturally united with the
bread or spatially enclosed in it. You, however, have never asserted
this, but have only disapproved that in the Lord\'s Supper nothing but
bread and wine is offered, and that it is denied that Christ\'s body and
blood are truly present through the words and sacraments. Then, in order
that the words in which we may agree may have all the greater prestige,
let us publicly confess on both sides that our faith and our doctrine of
this mystery is and should henceforth be that which the Canon of the
Council of Nicaea 3) teaches, and which all the ancients follow.

We have recently received letters from the brethren in France, who write
that the Gospel is beginning happily among them, but that this
unfortunate discord of ours is so opposed to its progress that if it is
not settled, they cannot hope that it will ever happen that France will
hear the Gospel publicly. But if they should succeed in dampening it,
they have good hope that it will happen in a short time that Christ will
appear in public among them. For the king is not averse to the truth,
and now that he has brought his children to France, he is not averse to
the truth.

1\) Instead of *eam* in the editions will read *eum*, referring to
*modo*.

2 ) The expression Bucer uses here: xxxxx *faciunt,* is ambiguous, and
could also be translated as: \"which make all this something that lies
only in the imagination\". Bucer\'s fifth thesis would also allow this
translation. Melanchthon says about the view of Bucer and his comrades
(*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 223): *Dicunt, corpus Christi vere adesse, sed
contemplatioue fidei, id est, imaginatione*.

3\) See the end of the supplement.

of^4)^ , he will not be very dependent on the pope and the emperor, at
least in this matter. Then the extremely Christian heroine, the king\'s
sister,^5)^ never lacks her service. Yes, also a great number of the
great ones have already joined the truth. In a certain region of
Normandy, so many already profess the gospel that the enemies have begun
to call it Little Germany. In the meantime, however, since, as it is
wont to happen, because we are divided, some follow our opinion of the
Lord\'s Supper, while others follow yours, which in truth is one and the
same, even though it has hitherto been presented in different words,
many who might otherwise be won over are alienated from the gospel, and
a weapon is put into the hands of the enemies with which they can
contest the truth that has only recently arisen. They say: \"These
people are not united among themselves, which does not happen with those
whom the spirit of Christ drives.

For this cause, therefore, the brethren who are there waiting for the
redemption of Israel have very sacredly exhorted us, by order of the
Queen of Navarre, to use diligence and effort, as far as it is possible,
so that at last this discord may be subdued, by which they have added a
spur to those who were certainly already running of their own free will.
It is also hoped that when you have read the articles I am sending, you
will also be inclined to do so, especially since you know very well how
much our native enemies mock us for this cause and annoy the weak in
faith. I seek only the honor of Christ and the edification of the
churches, he knows this who is hidden from nothing; I will ask him to
give you and ours such a mind that we do not, for the sake of words,
since we have the same opinion in the matter, by our disagreement cause
the churches to be troubled longer.

May the Lord be with your spirit, you most valiant defender of
Christianity. Would that God were here to guide the cause of Christ
against the enemies of whom we have learned that they are armed with no
other power than that of flesh and blood. Fare well. At Augsburg from
the Imperial Diet, Anno 1530, on the 25th day of August.

Your devoted

> Martin Bucer.

4\) The two sons who were in Spain as scourges.

5\) The Queen of Navarre, Margaret of Alencon.

**1556** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1673 to 1676. **1557**

Enclosure.

**Nine sentences on the Holy Communion, presented for evaluation by
Martin Bucer in 1530 to several distinguished theologians who disagreed
among themselves.**

1st sentence. We deny the transubstantiation.

2nd clause. Likewise, we deny that the body of Christ is spatially
contained in the bread, as if someone imagined that the body is
contained in the bread as wine is contained in a vessel or fire is
contained in red-hot iron.

3rd clause. But we claim that the body of Christ is truly present in the
Lord\'s Supper, and that Christ is present in fact (*re ipsa*) with his
true body and with his true body.

Blood and feed us, using His words, which the servants recite, and the
holy signs, the bread and the wine.

4th clause. For we confess that as through baptism the power of
regeneration is administered (*exhiberi*), so through the signs of the
Lord\'s Supper the actual (ipsum) body and blood of Christ.

**5th** sentence. But we say that this is perceived only through simple
and unsearchable faith, as St. Cyril says. But we do not shrink from
these words of St. Chrysostom: \"O tremendous wonder, O great
benevolence of God toward us! He who sits above with the Father, is at
that hour held by the hands of all, and gives himself to be passed about
and touched by those who will,\" and similar things found in this or
others. \"But this (as the same here teaches) we understand to say, that
this proceedeth with the putting away of all carnal thoughts in heaven
(*in coelestibus),* and is seen with the soul only, and with the mind
only.\"

6th proposition. We admit with St. Augustine that Christ is in some
place of heaven, because of the nature of a true body, but we
nevertheless recognize that he is also truly and actually present in the
Lord\'s Supper, not spatially, but in a way peculiar to this sacrament,
which comes about through the words, which are believed, and through the
signs, which are seen in faith. For we confess that both are sacraments
only when they are in use.

1\) Here Bucer, as he says in his letter to the landgrave, has
deliberately shredded *vere et re ipsa,* \"because perhaps ours would
also like to complain about the little words *essentialiter et
realiter,* that is essential,\" and he translates those words:
\"wahrlich und selblich.

7th clause. For the words of the evangelists testify that it is a
covenant by which we believe that through the bread and wine presented,
the body and blood of Christ are brought to us, are present, and are
offered, which was made for this purpose only with those for whom they
\[the body and blood of Christ\] were offered.

Sentence 8. Nevertheless, we also confess that those who are endowed
with faith cannot behave in such a way against (*circa*) these holy
things in faith, that they nevertheless become guilty of the body and
blood, which are not absent but present, which happened to the
Corinthians.

9th sentence. For the sacraments of the Christians are signs and
testimonies of the present Christ, not of the absent Christ.

That one should speak of this Sacrament in this way, as the attached
Canon of the Council of Nicaea prescribes, they \[the Swiss\] also
approved in Marburg and still approve today. The Canon reads: \"Again,
at the divine table, we are not to fix our thoughts in a lowly way on
the bread and the chalice presented, but to contemplate with an elevated
mind in faith that on this holy table lies the Lamb of God who takes
away the sin of the world, who is not offered by the priests in the
manner of sacrifices, and we who truly take His precious body and blood
are to believe that these are the emblems (*symbola*) of our
resurrection. For this cause we take not much, but little, that we may
know that this is not for satiety, but for holiness (*sanctimoniae*).\"
All the holy fathers agree with this decree.

**No. 1674.**

(Feste Coburg.) August 26, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1414, no. 1062.

**No. 1675.**

Coburg Fortress. August 26, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1406, no. 1060.

**No. 1676.**

(Coburg Fortress.) August 26, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1402, no. 1058.

**1558** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1677 to 1687. **1559**

**No. 1677.**

Coburg Fortress. August 26, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1405, no. 1059.

**No. 1678.**

Coburg Fortress. August 26, 1530.

**To Johann Brenz in Augsburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 166.

**No. 1679.**

(Augsburg.) August 26, 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, Vol. X VI, 1452, No.1071.

**No. 1680.**

(Coburg Fortress.) Towards the end of August 1530.

**Concerns about quite a few disputed articles.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1407, no. 1061.

**No. 1681.**

Coburg Fortress. August 27, 1530.

**To Hans von Sternberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1132.

**No. 1682.**

Coburg Fortress. August 28, 1530.

**To Spalatin.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1457, no. 1076.

**No. 1683.**

Coburg Fortress. August 28, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1455, no. 1075.

**No. 1684.**

Coburg Fortress. August 28, 1530.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2321, annex, no. 13.

**No. 1685.**

(Coburg Fortress.) August 28, 1530.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1478, no. 1081.

**No.1686.**

(Augsburg.) August 29, 1530.

**Melanchthon au Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1453, no. 1072.

**No. 1687.**

Friedwalde. August 29, 1530.

**Landgrave Philip of Hesse to Luther.**

The landgrave sends the copies of the \"indiscriminate means\" proposed
by the papists and the \"Protestants\' answer to them\" (St. Louis
edition, vol. XVI, no. 1046 and no. 1047), complains that Melanchthon\'s
pusillanimity has left too much to the opponents, and asks for Luther\'s
concern. In the postscript, he offers Luther an asylum with him if he
should need one.

Printed in Neudecker, Urkunden, ,p. 153 (from the Cassel archive) and in
Erl. Philips von GOtts Gnaden Landgraf zu Hessen 2c.

Dear, dear special! We are sending you copies of what has been done and
sent to us by our council since our parting in Augsburg in the matter
concerning the 1) Holy Gospel, and we believe that Philippi
Melanchthoni\'s pusillanimity is to blame for the fact that things have
happened so strangely. They have also committed too much in their
submitted articles. For since the opposite does not want to allow the
Word of God to be proclaimed in their lands, nor to receive the
Sacrament in either form, nor to allow religious and priests to marry in
any other way than at a concilium, and tolerate us immediately \[as if\]
we were wrong, and we should accept their commandments in fasting,
eating fish and meat, and keeping holidays, and tolerate them as if they
were right in their thing, and let them, the bishops, be judges of our
preachers, who would no doubt not suffer them long: the gospel would
thereby be depressed and the old abuses would be reestablished, which we
by no means mean or are willing to accept. Because it is a worthy cause,
in which mighty and much

1\) In our prelims: \"des\".

**1560** Letters from 1530. ho. 1687. 1688. 1689. **1561**

is: We graciously request that you inform us of your advice and good
intentions in this matter, and that you know how to judge us
accordingly; For we are of the opinion that, although we create peace
for our countries and benefit ourselves by approving these articles, 1)
where we want to be Christians, the common benefit should take
precedence, 2) and the poor communities, which are burdened here and
there with the infallible burdens under the popes and bishops, and which
daily hope in God\'s grace and His word, are more to be regarded and
considered than special benefits. It would not only cause us evil
reproach, but would also give the Gospel trouble, if we were to allow
ourselves to be entangled again with such human statutes and
commandments by those who do not want to be corrected, because they do
not want to accept God\'s word, from which they are to be corrected, nor
allow it to be preached. We would not do this to you in your gracious
opinion; do us a special favor and we will recognize it justly. Dat.
Friedwalt, Monday after Bartholomew \[Aug. 29\] Anno 30.

To Martinus Lutherus.

Zedula.

We also desire that you now remain steadfast in these dangers and not
retreat when we provide for you, and if you cannot remain in the
country, we may suffer you to join us. We would also defend you with
God\'s help as far as our body and goods extend. That we did not want to
leave you undisclosed in our gracious opinion. *Dat. ut in literis*.

**No. 1688.**

(Augsburg.) 1. September 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1484, no. 1084.

**No. 16 89.**

(Augsburg.) 4. September 1530.

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

Melanchthon complained that messengers to Luther could not be obtained
more frequently from the court. He reports that the conditions demanded
by the opponents had not been accepted, and the matter had been returned
to the emperor, who had demanded that everything be restored to its
previous state.

1\) Neudecker: \"yr\".

2\) This is the Conjectur of the Erl. Briefw. In the original,
\"vorziehen\" should be found. But Neudecker often reads incorrectly.

3\) Maybe: \"towards\"?

He offered his assistance in reaching a settlement, however. The
Protestants replied that they could not give in any more than had
already been given in. The Elector would not decide anything without
first having turned to Luther. One must not let the opportunity pass to
make an honorable peace 2c.

Manuscript in *Ms. Manlii*, p. 47. Printed in *Mel. epp.*, *lib*. I, p.
28; in the London edition of the same, lib. I, sp. 19; in *Coelestin*.
tom. Ill, p-. 66; in *Corp. ref.,* vol. II, 340, no. 884 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 243.

Hail! I know that this prolonged silence is very burdensome for you,
especially at this time when we should be talking to each other the
most. But you may believe me that nothing annoys me more at the court
than this negligence, that they do not send messengers to you more
often. We cannot get them to send the same. I have sent this letter to
Joachim 4). We have not accepted the conditions set by the adversaries,
of both forms, of marriage, of the mass. Therefore, the matter has again
been referred to the Emperor for consultation. Three days ago, he
requested that everything be restored to its former state, but if we
believed that we would be adversely affected by his ruling, he promised
to help us reach a settlement. Our people reply that they know of
nothing that can be given to the opponents except what has already been
given. Thus the matter is pending, and yet today we have discussed
several conditions of peace; if the adversaries insist on these, the
prince will send them to you before he decides anything. Our comrades 5)
seem to be completely Swiss-minded (xxxxxxxxxx == helvetisiren), in
order to avoid the

I think that we should make peace all the more for the sake of peace.
The Nuremberg envoys and the Hessians do not give a moderate answer, and
the Lüneburgers agree with them. Our people think that we should not
lose the opportunity to make peace, if this could be done in an
honorable way. For a terrible change of the entire empire and of all
things is imminent if the matter should turn into war. Today I have
learned from a princely man and friend of the Emperor that the Swiss are
making whimsical attempts to disturb the common peace, and that the Turk
is preparing a certain and terrifying campaign. Be well. September 4,
1530.

4\) Camerarius.

5\) The landgrave and his followers.

**1562**

**Letters from the year 1530. no. 1690. 156H**

**No. 16 90.**

Augsburg. September 6, 1530.

**Justus Jonas to Luther.**

Of the repeated vain requests of the Elector to the Emperor to give him
permission to leave Augsburg; of the festivities on the occasion of the
enfeoffment of King Ferdinand and the misfortunes that occurred; of the
various fears regarding the outcome of the Imperial Diet.

The original is in Hamburg, Vol I, 108. Printed in Kolde, *Analecta* p.
152; in Kawerau, Jonasbr.,

Vol. I, p. 175 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 244.

Grace and peace of God in Christ! Two days ago, my dearest father, our
Elector was ready to leave here, and everything had already been
arranged for the start of the journey, after the Emperor had been asked
for his release. ^1)^ But on the next day, Monday \[Sept. 5\], King
Ferdinand received the Archduchy of Austria as a fief and at the same
time the Duchy of Würtemberg, and knightly games were arranged, at which
the Emperor himself was present, so that you shall know and not doubt
that it was an exceedingly great pageant, as great as can ever be
arranged only by the kings of this world, and with the fullest and most
brilliant equipment in all things, as we shall tell you orally. On the
same day, in the evening, the king invited all the princes and the
others, the cardinals and princes, to the banquet of Ahasuerus 2). There
our prince (for there is easier access to obtain something) again turned
to the emperor for his dismissal. The emperor (as he \[in German\]
cannot hold a conversation, which proves to be quite inconvenient with
regard to many things) answered the princes through an interpreter that
our prince should remain for several days for the sake of his majesty.
Today, however, we await the Emperor\'s answer in the common matter; how
it will turn out, we only hear speeches and conjectures from people who
do not belong to the most limited, and we ourselves assume something
from the earlier actions 2c.

The bishops seem to desire unanimity, and say that we differ in nothing
in the articles of faith or in the summa of doctrine, confessing that
they also teach in the same way as we do, that justification is through
the

1\) Compare St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1526 ff, no. 1110 and no. 1111.

2\) Esther 1, 1-4. \"Ahasuerus\" is called Emperor. Carl V. because of
his many countries and his splendor love.

Faith in Christ, without merits; and yet, if they have not suddenly
become other people, they have never thought or think in their schools
and churches for eternity of ever teaching Christ purely, but merits,
but works 2c. That is, admittedly, deceiving GOD and sending themselves
into time and circumstance (*uti foro*), but who else are they deceiving
but themselves? Meanwhile, we leave them to God\'s judgment and, God
willing, continue to teach and confess Christ with heart and mouth. \[As
an aside, I will finish the Psalm \"Blessed is He Who Fears the Lord\"
(Ps. 128) with God\'s help (unless the disturbances cease), and, if I
can, I will avenge the exceedingly poisonous, sharp and cruel
blasphemies against our marriage\]. Some, this is the other opinion,
also think that they will not put up with anything concerning our
Confession, but will only give a respite by granting a certain peaceful
truce until a future Concilium, but in such a way that the Emperor
condemns the Zwinglians. But I do not know what they meanwhile threaten
us so often condemned Lutherans under this truce. The third opinion
agrees exceedingly well with them that they will condemn us, which would
perhaps be more desirable than a union entered into with danger. We
believe that the Cardinal Campegius is armed for Christ\'s sake and also
for your sake, dearest father, with wicked artifices, rather with
satanic deceptions and wiles, but the Lord will repay this wicked wisdom
and wickedness according to their works, and in the midst of their plots
will strike these \[ungodly\] on the cheeks and shatter their teeth and
all their strength \[Ps. 3, 8.\]. \[As an aside, He will oppose them
with His unsearchable wisdom, who has so often said to the world (1 Cor.
1:20.), Where is wisdom now with the wise? \"and try who is wiser\"\].
Never has anything been said against the wickedness of the Romanists so
sharply, vehemently, and bitterly, that they did not righteously deserve
it. If the Lord gives it, they will one day hear from others what they
have judged here about both forms, about marriage, about the mass.

At the knights\' games of King Ferdinand, as it is wont to happen in
such a great tumult, especially when things turn out unfortunate and
unhappy for someone, six people were killed in one day: two perished
because a gun burst and greeted all the bystanders very well; one of the
soldiers was killed by someone who was wearing the shoe of a

**1564** Letters from 1530. no. 1690. 1691. 1692. **1565**

Another was stabbed by an enraged Spaniard whom he did not want to
avoid; the sixth, if I am not mistaken, as a large crowd was crossing a
small bridge, was pushed into the water and died. The Margrave of
Baden 1) was struck by a horse\'s hoof and suffered a broken leg from
this spectacle. King Ferdinand himself was knocked down three times in
this fight and in this chivalrous exercise, the third time, as they say,
not without injury, I do not know on which side, but he is said to have
bravely fought it out so that the queen, who was a spectator at the
time, would not be upset by the bad omen 2c.

Pray for the common cause, my dear Father. Those play, we are meanwhile
with the damned and outcast Christ the mockery of the rich, and we
mourn. But the Lord will comfort us one day. Farewell in Christ. In
haste. Augsburg, Tuesday after Aegidii \[Sept. 6\] Anno 2c. 30. Dem J.
Jonas.

I ask you for Christ\'s sake to take care of your health.

\[I hope that we will see you shortly. You will have the goodness to
greet Veit and to send this enclosed letter to my extremely dear and now
especially dear wife.

**No. 1591 .**

Feste Coburg. September 8, 1530.

**To his housewife.**

News of the imminent end of the Imperial Diet and the intransigence of
the papists. From his literary works.

From Karrer\'s Geschichte der lutherischen Kirche im Fürstenthum
Oettingen, in Zeitschrift von Rudelbach-Guericke, 1853, 4th quarter, p.
706, supplement XX a (with many reading errors) ; in Erlanger Ausgabe,
vol. 56,\'pp. 181 f. and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 121.

> My beloved housewife, Katherin Lutherin zu Wittenberg, for your
> attention.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Käthe! This messenger passed by in
such a hurry that I was not able to write much, but I hope that we will

1\) Margrave Ernst already suffered this accident on his way out to the
festivities. Förstemann, Urkundb., Vol. II, p. 378.

This messenger brings us letters from Augsburg that the action in our
matter has come to an end, and they are now waiting to see what the
Emperor will conclude and judge. It is thought that everything will be
postponed until a future concilium; for the Bishop of Mainz and Augsburg
are still holding firm, and the Count Palatine, Trier and Cologne do not
want to go to war. The others would like to rage, and provide that the
Emperor will command in earnest. Let it be done what God wills, that
only the Diet will come to an end. We have done and offered enough. The
papists will not yield a hair\'s breadth, so that one will come who
shall teach them to yield and vacate. I am surprised why Hans Weiß did
not accept Psalm 2). I would not have thought that it would be so
disgusting, it is nevertheless a delicious copy. Send the same herewith
completely, and grant it to Georgen Rau well. If you like the copy of
the keys 3) He Johann Pommern and Creutzigern, then let it be printed.
It is nothing to celebrate the devil. Whoever told you that I was ill, I
am almost surprised, and you see the books that I write before your
eyes. I have finished all the prophets, without Ezekiel, in which I am
now, and in the Sermon of the Sacrament,^4)^ without what else is of
writing with letters and other things. I could not write now because of
hurry. Greetings to all and everything. I have a big beautiful book full
of sugar \[for\] Hansen Luther, which Cyriacus of Nuremberg brought from
the beautiful garden. Herewith God commands and prays. With Polner do it
according to the advice of the Pomeranian and Weller. *Ex eremo*, on
VIII *Septembris* 1530.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1692 .**

Coburg Fortress. September 8, 1530.

**To Hieronymus Weller in Wittenberg.**

Luther advised him to accept a job he had received from Dresden.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 93 d; there,
*Aug.* 11. 10. fol. 236 b; in *Cod. Rostoch*. and in Cod*. Gothan.*
Printed in Welleri

2\) Ps. 117 in second edition. See St. Louis Edition, Vol. V, 1132,
note.

3\) St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 902.

4\) St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2170.

**1566**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1692 to 1696,

**1567**

opp., p. 205; in Schelhorn, Ergötzlichkeiten, vol. I, p. 624; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 183; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 161; in
Schirrmacher, p. 268 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 248.

Grace and peace in Christ! I am writing in the greatest haste so that I
do not leave you without an answer and make you sad. I would indeed
advise you to accept the offer of the Dresden vocation. If now, finally,
some danger to your conscience threatens or presses you, then it is easy
to leave the position again. For what is not done right there is neither
done by your command nor with your approval. Joseph served the idolaters
in Egypt, and Jacob among the idols of Laban in Mesopotamia, and Naaman
in the temple of Rimmon 1) in Syria \[2 Kings 5:18.\]. Who knows with
what fruit you could fill the Dresden youth in Christ there. Be content
with this little, be well, and may the Lord bless and strengthen you,
amen. From the desert, September 8, 1530, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1693 .**

Feste Coburg. September 8, 1530.

**Letter of interpretation and intercession of the saints.**

Although this is not actually a letter, but a polemical writing in
letter form, we have not been able to avoid elaborating on it here,
because Walch has included the first, larger part in the 21st volume of
his edition, Col. 309 ff, but assigned the second to the 19th volume. We
have now united both parts and placed them where they belong, namely in
the 19th volume.

**No. 169 4.**

(Augsburg.) (September 8, 1530.)

**Melanchthon to Luther.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1513, no. 1102.

> **No. 1695.**

Coburg Fortress. II September 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 1514, no. 1103.

1\) Only Aurifaber (*Cod. Helmst*. 108) has this reading; in all other
manuscripts and editions: *Nisroch*.

**No. 1696.**

Coburg Fortress. September 11, 1530.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

Answer to Letter No. 1687: The concern that the opponents had been
granted too much during the settlement negotiations no longer existed,
because the negotiations had been broken off. Luther thanks the
Landgrave for the offer of an asylum; at first he was frightened because
of the Landgrave\'s departure from Augsburg, now he is happy about it.

The original is in the Kassel government archives. Printed in
Neudecker\'s Urkunden aus der Reformationzeit. Kassel. 1836. p. 158; in
the Erlangen edition, vol. 56, p. XXVII and in De Wette-Seidemann,
vol.VI, p. 123 f.

> To the illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord Philip, Landgrave
> of Hesse, Count of Katzenelnbogen, of Ziegenhain, Dietz and Nidda, my
> gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime Highborn Prince, gracious Lord! I
have received E. F. G.\'s writing 2) together with the copy sent to me,
and at E. F. G.\'s request I hereby give my opinion to E. F. G.. F. G. I
hereby give my opinion humbly to E. F. G. that I have now written three
times to Augsburg to ask them for it, since they also demanded my
advice. They finally wrote me the answer that the action had come to an
end, but that these indicated pieces had been proposed, but not accepted
by our people and that they wanted to have that part even more. And,
since God was in favor of them being accepted by us, the dispute would
have begun anew, for I would not have liked to concede so far to the
devil that we should praise that part and condemn ourselves. Therefore,
let E. F. G. not worry. For my sake (God\'s will) nothing shall be
forgiven me in this matter. So now the matter stands in the Emperor\'s
judgment, that 3) one waits, how I will make up my mind, that this will
ever be attributed to E. F. G. as well. But I thank God that He has
preserved E. F. G. so steadily, and I pray that He will preserve and
strengthen E. F. G. until his day, amen. And I also sincerely thank E.
F. G. for his gracious and comforting prayers, that they are so willing
to accept me.

2\) No. 1687.

3\) It should be read \"deß\" instead of \"that\".

**1568**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1696 to 1702.

**1569**

It scared me first E. F. G. Farewell to

Augsburg, but I am immediately glad from the bottom of my heart that E.
F. G. got away. I have also sent the message that E. F. G. sent me in
the next letter before this one. ^1)^ The messenger had to hurry and
could not come before me, otherwise I would have answered E. F. G. as
well. The Father of all grace and mercy keep and preserve E. F. G. in
Christ our Lord, 2) Amen. *Ex Eremo, XI Septembris* 1530.

> E. F. G.

willing

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1697.**

(Augsburg.) September 10 and 11, 1530.

**Bergleichsmittel, proposed by Georg Truchsess and D. Behus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1509, no. 1099.

**No. 1698 .**

Coburg Fortress. September 12, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther sends the manuscript of his writing \"Vom Dolmetschen\" 2c. so
that Link can have it printed.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 95 and in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed by *Coelestin*, tom. Ill, p. 80; in *Buddeus*, p. 203;
in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 163 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 257.
German in Walch, vol. XXl, 1216.

Grace and peace in Christ! I am sending a copy for your Georg Rotmaier,
3) my dear Wenceslaus, which you will give to him when he is here, but
if he is absent, you should keep it for him until he comes, and not give
it to anyone else. You may, however, publish it under your name as a
letter from me, which has been sent to you by a friend and handed over
to you. For I would like this to be, as it were, a home.

1\) The letter of the landgrave mentioned in Luther\'s letter to Jonas
of August 28 is meant, see St. Louis edition vol. XVI, appendix, no. 13;
not, as the Erl. Ausg. states, the letter No. 1687.

2\) This word is missing in the manuscript, apparently forgotten by
Luther in the haste of writing (Erl. Ausg.).

3\) A bookseller and printer who is already mentioned in Letter No.
1620.

I have written and sent ahead as a prelude, as if I cared for nothing
and dealt with other things. I have written more extensively in this
matter, whether perhaps some could be received in this hope. Therefore,
you can put such a title in front: \"Ein Sendbrief D. Mart. Luthers vom
Dolmetschen\", or as you like.

We are sitting here, as it were, transported into another world, so
completely have we not received anything full of Augsburg for a long
time; everyone is stubbornly silent, as if they were defeated,
imprisoned and dead. You are quite at ease in the Lord. But listen to
one more thing: If this copy does not seem worthy to you to be printed,
because the subject is too insignificant, then it shall stand and fall
according to your judgment. Greetings to your flesh together with its
fruits. From the desert, September 12, 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1699.**

Coburg Fortress. September 15, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2318, annex, no. 12.

**No. 1700.**

(Feste Coburg.) (Sept. 17 or 18, 1530.)

**Luther\'s comments on the remedies proposed by Truchsess and Behus.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1510, no. 1100.

**No. 1701.**

Feste Coburg. September 20, 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1525, no. 1109.

**No. 1702.**

Feste Coburg. September 20, 1530.

**To Melanchthon.**

Luther wrote that he had to hear many complaints about his Augsburg
friends and tried to reject them, and was also convinced that they
forgave nothing of the Gospel; he asked him to write in detail about the
last events so that he could shut up the accusers.

**1570**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1702 to 1706.

**1571**

Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 186; by Strobel, Miscell. vol. Ill, p.
86; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 19; by De Wette, vol. IV, D. 168 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 264.

> To his extremely dear brother, M. Philipp Melanchthon, the servant of
> the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! You do not believe, my dear Philip, with how
great clouds of speeches and letters, full of complaints about you,
especially about you, I have been showered, according to your letters.
^1)^ I write this unwillingly, since I am so minded that I fear to make
you grieved even in a small matter, since you should have nothing but
comfort from me in the so great burden of this matter, which I have
hitherto faithfully endeavored to carry out in this matter. But now I
also have to struggle with ours and their letters. I defend myself like
this: First, I say: The Augsburgers write to me differently about these
things and not about such things. However, I am firmly of the opinion
that I believe you rather than them, and I do not hope that you are
hiding something from me when it concerns the matter. Then I am sure in
my conviction that you will not admit anything unless the confession
remains intact and the gospel is excluded. But what this is, that the
gospel and our confession have been delivered, is it necessary that this
should be made clear to you? For this is what we have freely pledged
ourselves to from of old, that we will suffer and do everything, even
toward our enemies, that we can do without violating conscience and the
gospel. Therefore I have been calm and have not feared anything for the
cause, but have been concerned about violence and deceit on your part.
Therefore, for the sake of Christ, I ask you to write to me as soon as
you can, perhaps through the Nuremberg mail, about what has been done in
the meantime, since your last letters. For

1\) Meant are the letters of Melanchthon and Jonas, which are also
mentioned in the next number. They are not available. - Luther sent our
letter and the following letter to Jonas to Spengler in Nuremberg for
further order. But because it had become known in the meantime that the
Elector would leave Augsburg on September 23 at the latest and that the
farewell to the Reichstag was imminent, Spengler did not send the
letters, but sent them back to Luther.

The letters of ours, which cause great concern (*tragicissimae*), force
me to think whether some danger for the cause has not occurred in the
meantime. Someone rumored something like that the other day at the meal
in the presence of the younger prince, 2) but I denied it and said:
\"They have not written to me, I will wait for the letters; therefore,
get to work on it so that I have something to shut them up with. For
what I have answered them hitherto by letters and words, they have
esteemed little, and have had no power. May the Lord Jesus uphold and
guide you in his grace and mercy, amen. From the desert, on Tuesday
after Lamberti \[Sept. 20\] 1530. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1 703.**

Feste Coburg. September 20, 1830.

**To Justus Jonas.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1479, no. 1082.

**No. 1 704.**

Feste Coburg. September 23, 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1522, no. 1107.

**No. 1 705.**

Feste Coburg. September 23, 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 2322, annex, no. 14.

**No. 1 706.**

(Coburg Fortress.) September 24, 1530.

**To his wife.**

Luther expresses the hope of returning home soon. Some news from the
Imperial Diet.

The original is in the Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg. From it,
mutilated, in Lilienthal, Erläut. Preußen, vol. IV, p. 152 f. Ganz, in
Faber\'s collection of letters, p. 90; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 173 f.
and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 194.

2\) The Churprinz had arrived in Coburg on Sept. 14.

**1572**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1706 to 1710.

**1573**

> For the attention of Ms. Katherin D. Luthern at Wittenberg.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Käthe! Yesterday I wrote to you and
sent along a letter from my most gracious Lord, from which you can hear
how our people want to be at Augsburg. Accordingly, I hope, if God has
mercy, we will be at home with you in two weeks, although I fear that
our cause will not remain undamned. There is no power in it. They badly
want to have the monks and nuns back in the monasteries. However, the
Rietesel has written here that he hopes that they will leave Augsburg in
peace in all respects. God would grant this and it would be a great
mercy. So we all need it, because the Turk wants so much for us. You
will probably hear about the weather from Hornungen 2). Hereby all of
you are commanded by God, amen. Saturday after Matthew \[Sept. 24\]
1530.

> Martinus LutheR.

**No. 1 707.**

(Feste) Coburg. September 28, 1530.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1555, no. 1124.

**No 1708.**

(Coburg. October 1, 1530.

**To Martin Glaser in Hilpoltstein.**

Luther admonishes him for exchanging the spiritual office for a secular
trade.

The original is in Munich, Hof- und Staatsbibliothek, *Collect.
Camerariana*, Vol. VII. Printed in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 175 and in Erl.
Briefw., Vol. VIII, p. 273.

> To his extremely dear brother Martin Glaser, the faithful and loud
> servant of the Word in Hilpoltstein.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Do not, my dear Martin, exchange the
ministry of the word for a trade; be confident and undaunted and wait on
the Lord \[Ps. 27:14\]. You will see that in a short time there will be
a great shortage of ministers of the Word; then there are

1\) In the editions: \"in\", read from \"m\". (Erl. Briefw.)

2\) Wolf Hornung traveled back from Augsburg via Coburg and will
probably have delivered this letter.

all trades are already so full and occupied that it would be difficult,
especially for a new and unskilled apprentice, to find a livelihood in
them. I have diligently ordered your matter to Wenceslaus and the
tinsmith 3). Then I have also instructed M. Veit to seek the same orally
and personally; if he takes others with him (I hope), he will achieve
something. You only be strong; he who has given you life until now will
not leave you in the future either, not to mention other innumerable
gifts of life, which he continues to pour out on you and all of us in
many ways. Fare well in the Lord with your vine and its grapes, amen.
From Coburg, the first of October 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 709.**

Coburg Fortress. October 1, 1530.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1556, no. 1125. - The original is at
the fortress of Coburg, which (strangely enough) quite clearly has the
year 1539; therefore Burkhardt, Luthers Briefwechsel, p. 331, has
assigned it to this year. According to the original (which is not
exactly reproduced by Burkhardt, but corrected in the Erlanger Briefw.)
find the following improvements: St. Louiser Ausgabe, Bd. XVI, 1556, Z.
7 read: mein gnädiger\', Herr Herzog Ernst von Lüneburg; Z. 9 read:
greift; Z. 11 read: Wasser; Z. 12 read: regnen lassen; Z. 15 read
\"dass\" statt \"da\", and \"spotten\" statt \"verspotten\"; Z. 23 read
\"Er\" statt \"Herr\". Col. 1557, line 5 read: I ever not.

**No. 1710.**

Coburg Fortress. October 2, 1530.

**To Hans Honold, citizen in Augsburg.**

Luther thanks him for a gift of Confect, writes of his sickliness last
summer, and complains that God\'s Word is being suppressed at Augsburg.

The original is at Ulm in the Gymnasialbibliothek. Printed in
Veesenmeyer, Beiträge zur Geschichte der Literatur und Reform, p. 155;
in De Wette, Vol. I V, p. 178 and in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 54, p.
196.

> To the honorable, prudent Mr. Hans Honold of Augsburg, my favorable
> good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable and prudent, dear Lord and friend!
I am

3\) In the next letter. The letter to Link is missing.

**1574** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1710. 1711. 1712. **1575**

For your sake, I delivered the confect in two boxes, which I diligently
thanked you for. And is it ever true 1) that this summer I have had to
celebrate more than half of the whirring and rustling in my head. From
what it has come to me, I cannot know, since I have kept myself almost
moderate in all things. I think it was the black 2) angry (zorecht)
companion from hell, who does not like me in his kingdom on earth; and
perhaps God will help me out soon, amen; with grace, amen. I am sorry
that God\'s word to Augsburg has to be so silent and clear. It is not a
very good sign. God help you 3) and all of us, amen. From Coburg, on the
other day of October 1530.

> Martinus LutheR.

**No. 1711.**

Feste Coburg,October 3, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1557, no. 1126.

**No. 1712.**

Coburg Fortress. October 4, 1530.

**To Ludwig Senfel, court musician in Munich.**

Luther asks him to send him a polyphonic composition of the antiphon:
\"Ich liege und schlafe ganz mit Frieden\" (Ps. 4, 9.) and praises the
value of music.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod*. *Helmst*. 108, fol. 103 b; in *Cod*.
*Nedel*; in Zwickau, Rathsschulbibliothek XXXVI; in *Cod*. *Rostoch*; in
*Cod. Dorpat.*, no. 44, koi. 1; in Cod. Goth. 185; in Cod. Goth. 402; in
*Cod. Goth*. 451 and in Berlin, Cordatus-Handschr. Printed by *Buddeus*,
p. 213; by *Schlegel*, *vit*. *Langeri,* p. 140; by De Wette, vol. IV,
p. I80f.; by Kiefhaber, Sendschreiben D. M. Luthers an L. Senfl 2c.
Munich 1817. 8. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 276. German in Walch,
vol. XXI, 1218.

Grace and peace in Christ! Although my name is hated, so much so that I
am forced to fear that my letter will not be received and read by you
with complete certainty, which I am sending, best Ludwig, nevertheless
the

1\) \"ever true\" put by us instead of: \"in true\".

2\) In De Wette and in the Erlangen edition: \"der Schmerze\".

3\) \"you\" put by us instead of \"me\" in the issues.

Love for music, with which I see you adorned and gifted by my god,
overcame this fear. This love has also given me hope that my letter will
not bring you any danger, for who, even in Turkey, would blame him who
loves art and praises the artist? I, at least, praise even your Dukes of
Bavaria very much, however little they may be inclined to me, and still
honor them above others because they so favor and honor music. And there
is no doubt that many seeds of good virtues are in such minds that are
moved by music; but of those that are not moved by it, I consider them
to be quite similar to blocks and stones. For we know that music is also
abhorrent and unbearable to evil spirits. And I judge freely, and do not
hesitate to assert that, according to theology, there is no art that
could be equated with music, since, according to theology, it alone can
bring about what otherwise only theology can bring about, namely, a calm
and happy mind. A clear proof of this is that the devil, the author of
sad worries and frightening restlessness, flees at the voice of music
almost as much as he flees at the words of theology. Therefore it
happened that the prophets did not use any art like music, because they
did not put their theology into geometry, not into arithmetic, not into
astronomy, but into music, so that they had theology and music
exceedingly closely connected and proclaimed the truth in psalms and
songs. But what do I praise music now by trying to paint or rather
deface so great a thing on so small a piece of paper? But my inclination
towards it, which has often refreshed me and freed me from great
troubles, is beyond measure and bursts forth so overflowing.

I come back to you and ask: if you have a copy of this song \[Ps. 4,
9\], \"I lie down and sleep completely with peace\", would you have it
copied and sent to me. For this melody has delighted me from my youth,
and even more now that I understand the words. For I have never seen
this antiphon set in multiple voices. I

**1576**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1712. 1713. 1714.

**1577**

But I do not want to burden you with the work of composing it, but
assume that you have composed it elsewhere. Indeed, I hope that the end
of my life is near, and the world hates me and cannot stand me; I, in
turn, am disgusted with the world and detest it; therefore, may the best
and most faithful shepherd take my soul. Therefore, I have already begun
to sing these antiphons and wish to hear them componirt. ^1)^ If you do
not have them or do not know them, I send them here with their right
notes written, which you can compose, if you want, after my death. May
the Lord Jesus be with you forever, Amen. Forgive my boldness and my
prolixity. Greetings from only your entire music choir respectfully.
From Coburg, October 4, 1530.

> Martin Luther.

**No 1713.**

(Feste Coburg.) (October 4, 1530.)

**To Hans von Sternberg on Callenberg.**

Luther recommends to him the case of the pastor Johann Weybringer at
Hildburghausm. - Luther gave this small letter to Weybringer when he was
with Luther in Coburg to get advice from him in the various difficulties
he was having with his preachers and pastors. \"This little letter\" (as
Weybringer calls it) he was supposed to insert into one written by
himself to Sternberg. The Erl. Briefw. brings Weybringer\'s letter, vol.
VIII, p. 279, from which the time determination for ours results.

From the Cyprian collection in Gotha in Schütze, vol. I, p. 408; in De
Wette, vol. Ill, p. 412 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 57,
everywhere with the erroneous time determination: \"without date 1528\".

> To the attention of Mr. Hans von Stemberg, Knight.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Lord and friend! If it should happen
that my dear Lord would order your strictness to handle the visitation,
because I have driven this piece hard: I kindly ask you to let the
pastor of Helpurghausen handle his\"! things be commanded. Hereby
commanded by God. Amen.

1\) Senfel first sent Luther a motet on the saying: \"I will not die,
but live\" 2c. \[Ps. 118,17.\] and only later the requested composition.

**No. 1714 .**

Coburg Fortress. 2) October 5, 1530.

**To Hieronymus Baumgartner in Augsburg.**

Luther sends him his letter to Senfel (No. 1712) with the request to
forward it.

The original is in Munich (with the inscription by the recipient\'s
hand: 1530. *Augustae 21. Octobris*).

Printed in De Wette, Vol. I V, p. 176 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
282.

> To the extremely dear man, Mr. Hieronymus Baumgärtner, Nuremberg city
> councilor, his superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace! That I have not answered your letter, best Jerome, has
happened partly because there was nothing available that should have
been answered, partly because I wanted to postpone it until this day, on
which I would leave this desert, so that I, since I would have such an
occasion to write, said goodbye to you. But it is this occasion, namely
that you would see to it that this letter is handed over to the musician
Ludwig Senfel, because he has asked me that, if I wanted to send
something to him, I would send it through you, because in this way, he
thought, it would reach him reliably and comfortably. Therefore, I also
ask you to fulfill and strengthen the good confidence he has in you, and
to send the enclosed here to him when the opportunity presents itself.
For I

2\) From Luther\'s words at the beginning of this letter: \"I wanted to
postpone \[the answer\] [until this day,]{.underline} on which I set out
[from this desert]{.underline}\", two things can be inferred with
certainty\], first, that Luther wrote the letter on the day of his
departure, that is October 5; second, that this happened at [the
fortress Coburg.]{.underline} From this follows that the alleged date at
the end of the letter: *[prima]{.underline} Octobris* is wrong, and that
*Altoburgo* must not be dissolved by \"Altenburg\". It will have been
read (which could easily happen) *prima* from *quinta*, and *Altoburgo*
is to be taken as an appellative, and must be translated by: \"from the
high castle\". The attempt of Köstlin, M. Luther (3.), vol. II, p. 659
ad p. 250: \"Luther may have really sent this letter from Altenburg,
because he did not find the opportunity to do so in Coburg on the day of
his departure\", is invalidated by the fact that: *Ex Altoburgo* is
written in [the letter itself]{.underline}, which Luther dispatched *ex
hac eremo.* Furthermore it is to be noted that Luther \"Altenburg\"
[never]{.underline} by *AItobur*

*gum* has given. Only once can be found *Aldenburgi*

(Erl, Briefw., VI, p. 68), also only once *Aldenburgii* (Erl. Briefw.,
VIII. p. 54); otherwise always *Aldenburga*

(Erl. Briefw., VI, pp. II. 28. 56. 57. 62. 88\" 247.; VII, p. 148).

**1578** Letters from the Iahn 1530. no. 1714. 1715, 1716, **1579**

would not like to burden the very good man with the hatred of my name or
with danger, as long as he lives under these circumstances. I hear that
you are becoming a \"great\" arborist, and hasten to the verse of Moses
\[Deut. 32:15.\], \"He became fat and thick and strong.\" But the Lord
bless thee, that thou mayest grow much fatter, fatter, and stronger in
spirit, where it follows not: \"and he forsook the God who made him,\"
but it follows, \"and he clung to God his Lord with all his heart. So I
chat with you, because there was nothing else that I could write. For
what is happening in the whole world, you will know first and most
certainly. The papists are pressing their doom, 1) and already Pharaoh
is pale and hardened, and the exodus is imminent for Israel. What is
left for him but the Red Sea? The Lord will deliver us, as we believe
and pray. Greet from me your rib and your children. I greet you in the
name of my mistress, your former flame; 2) I will also tell her this
when I have returned. So I also tease her with you from time to time.
Christ be with you, amen. From the high castle, on the fifth 3) October
1530. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1 715.**

Wittenberg. October 16, 1530.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

Luther thanks the landgrave for his admonition that he should stand firm
and not give way to the papists. He indicates that \"ours\" are of the
same mind and that he wants to do everything to keep it that way.

The original is in the archive at Marburg. Printed in Hassenkamp,
Hessische Reformationgesch., vol. I, p. 297; in De Wette - Seidemann,
vol. VI, p. 125 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 284.

Grace and peace from Christ. Sublime, Highborn Prince, Gracious Sir I
have gladly and cheerfully received E. F. G.\'s writing and the
Christian exhortation therein, I also thank E. F. G. for such faithful
and diligent exhortations, and will, if God wills, after I see that the
widow\'s remedy, ver

1\) *fatum*. *Virg. Aen. lib*. VIII, v. 334.

2\) Compare Luther\'s letter to Baumgärtner of Oct. 12, 1524, No. 769.

3\) See the first note to these\" letters.

I find the others (praise God!) still so minded that they are not
inclined to yield much, even though I have not yet dealt with them in
all respects. I also find our people (praise God!) still so minded that
they are not inclined to yield much, even though I have not yet dealt
with them in all matters. But I will do what I can to help them, because
I hope that God will help them out completely, as He has begun. May E.
F. G. keep them strong and pure in His grace, amen. At Wittenberg,
Saturday after Calixti \[Oct. 15\] 1530.

> E. F. G.

willing

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 716.**

Wittenberg. October 18, 1530.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

Luther wrote that the same complaints that Cordatus had voiced against
him, namely that the gospel was despised and preachers were starved,
reached him from all over the Duchy of Saxony. He advises him either to
persevere or to resign from his office in Zwickau.

Printed in Strobel, Miscell. vol. Ill, p. 88;i Lei Strobel-Ranner, p.
184; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 182 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
285.

Grace and peace in Christ! I neither know nor have anything, my dear
Cordatus, that could answer your letter, so much do such complaints
overwhelm me in the whole duchy of our prince. It is a kind of secret
and exceedingly harmful persecution that our preaching ministry is thus
despised, hated and attacked, then also exterminated by hunger. Of
course, this is the fate of the word, that when it comes into his
possession, his own do not receive it \[John 1:11\]. The neighboring
Gentiles could not suppress the worship in Jerusalem, but they
themselves suppressed it. Christ Himself would never have been crucified
if He had remained outside Jerusalem. \"It does not do for a prophet to
perish outside Jerusalem\" \[Luc. 13, 33.\], and: \"A prophet is nowhere
less valid than in his own country.\" So it is also happening now with
ours. From the outside, the enemies would not achieve anything with
their raging, therefore, from

**1580** Letters from the year

1530\. no. 1716. 1717. **1581**

Inwardly among our people, while there is peace, the word will be
destroyed by contempt, hatred and hunger. Therefore, the punishment of
this wickedness will soon follow, and more will follow, namely famine,
which has already begun, and pestilence, perhaps even the sword, if they
continue in this way. \"If God is pleased to be merciful to the German
land, we will not let it happen.\" Therefore I ask you, my dear
Cordatus, either to persevere, comforted by these examples of Christ and
His, or to recite the service to these hard Zwickauers of yours. For I
see neither hope nor any way in which they can be changed. If we
approach the prince with petitions, and he also honestly issues
commandments, yet no one carries them out. I speak this as one who has
experienced it, and to whom it grieves. It will soon happen that these
great ones will empty the duchy of servants of the word, whom they will
drive away by hunger alone, to say nothing of insults. More at another
time, for I am weak and ill in body. Give my best regards to Nicolaus,
your bishop, and be well in Christ, amen. From Wittenberg, on the day of
Lucas \[Oct. 18\] 1530.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 717.**

21, October 1630.

**Landgrave Philip of Hesse to Luther.**

The landgrave asks Luther to send out a letter to all believers
admonishing them not to follow the Diet\'s decision at Augsburg, and he
justifies that the emperor does not have the right to punish for the
sake of the gospel, nor to command that the devil\'s doctrine be taught
again.

The original concept is in the archive at Marburg. Printed by Romme,
Philipp the Great, Urkundenb., p. 42 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
286.

Dear Doctor Martinus! My request is still, you want to do an admonition
to all believers for the sake of this Diet,^1)^ and if you do not have a
sufficient report, write to me and I will send you all the actions that
have taken place. It

1\) Luther replied on October 28, 1530, \"that without that he would be
disposed to issue a little book to comfort the weak,\" and fulfilled
this promise by the \"Warning to his dear Germans,\" St. Louis edition,
vol. XVI, 1616.

It is necessary to comfort and admonish the weak in faith.

I also cannot leave it undisclosed to you, as I have a particularly good
opinion of him, that there are some who think that if the emperor and
his followers want to punish us, who are in authority, for the sake of
the gospel, and if his majesty wants to reestablish the doctrine of the
devil, we should allow it and have no power to oppose it.

Now I can remember that you presented the Elector \[at\] the time when
the pack was dealing with the bishops, a counsel 2) in which you
indicate that one should not attack, but if one wants to attack us, one
would have to defend oneself, and does not know otherwise. You write
further: 3) The Elector has to defend himself, if the Emperor wants to
attack him, because his love would be a noble member 2c., with further
appendix. Hereupon is my desire, you want to show me your opinion in
this case. But I cannot refrain from reminding you, as one who has much
business, of some of the causes of this case, so that you may consider
it all the more carefully.

First, the case is not described in the New Testament, nor, to the best
of my knowledge, did it exist in the time of the apostles, namely, that
a superior who had hereditary possession of a country accepted the faith
and was subsequently persecuted by a greater superior.

On the other hand, it is much different with the German princes than
with those of old, who were bad governors and not hereditary lords. The
French princes did not have such freedom, nor did they have such a
tradition as we Germans.

And that this is true, no emperor has ever had the power to see or take
away a subject of a prince by force, otherwise the subject may have
suffered such a prince\'s right, and whether he has already acted
against the emperor\'s own person, body and people. Majesty\'s own
person, body and people. Because to prove this with many examples, it is
also fair, in my opinion, that our preachers may suffer justice, that we
protect and handle them with justice.

It is also obviously true that no emperor has ever had the power in
German lands to demand one florin from some prince by force, and even if
he had already demanded it, it would not have been given in that form.
But if an emperor

2\) Das Bedenken, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, 987, No. 834.

3\) The following words are not found in the concern just cited.

**1582** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1717. **1583**

If a person obtains something with the consent of the commonwealth, he
is obliged to give it.

Thirdly, it is true that the emperor has pledged and sworn to us as well
as we to him, and we are not sworn to him alone, but to him and to the
empire at the same time. If then the emperor does not keep us, he has
made himself a common person 1) and can no longer be regarded as a true
emperor, but as a peacebreaker, first of all because he is not a
hereditary emperor, but an elected emperor.

Fourth, the emperor has said at all imperial congresses and written from
Hispania that he does not consider himself a judge in these two-split
matters, but that it is due to a Cœncilio to discuss and settle such
matters. Since he, the emperor, now confesses this himself and once
threw away such a judge\'s office (if he had already had the right, as
he was not to judge at home, but only over body and goods, but also with
a measure), how can such a thing be allowed to him now? first of all,
because he acts so partial that he is plaintiff, judge and answerer, and
again neither wants to see, hear nor accept our answer, which is too
much according to pagan laws.

I will not indicate this time how the election with this emperor and
\[the\] future king has proceeded and \[will proceed\]. 2)

Fifth, if it be said that the emperor had no power, but that because the
emperor and the estates unanimously compared themselves with him, we had
all the less power to defend ourselves, I say to this: First of all, it
is not true that all the estates have compared themselves to him, the
emperor. For I know of some of them, who had to do it for the fear of
the Jews, 3) as one speaks, namely Margrave Philip and Ernst of Baden,
Duke Erich of Brunswick, the Bishop of Augsburg, Duke Ludwig of Bavaria,
Count of Veldenz;^4)^ there are Protestants among them. Now there are
still many who do not want to have such an extermination of the truth,
as namely Mainz, Palatinate, Trier, Saxony, Margrave Jörg of
Brandenburg, Heinrich Duke of Mecklenburg, Duke of Holstein, Philipps,
Ernst, Otto, Franciscus, Dukes of Brunswick and Lüneburg, Landgrave of
Hesse, Anhalt, Duke in Prussia, Jülich; and then cities: Strasbourg,
Lübeck, Frankfurt, Memmingen, Schwäbisch

1\) This is: private person.

2\) Compare the documents on the election of Ferdinand as Roman king,
St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1773 ff, no. 1188 to no. 1193.

3\) That is, out of fear of man. Cf. Joh. 13, 38.

4\) Duke Ludwig of Palatinate-Zweibrücken, to whom Veldenz belonged.

Hall, Nuremberg, Hamburg, Lindau, Kempten, Reutlingen, Ulm, Magdeburg,
Constanz, Heilbronn and others.

From the above princes and cities (not to mention some many counts) it
is clear that the noble princes and estates did not consent to such a
thing; therefore, the claim that the emperor decided unanimously with
the common estates cannot stand either 2c. Even if there were more of
the other estates, they are still the least, and come into this matter
through finances 5) and for their own benefit. And therefore they should
be rejected, the bishops, who are so bloodthirsty, because they
themselves are the ones who are most hostile to this evangelical cause
for the sake of their avarice. The angry princes are also rightly
rejected, who for the sake of their hatred, which they have for some
persons, because their vices have been pointed out to them,^6)^ have
such a thing as the gospel, 7) which they find so clear that they
themselves do not oppose it with truth, and yet persecute and hasten it
to the utmost. If then such fierce and selfish people are put aside, and
their voices are not valid, as it should be in truth, then the emperor
stands alone.

This I want to have indicated to you therefore after my simplicity,
which after your reason, since you are highly gifted by God, to think
further, 8) and ask your advice and concern. Date Friday after Galli
\[Oct. 21\], Anno Dom. 30.

God did not abandon His own in the Old Testament, nor did He let a
country perish that trusted in Him.

Likewise, he also helped the Bohemians, and yet we must all confess that
the Bohemians are under the emperor, and that a king of Bohemia (Beheim)
is one of the noblest princes. They still refused against the emperor
and the empire, and God gave them victory and overcoming. So I also hope
in God, if we only trust in Him undauntedly.

God has also helped several emperors and others who have acted with
violence against their subjects without justice. Example: See how a
small number of Swiss have beaten the lords of Austria and several
emperors; although this example does not apply to this matter. *Date ut
supra*.

Philips L. z. Hesse.

5\) Finances - intrigues.

6\) For example, the Elector Joachim of Brandenburg.

7\) Inserted by us.

8\) Here, to make sense, we have deleted \"have\". We have split the
preceding \"therefore\" into two words.

**158t** Bliese from the Iah\"\' 15M. No. 1718. 1719. 1720. **1588**

**No. 1 718.**

(Strasbourg.) October 21, 1530.

**Nicolaus Gerbet to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Gerbet reports that Luther\'s steadfastness and the feeling of isolation
have softened his opponents in Strasbourg and made them wish for a union
with him. He hopes that this will come true and that they mean it
sincerely. At the same time, he asks for information about the
negotiations between Luther and Bucer, the contents of which are being
concealed from him.

Handwritten in Strasbourg in *Thes.* Printed in Kolde, *Analecta,* p.
155 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 290.

**No. 1 719.**

Torgau. October 26, 1530.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

About a marriage affair and the annoyances of the Zwickau clergy with
their congregation.

The original is in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv, Hausmannbr., No. 66.
Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Franciscaneum,* Ms. 26, fol. 38b; in
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 4 (of 12 Feb.); there again fol.
461 (with your wrong date: 29 July 1545); there again fol. 461 (with
your wrong date: 29 July 1545).

II\. 10, fol. 233b; ibid. Aug. 20. 2, fol. 149; in *Cod. Rostoch*. and
in Gotha, Cod. 402 (with the year 1520). Printed in the *Collectanea LL.
communium Lutheri, Francof*. 1566, fol. 12b; in *Buddeus*, p. 216
(without date, with wrong address); in *Ericeus, Sylvula,* p. 13b; in
Schütze, vol. I, p. 358 (datirt 29 July 1545); in De Wette, vol. IV, p.
183; in Schirrmacher, p. 27 (datirt: 12 January) and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VIII, p. 293.

> To Nicolaus Hausmann, Bishop of Zwickau, his superior and brother in
> Christ.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Dearest householder, I read your letter
about Petzold\'s marriage case and promised that I would write to you
about this matter, which I do, and which you can tell him. First of all,
since he is in such a place where the authorities either cannot force
his wife to him or do not want to do so, or at least expel her, but the
clergy defend her (as he tells), it cannot happen that he marries
another in the same place, nor will they suffer this, therefore he would
undertake this in vain. Therefore one of these two things must be done,
that he either changes the place and 1) marries another one.

1\) Here we have assumed *et* with Aurifaber. In the original *vel*
should be found. The latter is in any case erroneous.

I do not see either of these two things as being in the middle. I do not
see either of these two things as being in the middle. Among these two
things I see no middle one. That is my opinion.

May you greet the prince\'s preacher 2) many times in my name and tell
him that he does not in any way undertake to administer the sacrament
secretly, since he is not called as a servant to this work, so that no
occasion is given to the adversaries, or (as Paul says \[Col. 4, 5.\])
to those who are outside, a cause for blasphemy. Meanwhile, they may
suffer what they suffer on both sides. GOD will finally put an end to
these things as well. Cordatus wrote to me, and I answered. Through such
cases, my thoughts certainly come to the point that I would almost like
to wish a day of rest (*sabbatum*) for your spandrels, that is, that
they would have to be completely deprived of the service of the Word for
a time, and of both a pastor and a preacher, whether these sated and
unruly sows might perhaps be cured by hunger and lack of the Word, which
become so insolent through satiety and abundance. May you therefore also
go away! If I can, I will take the cordatus away. If I am asked for it,
I will see to it that they have none. For they think that the world is
full of idle servants of the word, that they can easily get such as they
want. But more at another time. Greetings to your brother and all our
brothers in Christ. From Torgau, 3) Wednesday after the eleven thousand
virgins \[Oct. 26\].

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1720.**

Torgau. 28 October 1530.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

Luther informs him that he would have intended to write about the
Augsburg Treaty even without the Landgrave\'s request; he has already
expressed his concern to the Elector about the question of resistance,
and he hopes that it will pass off without bloodshed 2c.

2\) The castle preacher in Zwickau was Lorenz Soranus.

3\) Luther was in Torgau because of the negotiations about the
counter-defense, which took place there between the theologians and
jurists.

**1586**

Letters from the year 1536. no. 1720. 1721. 1722.

**1587**

The original is in the archive at Marburg. Printed in F. W. Hafsenkamp,
Hessische Kirchengeschichte, vol. I, p. 294 (with the wrong date: Oct.
25); in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 126 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VIII,

p\. 294f.

Grace and peace, from Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most
Gracious Lord! I have received E. F. G.\'s writing and several
instructions 1) in the present matters. And first of all, that E. F. G.
desires to issue a booklet for the consolation of the weak, I will not
refrain E. F. G. from issuing a booklet shortly, 2) in which I want to
touch the farewell and clumsy behavior of the princes, with admonition
of every (jder\'s) conscience that no subject is guilty where Imperial
Majesty would insist on it. Maj. would insist on obeying, but will (as
much as my pen can) deter from such obedience, that no one should engage
in such blasphemous, murderous and diabolical plots, God grant that I
create much fruit with it, amen. Nevertheless, it shall be kept safe, so
that it may not be reproached seditiously.

On the other hand, I hope that God will find a means that no bloodshed
will occur for the sake of these things. Thus I have also (if it ever
comes to that, since God is for it!) indicated to my most gracious lord,
the Elector, my opinion as to what should be done about the
counter-revolution, which will undoubtedly be hidden from E. F. G.,
because I see and realize that one will have a common counsel about it,
and it is dangerous for me, as a spiritual person, to present such in
writing, for many reasons.

And please, let E. F. G. not be alienated that we offered ourselves
several times in some pieces, than to accept with fasting, celebrations,
food and songs, because we know that they can not accept it with such
measure, and serves us that we raise our glimpses the higher, and I may
drive their glimpses in my booklet the more violent. So it is not a
mistake for us, where it would already be accepted in such a way. Hereby
commanded by God, Amen. From Torgau, on the day of Simonis and Judä
\[Oct. 28\] 1530.

E. F. G. williger Martinus Luther.

> 1\) The objection raised by the Hessian theologians. 2) See No. 1717.
>
> 3\) \"none\" is our conjecture instead of: \"one\".

**No. 1721.**

(Torgau.) End of October 1530.

**Luther\'s, Jonas\'s, and Melanchthon\'s concerns of the opposition.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 562.-Without time determination. In the
old editions and in De Wette- Seidemann with the year 1539. We have
followed the Erlangen correspondence.

**No . 1722.**

Wittenberg. October 31, 1530.

**To Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther jokingly reproaches him for his continued silence.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 194; in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 184 f. and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 300.

Grace and peace in Christ! That you quarrel with me about my silence, my
best Amsdorf, you are doing nothing else than giving me cause to quarrel
with you with the greatest justification about your so persistent and
constant silence. For since you knew that I was in solitude, you not
only did not take pity on me by comforting me with your letters, but
also added pain upon pain by distressing me with your constant silence.
And now you are already increasing your sin again by accusing and
scolding me on top of it because of a guilt that is not mine but yours.
You have forced me to assume that you might have become Archbishop of
Magdeburg in the meantime, Primate of Germany, that you so easily forget
me, who am so poor, and peel me so arrogantly. How else can I assume
that this is because you reproach me for calling the bishop of Mainz
\"Most Reverend Father\",^4)^ than because you think that this title is
perhaps taken away from you, although I have used this word not
differently than according to the usage of the courts, according to
which those are called gracious (*gratiosi*) lords who are even
*furious* (*furiosi*) devils. But with one thing you have made me happy,
that you have published the booklets that have come out this summer.

4\) In letter No. 1612.

**1588**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1722. 1723. 1724.

**1589**

are given. I could not publish several because of my health, and also on
the published ones I could not work more \[than I did\], almost half the
time or more, since I was in solitude,^1)^ so that I wrote everything I
wrote there, as it were, as a thief (*furtim*) and against the will of
the illness. With the same sluggishness the printers go ahead, because
they still have two little books under the press, 2) which have long
since been written. Another thing, when you come to greet us, which I
hope you will finally do, so that we may refresh ourselves by an
exceedingly sweet conversation before we are separated. For I feel that
I am getting very old or at least am losing strength. Satan\'s angel has
made me very weary. May the Lord be with you in grace and steadfastness,
amen. Wittenberg, the last day of October 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1723.**

Wittenberg. November 1, 1530.

**To the City Council of Herzberg.**

Luther had interceded for a woman to whom he had received an unfavorable
response, so he repeats his request in this letter.

The original is at Eisleben in Luther\'s house. Printed in De Wette,
Vol. I V, p. 185 f.; in Aerger, Merkwürdigkeiten, p. 49 and in the
Erlangen edition, Vol. 54, p. 199. - Under the address is the note by a
later hand: \"Fürbiet kurzen elen halben. Koffirt.\"

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of Herzberg, my favorable
> lords and friends.

Grace and peace. Honorable, wise, dear lords! I have received your
answer to my

1\) This passage has been a *crux interpretum.* De Wette remarks:
\"Something seems to be missing here.\" Förstemann, in the Hall. Allg.
Literaturzeitung, 1829, Sp. 14, translates thus: \"My sickliness did not
allow me to publish several (sc. books), after all, I could hardly spend
half or a little more of the time spent in the wasteland (sc. at Koburg)
on the ones I did publish!\" This translation seems to us to be
mistaken. The addition we made in square brackets is justified by the
fact that the *infinitivus perfecti (laborasse*), and not the *inf.
praesentis (laborare*) is used.

2\) The \"Admonition to the Sacrament,\" St. Louis edition, vol. X,
2170, and the \"Interpretation of the 111th Psalm,\" ibid. vol.V, 1056.

I have received the Scriptures, and I feel so much sorrow that I deserve
half my wrath, yet my opinion has not been different, except to help
settle and put things to rest. What else should I seek in other
people\'s affairs, and what business would it be of mine to create
unhappiness for myself or others in another\'s affairs? Therefore, my
friendly request is once again, do not regard my writing as your letter
suggests. If I cannot create good things, I would not like to create
painful things. And because you might otherwise judge me according to
your writing, I ask you once again to drop the matter and, if it pleases
you, send the cubits to me, considering that you are not helped by it,
where you inflict such a disgrace on the women, because it is in your
free power to let up, and perhaps afterwards you would regret and bite
in your conscience, since you would not be able to help it nor to
improve it, and it would be seen as if you had no regard for
intercession, but as if you had straightway atoned for vengeance
according to a conceived displeasure, and for such a small matter had
caused so much unpleasantness, and had saddened many hearts without such
need, just as if you had not had to daily let go and tolerate many more
and greater cases than the beams against this splinter. Please give us
your correct answer. At Wittenberg, on Tuesday after Simon and Jude
\[Nov. 1\] 1530, Martin Luther.

**No. 1724.**

Nuremberg. November 1, 1530.

**Stephan Agricola to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Agricola and Frosch had been in exile for months and did not know where
they could finally find a home with their wives and children. For the
time being, they were living in Nuremberg in the St. Aegidien monastery,
still receiving a salary from the Augsburgs, but were uncertain whether
they would be called back there. The council there is said to have
declared that it does not consent to the Emperor\'s decrees insofar as
they concern the faith, but God alone knows whether this was done out of
fear of the common people or out of love for the word. The
Sacramentarians there boast that Luther has given way to them; the
papists cry from all pulpits that they (Agricola and Frosch) have
seduced Augsburg and infected it \[with heretical doctrine\]. Now he
asks that, if they cannot return to Augsburg, an appointment be worked
out for them with the Elector, for which the Chancellor Brück has also
made a prospect. Luther may intercede for them with the prince.

**1590**

Letters from the year 1530. no. 1724. 1725. 1726.

**1591**

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. Vol. I, fol. 300. .handwritten in
Dresden, Cod. C 342, fol. 12 b. Printed in Kolde, p. 149 and in Erl.
Briefw.,

Vol. VIII, p. 302.

**No. 1725.**

Lübeck. (Beginning of November) 1530.

**Johann Bugenhagen to Luther, Jonas, Melanchthon 2c.**

(Regest.)

Bugenhagen reports that he arrived in Lübeck on October 28, and that
soon after his arrival the devil began to rage against him through a
possessed virgin into whom the devil had entered. She had cursed and
blasphemed horribly in her fits, but knew nothing more about it when she
came to herself again.

Printed in \"Zwo wunderbarlich Hysterien, zu bestettigung der lere des
Evangelii. Johann Pomer. Philipp Melanchthon.\" Without place and year.
Quarto; in Vogt, Bugenhagens Briefwechsel, p. 101 and in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VIII, p. 304.

**No. 1 726.**

Schwäbisch-Hall. November 4, 1530.

**Johann Brenz to Luther.**

Brenz reports that he has received his (Brenz\'s) interpretation of the
prophet Amos, but rejects the praise given to him by Luther in the
preface (St. Louis edition, vol. XIV, 166) as undeserved. By not
accepting the means of comparison granted by the evangelicals, the
adversaries at the Diet of Augsburg revealed themselves as people like
Pharaoh and as antichrists.

The original is in Hamburg, Vol. I, fol. 105. Manuscript in Dresden,
Cod. C 342, fol. 1 (dated October 4). Printed in the Fortgesetzten
Sammlung der Unsch. Nachr., 1743, p. 643 (dated: Oct. 4; also in the
regest in Burkhardt, p. 185) and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 308.

> To the highly famous man, Mr. Martin Luther, his father, always to be
> revered in Christ.

Hail in Christ! I have received my Amos, most reverend Father, but what
you ascribe to me in the preface I neither accept nor acknowledge. I
would gladly allow and sincerely wish that the spirit of Christ dwells
in me, the most unworthy shepherd, but that you ascribe to my
impassivity I don\'t know what kind of arts and loveliness (*nitorem*)
in speech, - when I read this, I become completely ashamed, since I know
very well that I have never received such gifts,

not even in a dream. But you show yourself

so much the more admirable in that thou art exceedingly humble in
lowering thyself under my and my like\'s immodesty, and in truth
fulfillest Christ\'s word \[Luc. 22:26.\], \"He that is greatest shall
be least.\"

By the way, I believe that you now know exactly how things stand
(*rationem*) with the Diet of Augsburg, and perhaps you laugh that in so
long a time nothing has been accomplished through so many attempts,
through so much action. But I have this opinion about it, that there has
never been any imperial diet in which more was done and accomplished by
much action than in this one by accomplishing nothing. You ask: What are
these accomplished things? I will tell you in a few words. Our
adversaries have been declared and made manifest as true Pharaohs and
Antichrists in this Kingdom Day. For before it was still hoped that
there was a heart of flesh in the adversaries, it was hoped that they
would repent of some kind; but now, although everything has been tried,
all means of comparison have been conceded, that we have often suffered
the worst calumny from our own even for this cause, and yet the
adversaries neither acknowledge this nor repent, but on the contrary
condemn and rage: do they not declare by obvious evidence that they are
Pharaohs and antichrists? If there were even a trace of godliness in the
whole papist body, it would certainly have broken out through these
means by which those people have been tempted.

In addition, they often freely confessed at earlier imperial congresses
that there were many errors and abuses in their church, but now they do
not even admit this. The emperor\'s presence makes them such pure and
holy people. For so they write in the article about holding a council:
\"Because there may be some errors in the church, therefore we want to
hold a council\" 2c. ^1)^ Do you hear? They no longer say, as at the
earlier imperial congresses: [There are errors in]{.underline} our
church, but: \"There may perhaps be \[errors\].\" O about the impudence!
Therefore, not only from the Holy Scriptures, but also according to
obvious evidence from experience, it is now proclaimed with certainty
and preached publicly that the Papists are, first, Pharaohs who neither
enter the Promised Land themselves, nor let even the people of God
enter. Secondly, that

1\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1534, § 7, no. 1113.

**1592** Letters from the Fahre 1530. no. 1726. 1727. 1728. **1593**

they are antichrists who forbid the doctrine of godliness and command
godlessness. And this was accomplished and revealed at the Diet of
Augsburg, of which you will certainly not say that it is \"nothing\".
For he whom the Holy Scriptures describe as the Antichrist in so many
words, in so many sentences, in so many chapters, in so many books, the
Diet of Augsburg revealed him in not very many days. But the Lord will
bring this child of destruction to ruin, but will deliver us in Christ
Jesus, amen. Fare well in the Lord, and I most earnestly commend myself
to the prayers of your love. From Schwäbisch-Hall, on November 4, Anno
30, yours, Joh.

**No. 1 727.**

Wittenberg. November 7, 1530.

**To Johann Apel in Königsberg.**

Luther wished him luck on his arrival in Königsberg and on taking up his
office. Peter Weller, who was present there, would report to him about
the events at the Reichstag. About Luther\'s state of health.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 107 k and in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 199; in De Wette, vol. IV, p.
189 and in Erl. Briefw., vol.VIII, p. 310.

> To the highly famous man, Mr. Johann Apel, Chancellor of Prussia,
> Doctor of Laws, his very good friend and superior.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I wish you happiness, dear man, on your
safe arrival in Prussia, but even more that it is granted to you to live
there adequately, even honorably. For this is how Peter Weller wrote to
me when I was still in Coburg. May the Lord finally comfort you and make
you a Manasseh, that is, a man who forgets all former trials and
troubles, amen. There is nothing I can write about the Diet and the
state of our affairs; the eye and ear witness of all things, Peter
Weller, is himself present with you. ^1)^ The bishops and the monks are
working fatally on their undoing, in that the duke, who is the

1\) Peter Weller, the bearer of this letter, had been in Augsburg
himself. Cf. no. 1631.

2\) who is completely possessed by devils, is their advisor. All of our
people are still bravely ready to suffer the utmost for the Word. God
preserve and protect them, amen. I am reasonably healthy according to
your body, except that this summer I have suffered from a new kind of
effervescence in my head and have been much prevented from writing, and
even now I am not yet free of it. Thus Satan beats me with fists and
intends to make a corpse out of my body. Christ Jesus keep me. Greetings
to the Lord Poliander 3) and to all our people. May the Lord Jesus be
with you. Wittenberg, November 7, 1530, Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1 728.**

Wittenberg. November 7, 1530.

**To Johann Brismann in Riga.**

Luther shortly informs him about the success of the Diet and some news,
namely that there is hope to establish an agreement with the
\"Strasbourgers\".

The original is at Königsberg in the Wallenrodt Library. Printed by
*VogIer*, No. 8; in Erläut. Preußen, vol. Ill, p. 204k (incomplete and
without date); in *Act. Boruss.* vol. I, p. 806; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.*
126; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 190; in Ripke, Einführung der Reformation
in den baltischen Provinzen. 1883. p. 63, Bell. VI (incomplete) and in
Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 311.

> To his exceedingly dear brother in the Lord, Johann Brismann, the
> faithful and very loud servant of Christ in Liefland.

Grace and peace in the Lord! For a long series of years, neither you nor
I have seen a letter from you, my dear Brismann; but since this Peter
Weller, my housemate, had set out on his way there, it was only right
that I should write to you at last. I hope that, through the power of
Christ, the cause of the Gospel is well with you, for I have not heard
anything before, although, if something evil were present, the rumor
would have carried it to us long ago, even if you had not written
anything. God be with you always, amen.

2\) Duke George.

3\) Graumann.

**1594** Letters from the year

1530\. nv. 1728. 1729. **15S5**

With us is the rumor and suspicion of evil things. For what you may wish
to know, the emperor and the bishops together with the other princes
will condemn our princes by a public edict, by which they will arouse
unrest, which God may avert. For after the confession of ours had been
heard, it was at first the common voice and opinion of all that we
certainly do not teach anything against any article of faith nor against
the Scriptures, but with us the conciliarities and the statutes of the
fathers would not be kept. In this matter, a long effort was made to
establish harmony; when this could not be achieved on both sides,
namely, because they absolutely did not want to give way in any matter,
nor could we approve of everything, then ours were ordered to bring
everything back to the old state, nor were we allowed to change anything
without the authority of the pope. Thus, our people left without having
achieved anything, expecting cruel and terrifying threats, so that the
danger of a great uprising will arise if God has not provided otherwise.
This is the summa of the Diet. However, there are some good people on
the opposing side who are favorable to us, especially the Bishop of
Augsburg. Our people, however, are still strong by God\'s grace, and
expect these threats and do not fear them, namely, by trusting in their
good conscience and their good cause. Christ will stand by and deal with
these raging ones in due measure, who have the Turks sitting on their
necks and before their faces, and yet still seek wars and disunity among
themselves. Summa, the whole devil is raging in the worst way; therefore
pray for us. Weller will tell all the rest, for who could write the
details of all things?

Greetings to all of us, and also to your wife and children. My house is
quite healthy, except that I am losing strength, especially in my head.
Pommer has traveled to Lübeck and teaches the Word. There is hope that
the Sacramentarians, at least those in Strasbourg, will get along with
us again. For Bucer has been sent to meet with me in confidential
conversation at Coburg.

If what he says is not deceptive (for I have admonished him not to
pretend falsely), there is not little hope. One must pray against the
devil. The Lord be with you, Amen. Wittenberg, November 7, 1530, Yours,
Martin Luther.

**No. 1 729.**

Wittenberg. November 7, 1530.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther shares some news with him.

Handwritten in *Cod. Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 231
(incomplete); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 191 (incomplete); in
Schirrmacher, p. 379 and in Erl. Briefw.- Bd. VIII, p. 313.

Grace and peace in Christ! By Ciring one more thing, my dear Amsdorf,
now the lack of time does not allow more than that I inform you that I
will shortly write to you as well as to our Otto 1) whose petition I
will send back. For that raging peasant 2) has been irrevocably handed
over to Satan for destruction. Now there is no news, except what I
believe you know, that Florence has surrendered to the Emperor and has
been handed over by the Emperor to the Pabst, and they will install a
new duke there, namely Alexander, the son of the Pabst, who will marry
the illegitimate daughter of the Emperor 3). And the bridegroom has
already been received in Augsburg with great pomp. What do you think,
won\'t the pope now give the priests a public example to take a wife, or
rather to fornicate? But enough of this for another time. Now farewell,
and in the meantime greetings

1\) Otto von Pack.

2\) Duke George.

> 3\) Margaretha, created by Charles V with Johanna von der Ghaenst,
> born in 1522, was promised as wife to his natural son, Alexander de
> Medici, at the meeting of the emperor with the pope at Bologna, but
> the marriage was not consummated until 1536. On Jan. 7, 1537,
> Alexander was murdered by his cousin Lorenzo. In 1538 Margaret was
> married to the thirteen-year-old grandson of Pope Paul III, Octavio
> Farnese, Duke of Parma. In 1559 she became governor of the
> Netherlands; she was succeeded by Duke Alba, after which she returned
> to her husband.
>
> returned and died in 1586 at Ortonna in Italy.

**1596** Letters from 1530. no. 1729. 1730. 1731. **1597**

all yours, especially the banished Mr. Otto. God comfort him, amen. On
Monday after Leonhard \[Nov. 7\], Wittenberg 1530.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 730.**

Wittenberg. November 8, 1530.

**Luther, Jonas and Melanchthon to the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for the pastor Egidius Hofer for care in the distress into
which he has fallen through no fault of his own.

The original is in the archives at Weimar, *Reg. O,* p. 148.

FFF. 3 Printed in Burkhardt, Luthers Briefwechsel, p. 186 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 314.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! Your churf. graces are our
submissive obedient service always with will before, most gracious Lord.
In the visitation at Grimma (Grym) we took a good fief from Ern Egidio
Hofer, out of necessity we put it into the common box there, and because
we found him not unskilled in teaching, we provided him with the parish
of Seiferthain, where before there was a whole papist, against it. Now
we are informed that your ch. Grace, at the request of Andresen Pflug,
bailiff of Leipzig, has granted that the said Hofer be removed from the
parish, and that another be assigned to it, but with this gracious
consolation, that the said Hofer may be assigned by your ch. Grace in
other ways, as he recently complained to us, Martin Luther, Just Jonam
Probst, Doktores, and Philipp Melanchton, when we were on our way home
from Augsburg to Grimma, with an account of his great need. G. gnädigen
Vertröstung now with further complaint, asking to be helpful to him in
his distress. However, since we know nothing at present so that he may
be provided for again, and yet it would be difficult for the poor man
together with his family to wait thus completely unrelieved, especially
since according to his report he is already coming to ruinous harm, we
ask 1) therefore E. ch. Gn. in subservience, \[they\] 1) want to help
the poor man in his

1\) Added by us.

If a fief is forfeited, we shall provide it again. For the sake of the
same E. ch. G. in humble obedience. Date Wittenberg, Tuesday after
Leonardi \[Nov. 8\] Anno XV^c^ XXX^o^ .

E. ch. G. subservient obedient

> Just Jonas- Rector and Provost, Mart. Luther, Doctores, and Philippus
> Melancton.

**No. 1 731.**

Wittenberg. November 13, 1530.

**To Veit Dietrich in Nuremberg.**

Luther instructs him to turn to his friends there in the matter he has
presented; he reports on the amount of his business, which has been
increased by Bugenhagen\'s absence, and on his state of health.

Printed in Strobel\'s Miscell. vol. I, p. 165; in *Strobel-Ranner,
p.*188; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 192 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
316.

> To the worthy young man, Magister Veit Dietrich of Nuremberg, his
> brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! This is the third time I have received
letters from you, my dear Veit, and I thank you for your diligence and
faithfulness in informing me of all these things. We, on the other hand,
have no news, because you know everything more reliably about the
flooding of the Tiber.

I cannot give advice on your matter, since I am absent and have no
insight into the circumstances. You would do best to follow the advice
of present friends who see everything before your eyes and know how to
advise. The messenger was in such a hurry and I have been too busy to
write in detail; I have not been able to write to our host in Coburg or
to anyone else. I have joined Pomer\'s work, I preach, I read, I am
taken up with various things, I am occupied with letter writing, so that
I could not write now. You send greetings to all in my name. I have to
steal my time by force and cunning, if I want to do anything except the
current business.

**1598**

Letters, from the year 1530. no. 1731.1732. 1733.

**1599**

I want to do. My head is still buzzing, sometimes quite strongly,
especially in the morning hours. Otherwise, thank God, we are all quite
well. You are also greeted by our entire community and my mistress Käthe
(which she expressly instructed me to do), so that you do not think that
she is angry with you. More and more detailed at another time.
Wittenberg, on the Sunday after 1) Martini \[Nov. 13\] 1530.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1732.**

Wittenberg. November 13, 1530.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About the disturbing rumors that the papists are spreading and about
Otto von Pack\'s affair.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 201; in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 192 f. and
in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 317.

Grace and peace in the Lord! What have we sinned against you, I beg you,
my dear Amsdorf, that you do not want to tell us how your life is, and
that you worry us so much by your silence? We have learned from your
mother that she was summoned by you with these words: that she should
come when she wants to see you for the last time. I do not know whether
you wanted to indicate with these words that you were sick to death or
that you wanted to go away somewhere else. I ask you for Christ\'s sake
not to think of leaving in haste, nor to let yourself be discouraged by
the hopes of the glorified papists. They do not yet have what they hope
to have, and their boasting is quite futile and will soon be disgraced,
which, to use your words, you will know by the month of May. The bishop
of Mainz may be whoever he wants, so he will not be able to do anything
humanly that I say so. But behold, while I am writing this word \"say,\"
a letter comes to my Käthe in which you enumerate the monstrosities
which, as your papists say, the emperor will undertake. \"O! let them
boast for God\'s sake! they will know.\"

1\) Here the Erlanger Briefw. has the wrong note: \"The post after usual
way set, although the Sunday itself fell on Martini.\" Martini, November
II, fell on a Friday in 1530.

From this I now begin to understand what you had written to your mother:
\"if she wants to see you\", namely you speak like this in mocking
irony. Käthe thanks you for your kindness and will write to you briefly
at another time.

I have nothing about Otto Pack, only that the matter is impossible with
Duke George, as with a quite obviously obsessed and raging person. At
another time, I will write to Otto and send him whatever he wants. For
now I am still so afflicted by a buzzing in my head that I cannot read
and write much; Satan has made me so dull in the desert. Oh, if only you
were present in person! Christ be with thee, and thou exhort thine own
to be strong, and to laugh at these glorious priests. Wittenberg, on the
day of Briccius \[Nov. 13\] 1530.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1733.**

(Wittenberg.) 13. November 1530.

**To Friedrich Mykonius in Gotha.**

About the disdainful treatment of the pastor Bernhard Dölen by a
magistrate. He asks for the exact communication of the history of the
twice deceased.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, 6oä. Uslmst. 285 Printed in Schütze,
vol. I, p. 388 ; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 193 f. and in Erl. Ausg.,
vol. 54, p. 200.

> *Optimo Viro, D. Friderico Myconio, Gothensi Episcopo fideli, suo in
> Dno. fratri* \[To the worthy man, Mr. Friedrich Myconius, the faithful
> bishop of Gotha, his brother in the Lord\].

Grace and peace in Christo, *Aberat Ber- nardus Dolen, mi Friderice, cum
venirent literae tuae. Sed etsi reversus ad me fuerit, non sinam eum
redire sub praefecti istius tyrranni- dem* (Bernhard Dölen was absent,
my dear Frederick, when your letter came. But when he will have
returned, I will not let him return under the tyranny of this bailiff\].

If the officials are so much more learned and powerful than the
sovereign himself that they dare to judge and change what their
sovereign sends them, then I will let them create preachers themselves
from now on, and no one else.

**1600**

Letters from 1530. no, 1733 to 1736. **1601**

send. One must cheat the Scharrhansen, and Pfarrherren send theirs
favor. Therefore I will keep quiet and let the people cry out about the
shackles and courtiers up to heaven. *ldem consulo, ut tu facias* \[I
advise you to do the same\]. I cannot send vain Luther and Pomer, so it
is not necessary. Bernhard is so learned that he is preacher enough for
ten years. Well, they shall have to worship lesser preachers by and by.

*Oro, ut historiam adolescentis bis mortui, quam Philippo significasti,
nobis nominatim diligenter perscribas, expressis nominibus, temporibus
et aliis circumstantiis. Digna est, quae aliquando a nobis celebretur.
Saluta Justum Menium, et patienter fertote nequitiam praefectorum et
nobilium. Nam idem vel amplius ab ipsis nos quoque ferre cogimur.*

It is called patience. *Breviter scribo obrutus negotiis. Vale cum carne
tua tota, et ora pro me. Dominica post Martini*,^1)^ MDXXX \[I ask that
you describe to us the history of the young man who died twice, 2) which
you reported to Philip, with particular care, stating the names, times
and other circumstances. It is worthy of being published by us one day.
Give my best regards to Justus Menius, and patiently bear the unworthy

1\) The Erl. Briefw. refers here to the wrong note which has been made
to the date in No. 1731.

2\) This history, which forms the second part of the print mentioned in
No. 1725: \"Zwo wunderbarlich Hysterien\" 2c. is told by Melanchthon in
two simultaneous letters (*Corp. Ref.*, Vol. II, 438 f. and Col. 450) as
follows: \"In Gotha, in days gone by, a young man became ill with
vomiting or pestilence, and lay for several hours, as if he had died, so
that everyone thought he had died; then he came to himself again and
came to life, and with joy told quite happily how he had seen Christ,
and felt such joy from heaven that no one could express in words. He
also said, \"Now I am quite sure and know for certain that after this
life there will be another life in the future,\" and exhorted the people
to godliness, saying constantly that believers will attain these
unspeakably great goods. But lest it should be supposed that he spoke
such words out of sickness or a defect of reason, he gave them for a
sign that with good reason he had prophesied and signified his death
beforehand, saying that he would pass away from this present life before
the clock struck three, which was done.

of the bailiffs and nobles. Because also lvir must suffer the same or
even more of them. \"It is called patience.\" I write briefly, as I am
overwhelmed with business. Fare well with all your relatives, and pray
for me. On Sunday after Martinmas (Nov. 13) 1530\].

> *T. Martinus Luther, D.*

**No. 1734.**

November 14, 1530.

**Elector John of Saxony to Jonas, Luther, and Melanchthon.**

(Regest.)

Answer to No. 1730: The Elector\'s opinion is that they should issue an
order that Egidius Hofer be granted the income of the fief taken from
him again until something else happens that the Elector wants to send
him on the addressee\'s notification.

The original concept is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. O 148. FFF 3.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 187 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 319.

**No. 1735.**

Nuremberg. November 16, 1530.

**Eoban Hesse to Luther.**

(Regest.)

He testifies his joy that Luther is finally released from the so long
prison in Coburg, regrets that he did not come to the so near Coburg,
while he had traveled to Augsburg, where he had seen so many donkeys
riding on donkeys, but hopes to welcome him once in Wittenberg. Veit
Dietrich had come to him very seldom, and had excused himself with the
fact that he had had to visit very many in his father\'s town, but
especially to meet with some whom he loved particularly and from whose
number he wished to take one as his wife. Finally, Hesse complained
about his income, which had been reduced by a malicious person.

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. Vol. I, fol. 110. Handwritten in
Dresden, C 342, fol. 19 and in Bremen at the Stadtbibliothek, Ms. a. 11.
Printed in Krafft, Briefe und Documente, p. 68 and in Erlanger Briefw.,
vol. VIII, p. 319.

**No. 1736.**

Nuremberg. November 20, 1530.

**Veit Dietrich to Luther.**

Dietrich reports all kinds of news: of the Emperor\'s departure from
Augsburg and his anger at the Augsburgs; of Ferdinand\'s election as
Roman king.

**1602**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1736.

**1603**

and the forthcoming coronation of the same at Aachen; of a letter from
the Elector to the Nuremberg Council, in which he urges the latter to
arm itself against violent intervention by the Emperor; of the state of
his own affairs; of Brenz\'s marriage; of Billican\'s apostasy and the
return of many priests in Nördlingen to the Papacy; of the faithfulness
of the Senate in Reutlingen.

The original is in Hamburg, Ms. Vol. I, fol. 317. Handwritten in
Dresden, C 342, fol. 4 b. Printed in the Fortgesetzten Sammlung der
Unschuld. Nachr., 1744, p. 465 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 322.

> To D. Martin Luther, his most revered father.

Hail in Christ Jesus! The letters which this messenger brings to you,
most reverend Father in Christ, I requested from your friends, since I
wanted to leave here, and would have delivered them myself, if the rainy
weather had not deterred me. Therefore, I will stay here until the
weather improves. It is said that the Emperor will leave Augsburg
tomorrow; 1) he is very upset about the steadfastness of the
Augsburgers, who did not want to sign the extremely ungodly decree;
therefore, the poor citizens are in danger in many ways, both from the
enraged Emperor and from the people (if they agree with the Emperor\'s
opinion). There are certain rumors about the election of Ferdinand; the
coronation is scheduled for Aachen, and the emperor will put it into
effect in the first place. 2) I have no doubt, however, that if these
rumors continue, a certain doom will befall our Germany. For not only
the fate of Ferdinand, but also that terrible flood by which a good part
of Lower Germany perished, has given a certain indication of very great
misfortunes. About this matter, I am sending you a printed note. 3)

A letter sent by the Elector to our council has brought a new cause for
dispute, in which he admonishes our people to prepare themselves to
drive back the unjust power of the emperor. For this opinion had been
approved by his councilors and doctors (he did not add anything about
the theologians). Jns

1\) The emperor left Augsburg on Nov. 23.

2\) Ferdinand was elected in Cologne on January 5, 1531, and crowned in
Aachen on January 11. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1781 ff.

3\) \"Newe zeytung des erschrecklichen großen Wassers, So sich auff den
fünfften tag Novembris im Niderland erhaben, vnd was es für schaden
gethon hat\" 2c. 1530. two quarto leaves.

This was secretly entrusted to me by Spengler, and he himself may have
written to you about this matter. Our people are not very moved by this
strange thing, especially those who are more intelligent. For they
suspect Albrecht 4) of whom it is said that he has all the advice in
common with Macedonia 5). I must not say more about this. My dear
father, make sure that through your prayers the extremely sad evils that
we fear are either completely averted or at least alleviated. Our sins
do not allow us to expect anything milder. But there may be five
righteous ones in the holy Church of God, by whose supplications and
tears we may be preserved, amen. Fare well in Christ with your wife
Catharina and the children and the whole household.

My cause has not yet reached the goal I desired. ^6)^ Partly the
threatening horrors and dangers stand in my way, partly the stupidity of
my mind. Brenz in Hall has taken a widow as his wife and celebrated the
wedding without pomp.

Billicanus, 7) the Nördlinger, has asked Cardinal Campegius for
dispensation from the ordination of priests and from the office of
preacher, and now walks around splendidly dressed and engages in
merchandising. Also a good part of the priests, who followed his
reputation in Nördlingen, have returned to the old benefices and defend
the pope stubbornly and perform papist official acts.

The council of Reutlingen has recently written a letter to our council
which testifies to an extremely great confidence in faith: they would
follow the word even in the most extreme dangers; it makes no difference
whether they are destroyed by the enemies of the word or whether they
are delivered, and death and life are in the hand of the Lord 2c. I will
see to it that I bring a copy of this letter with me, for as soon as the
weather improves I will return. Now farewell, my dear Father in Christ.
On Sunday 8) \[after\] Elizabeth \[Nov. 20\], at Nuremberg.

Your Veit Dietrich.

4\) from Mansfeld?

5\) Philip of Hesse.

6\) Perhaps the intended marriage of Dietrich, of which Eoban Liefst
writes in No. 1735.

7\) On Billicanus, see St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 651, note 6.

8\) Elizabeth is Nov. 19, so post must be added.

**1604** Letters from the year 1530. no. 1737. 1738. 1739. **1605**

**No. 1737.**

Wittenberg. November 28, 1530.

**To Caspar von Köckeritz zum Sees.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1056.

**No. 1738.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. December 1530.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

About the floods in Rome and the Netherlands. About his condition.
Greetings. His many affairs. News about Bugenhagen.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 111. Printed in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 202; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 199 f. and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 325.

> To the worthy man, Mr. Wenceslaus Link, the extremely faithful servant
> of the Word at Nuremberg, his superior in the Lord and Benefactor.

Grace and peace in Christ! There is nothing new with us, my dear
Wenceslaus, but with you, I believe, you know everything. We have heard
of the floods in Antwerp and Flanders, but the matter is still
uncertain; but if both should be true, the flood in Rome and in
Flanders, then these are terrible signs against both majesties, both of
the pope and of the emperor. But this also belongs to the other signs
with which Christ prepares his coming to judgment. \"Let there be\" the
end of the wicked, and let the kingdom of the godly begin, amen. Pray
for me that I may be strong in faith; in body I am reasonably well, only
that I am troubled by a kind of flux in my tooth and throat. Greet all
of ours, the Osiander and the Dominicus, 1) the Abbot, Spengler, our
Veit, because I did not have time to write to all of them, since I am
now not only Luther, but Pommer, but Official, but Moses, but Jethro,
and what not? all in all, *Pluribus intentus minor est an singula
Luther* 2) \[Luther has a lot to do, so do not forget about him.

I\) Dominicus Schleupner, parish priest at St. Sebald\'s Church. - \"The
abbot\" is Friedrich Pistorius; \"Veit\" is Veit Dietrich.

2\) The common saying is: *Pluribus intentus minor est an singula
sensus*, which Luther (in the St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1401, ?I6)
translates thus: \"He who thinks many things thinks nothing, does also
nothing good,\" and (ibid., vol. II, 1193, § 80) interprets thus: \"If
one

he does not do everything to the best of his ability\]. Pommer has good
success in Lübeck, but Satan troubles him a lot with the possessed girl.
The cunning evil spirit is doing wondrous things; if you want to read
them, you will find them in this letter, which you will send back to me
in time. Fare well in Christo and greet your rib with your ribs. My lord
(*meus domina*) Käthe greets you. December 1, 1530.

Your Martin Luther.

I ask you to send this letter to Mr. Nicolaus Gerbel, if you are able to
do so with the help and advice of friends, to Strasbourg and deliver it;
be diligent about it.

**No. 1739.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. December 1530.

**To Johann Fesel in Coburg.**

Luther wished Fesel\'s wife a happy delivery. The matter of Rauschner
had been approved by him, but had not been settled because there was too
much to do at court. In the matter of a foreigner, he promises to use
the time available. About Cyriacus Kaufmann\'s (?) love thoughts.

Handwritten in Munich, Hof- und Staatsbibliothek, *Reg. CIoss*. 943,
fol. 48. Printed in Erlanger Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 327.

> To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Johann Fesel, the faithful servant of
> the Word at Coburg, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! May Christ keep and make your wife happy
and may her birth go well, my dear Fesel. Meanwhile, be strong and
comfort her, and greet her also in my name. If my prayer is able to do
something, I shall not be lacking. In truth, I have faithfully pursued
the matter of Rauschner, by letter to the Prince himself and orally to
Riedesel, but I have not yet received an answer. I believe that the
great amount of important business at the court is the reason that I am
being deceived in this agitated time, as much as I am being deceived.

is eager for many diuge, he cannot wait for each one in particular.
Aurifaber knew this proverb and had therefore written in *Cod. Helmst*.
108 (== *Aurifaber, tom.* Ill), but crossed it out and put *Luther*
instead.

3\) Luther sent the letter No. 1725 to Link, as you can see here.

**1606** Letters from the year

1530\. no. 1739. 1740. \' **1607**

the court is now occupied by great council discussions and movements.
Therefore, I think that the Rauschner should be advised that he does not
cease to press, but at another time, when the circumstances are a little
calmer and the courtiers will be less busy. However, I have not
forgotten about the picture (*figuli*), but I am seizing a convenient
opportunity so that I do not also 1) labor in vain here; for the little
picture of my daughter which he has made reminds me enough of him, since
it stands on the top of my stove and artistically represents the father
at the same time as the pleasant face. Greetings to your wife and your
little Fesel (*Feselios*). Greet all those who are far away, and pray
for me.

Cyriacus is in mourning because I am opposed to his love and have
expressed my opinion against him. \"There is misery and distress before
I will have extinguished this flame that burns on both sides. 2) Greet
all yours many times. Christ be with you, Amen. December 1, 1530.

**No. 1740.**

(Wittenberg.) December 5, 1530.

**To Johann Heß in Breslau.**

About the appointment of M. Ambrosius Berndt to Schweidnitz.
Miscellaneous news.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 108 b and in *Cod.
Rostoch*. Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 204; in De Wette, vol. IV, p.
199 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 328.

> To Johann Heß, pastor of the church at Breslau.

Grace and peace in Christ, my dear Heß. At first I myself did not
approve of the appointment of M. Ambrosius to Schweidnitz, both because
it seemed to me that he himself was not at all willing to accept this
office,

1\) Instead of: \"ad hic \[?\]\" in the Erl. Briefw. we have assumed ot
kic. This seems to be an intercession for the *figulus* (potter?).

2\) It seems that here we are talking about the same matter that is
reported in the Table Talks, Cap. 43, ? 99. St. Louis edition, vol.
XXII, 1176.

3\) We have adopted here the correction made by Köstlin: *Ambrosium*
instead of *Moibanum*, just as the Erl. Briefw. It is Ambrosius Berndt
at Wittenberg.

then, because I do not know whether it is advisable or not. But since
all of you there are so insistent that he should go there, he will see
for himself whether he can free himself or bind himself in a suitable
way.

About the Imperial Diet this is the certain opinion,^4)^ that the
emperor commands par excellence that everything should be restored as it
was before, and the empire of the pope must exist, and more firmly than
before. This harshness will produce a movement in the empire (as I
fear), to the ruin of the bishops and the clergy. For the more powerful
cities, namely Nuremberg, Ulm, Augsburg, Strasbourg, Frankfort, with
twelve others, publicly reject the Emperor\'s decree and do not want to
carry it out, and, together with our princes, are constantly and bravely
clinging to the word. It is also said, indeed it is certain, that
Ferdinand should be elected Roman king, namely so that, having lost his
kingdoms, he may still have one left to add to those he has lost, \"and
at last the misfortune of our country may be complete. I believe that
you have heard about the flood in Rome, then also about the other one in
Brabant and Flanders, both of which were extremely terrible. God shows
great and many signs, but the wicked do not care about them. I believe
that you have also heard of the *vision of* the Speier monks 5). But
now, recently, another ghost has been seen near Baden, namely an army on
foot in the air, and at its side a distinguished^6)^ soldier who carries
a spear.

4\) According to the wording, the imperial agreement became known to
Luther only towards the end of 1530 or at the beginning of the next
year. Köstlin, M. Luther (3.), Vol. II, p. 254.

5\) This story is widely found in Schirrmacher, p. 194 ff, in a letter
addressed to the emperor. The essential content is this: Before St.
Jacob\'s Day (July 25, 1530) two fishermen, who were busy with their
work at Speier, were forced by a very large number of monks from all
kinds of orders to put them across the Rhine. \"The monks who crossed at
Speier let themselves be heard that they were coming from Cologne and
wanted to go to the Diet in Augsburg. But when they crossed, they all
disappeared, so that one would think that they were all evil spirits.

6\) *primarium*. Melanchthon writes in his letter to Myconius: \"one of
more significant size than the others\". *Corp. ref.* vol. II, 449.

**1608**

Letters from the year 1530. No. 1740 to 1743.

**1609**

The man, who was moving and shaking back and forth, and who showed
himself as if in triumph through this gesture, had crossed the
neighboring mountains and the Rhine. Brenz wrote this to me yesterday.
Wonderful and frightening things are said here about the Turk. I am
surprised that you do not write anything about this. We want to ask
Christ to put an end to these monstrosities and come with glory and
majesty to pull us out of these troubles. Greetings to all yours. On the
day before Nicolai \[Dec. 5\] 1530, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1741.**

(Wittenberg.) December 12, 1530.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X VI, 1777, no. 1191.

**No. 1742.**

Wittenberg. December 16, 1530.

**To Peter Hackenberg.**

Luther encourages him to leave the monastery and promises him a
preaching position.

Printed in Innocent News, 1710, p. 67; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 189; in
De Wette, vol. IV, p. 203 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 332.

> To the highly venerable man, Mr. Peter Hackenberg, Christ\'s servant,
> his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! It is not you alone, my dear brother in the
Lord, Peter, whom this hope in the Diet has deceived. The whole world
has looked there in vain and sighed for peace, and behold! instead of
bread it receives a stone. I approve all the more of your intention to
leave this torture chamber and the flesh-eating monastic state
(*religione*). And if you need advice for your conscience, I will give
you plenty of my support when you go out; I will gladly offer everything
I can. And I approve of the fact that you have decided to take a little
with you for your sustenance. This is owed to you, and Christ will
gladly give it to you from the wealth of these Egyptian tyrants, thieves
and robbers. Fer

ner, do not worry about any parish or any ministry of the Word. There is
a great shortage of faithful shepherds everywhere, so that it is
imminent that we will be forced to ordain or appoint preachers according
to our own ceremonial, without plate shears, without ointments, without
isles, without gloves, without \[shepherd\'s\] staff and without
censers, even without these bishops. The LORD JEsus, who hath begun in
thee the work of his grace, may he accomplish it unto the day of his
glory, Amen. Wittenberg, Friday after Lucia \[Dec. 16\] 1530.

**No. 1743.**

Wittenberg. December 18, 1530.

**To the City Council of Göttingen.**

Luther promises to send two preachers, but he demands a better salary
for them than they receive in Brunswick. It pleases him that they want
to keep to the Brunswick church order.

Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p.64, no. 104; in Walch, vol. XXI,
329 f.; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 204; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 205; in *Heumann, Sylloge dissertat. de lenitate Aug. Confess., App*.
II, p. 54 and in Zeit- und Geschichtsbeschreibung der Stadt Göttingen,
vol. II, p. 388.

> To the honorable and prudent mayors and council of the city of
> Göttingen, my favorable gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, prudent, dear sirs! At your
request, I will send you two preachers in the most conducive manner, but
kindly ask you to consider that poor journeymen may not arrive in these
difficult times with such remuneration as in Brunswick. Otherwise, it
pleases me from the bottom of my heart that an honorable council and
community want to adhere to the same Brunswick order, and I ask God to
give you grace and help in this, and especially that you do it with a
united heart and mind, otherwise it would be much better left undone. As
for the food, whether they would borrow it here, you will know how to
keep yourselves. For it is burdensome for them to travel to your service
on their own food. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. At Wittenberg, Sunday
after St. Lucius \[Dec. 18\] 1530.

Martin Luther.

**1610**

Letters from the year 1531. No. 1743a to 1747.

**1611**

**No. 1743a.**

(Wittenberg.) . Without date 1530? 1533?

**To Wolfgang Wirbel, citizen in Jáchymov.**

About false teachers, especially Egranus.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. 11, p. 16; in the Altenburger,
vol. V, p. 6; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 556; in Walch, vol. XX l,
302; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 207 and in the Erlanger, vol. 54, p. 208.
In all these editions set in the year 1530. Only the Erl. Briefw. says,
vol. VIII, p. 334, that this letter belongs to the year 1533, but
without giving reasons for this.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear friend! I have been told of your good
will toward me, and I have especially enjoyed hearing Egranus preach;
for the erroneous spirit, which I have known for a long time, once gives
itself so roughly to day; for I see that they are full of the devil\'s
poison. If one gives them neither syrup nor purgation, they must
nevertheless spit out their poison from themselves, both below and
above. In time, if they cannot spit nor throw, their belly, like Judas,
will have to burst; for what they have stolen and eaten from Christ will
not and cannot remain with them. Hereby be commanded to God.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1744.**

Wittenberg. January 1, 1531.

**To Hieronymus Baumgärtner in Nuremberg.**

Luther sends him a box containing a letter and a gift of books for
Ludwig Senfel to forward.

The facsimile is found in the \"Sammlung histor. berühmter Autographen\"
2c. Stuttgart 1846, No. 77. Printed by v. Soden, Beitr. zur Gesch. der
Ref. 2c. Nürnberg 1855, p. 130; in De Wette - Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 128
f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 335.

> To the highly honored man, Mr. Hieronymus Baumgärtner, Patrician and
> city councilor in Nuremberg, his special friend.

Grace and peace from Christ! There was nothing I could write to you, my
dear Jerome, only I would like to ask you not to feel burdened to have
this box sent to Mr. Ludwig Senfel. For so he has himself.

in case I wanted to write something to him, named you as the
intermediary. ^1)^ I am sending him a letter with some little books as a
gift and as a sign of my gratitude. Everything that is news must be
expected from you. Fare well in Christo with all yours. Wittenberg, on
the day of the circumcision of the Lord \[Jan. 1\] 1531. Yours, Martin
Luther.

Respectfully greets my Lord Käthe 2c.

**No. 1745**

Strasbourg. January 1, 1531.

**Nicolaus Gerbel to Luther.**

**(Regest.)**

Gerbel urgently asks Luther to unite with the Strasburgers as far as the
truth itself and the integrity of the Holy Scriptures are concerned. If
this had happened at the Imperial Diet itself by a common confession of
Christ, it would have been of great influence for the Protestant cause.

Handwritten in Strasbourg, *Thes. Baum*. IV, 1. Printed in Erl. Briefw.,
vol. VIII, p. 399.

**No. 1746.**

(Wittenberg.) (Early 1531?)

**Bedeuken about the confiscation of the monastery estates.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, 1829, No. 1204. - There this concern is
dated, as in the previously published editions: \"Perhaps in April
1532.\" But Burkhardt, Visit, p. 109, says: \"After one had become
conclusive about the necessity of sequestration at the state committee
meetings in Torgau and Zwickau, and Luther had perhaps developed his
views about the necessity and expediency of the same somewhat earlier,
the instruction for the sequestrators elected at the same time appeared
on June 1, 1531.\" Therefore, Burkhardt places this concern at the
beginning of 1531, wherein the Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 336 follows
him.

**No. 1747.**

Wittenberg. January 11, 1531.

**To the City Council of Göttingen.**

Luther sends one of the preachers promised in No. 1743, Johann
Birnstiel; the other will follow soon.

The original is in the parish registry of the Marienkirche in Göttingen.
Handwritten in the Nachrichts- und Jnventarienbuch der Marienkirche in
Göttingen. Printed in *Heumanni diss. de lenitate Aug. Conf., App. II*,

1\) Compare the letter to Baumgärtner, No. 1714.

**1612** Letters from clear years

p\. 55; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 65, No. 106; in Walch, vol. XXI,
332; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 209; in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p.
209; in the Zeit- und Geschichtsbeschreibung der Stadt Göttingen, vol.
II, p. 389 and in A. Tolle, in the Protocols of the Gesch.-Ver.,
Göttingen, 1892/3, p. 52.

> To the honorable and wise mayors and council of Göttingen, my
> favorable lords and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen and friends!
Here comes a preacher, whom I recently announced to Your Worship, by the
name of M. Johannes Birnstiel. ^1)^ And although he will not be entirely
of Saxon language, I hope that he will be well heard, because preachers
of Upper Saxon language are also pleasant in Brunswick. The other,
Licentiate Basilius, 2) will soon follow; for he cannot sell his
farmland and livestock in such a hurry, therefore he must also move, 3)
and is difficult to raise. It will become thin here with pastors. The
harvest is great, and the workers few; that is why they are being kept.
I hope, however, that Ew. W. will have two learned, skilful men in them;
so he Basilius knows both Saxon and Oberlandish well. Order them
herewith to Ew. W. in all confidence. I also ask that you reimburse them
for food on the way; 4) in the meantime, I have asked them to borrow.
God grant that they may produce great fruit among you all, to the praise
and glory of God and to the blessedness of you all, amen. At Wittenberg,
January 11, 1531.

Martin Luther. 5)

**No. 1748.**

Wittenberg. January 11, 1531.

**To Johann Sutel, pastor in Göttingen.**

Luther writes because of the same preachers and exhorts to unanimity in
doctrine and toleration in regard to the

Ceremonies.

1\) Birnstiel became pastor at St. Mary\'s Church, but remained in
Göttingen only until July 27, probably because of his \"High Franconian
language\"; \"he called out very loudly, soon he spoke lower, so that
one could not hear \[that is, understand\] it too loudly. He was
assessor of the consistory at Coburg in 1542 and died in 1559.

2\) Basilius Schumann; he did not come to Göttingen. Cf. the letter to
the council of Göttingen of March 1.

3\) \"must\" only with Tolle.

4\) Birnstiel received for himself and his wife in travel money January
29, 24-1/2 fl. 16-1/2 ß. and 31 Mk. 8 ß. On July 27, he received a
parting gift of 1-1/2 Mk. 8 ß.

5\) The signature only at Tolle.

1531\. no. 1747. 1748. **1613**

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 118. Printed in
*Heumann, diss. etc.,* p. 51; in Schütze, vol. II, p. 214; in Zeit- und
Gesch.-Besch. von Göttingen, vol. II, p. 389 (wrong: X.; in
*StrobelRanner, p.* 190 ; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 210 and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p.337.

> To the highly esteemed man, Magister Johann Sutel,^6)^ the faithful
> servant of God in Göttingen, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ JEsu! Behold, there comes one of the
preachers, dear brother, whom I promised before, named Johann Birnstiel;
the other will also follow in a short time. For he is hindered by his
farming, with which he has fed himself until now. He could only be taken
away from the place with great difficulty, and until he sells his
things, he will only be able to get away slowly. But I ask you and all
of you to carry on the cause of Christ with one accord, and not to raise
any questions in the ceremonies that do not violate the faith. For you
know that the rough rabble easily seizes an opportunity to despise the
word. And even though ceremonies are not necessary for salvation, some
of them are useful to the common people, so that their dull minds are
moved. But I speak especially of the ceremonies of the masses, as there
are the altars, vestments, lights and such minor things; if these are
not done away with, they can be retained, as we do here in Wittenberg.
But if they are removed, I would like to see them gradually
reintroduced, but in such a way that the

> Word governs, through which we can make consciences firm. For they
> benefit the children and the simple; they must be served. But the bond
> of perfection, love, must reign here and peace must triumph:
>
> 6\) Sutel, born in 1504 at Altenmorsch near Melsungen in Hesse,
> studied in Erfurt, became Rector in Melsungen, came to Göttingen in
> 1530 on the recommendation of the preacher Jost Winter von Allendorf,
> who had been lent to Göttingen by the Landgrave of Hesse, as a
> preacher at the Nicolai Church, later at the Johanniskirche. In
> September 1535 he became superintendent. In 1542 he was called to
> Schweinfurt, whose reformer he became; returned to Göttingen because
> of the Schmalkaldic War at the beginning of 1547, where he works as a
> predicant for 21 months, but is already found as pastor in Allendorf
> at Easter of that year. Called back to Göttingen again in 1548, he
> became pastor of St. Albani\'s Church and in 1555 superintendent at
> Nordheim, where he died in August 1575.

**1614** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1748 to 1751. **1615**

give this to Christ who calls us, amen. In him be well and pray for me.
Wittenberg, January 11, 1531.

Martin Luther.

You will cooperate that M. Philip will be reimbursed for the travel
expenses, which is cheap.

**No 1749.**

(Wittenberg.) January 12, 1531.

**To Heinrich Scholl, schoolmaster in Eisenach.**

About the hostilities and annoyances that Scholl has to suffer from the
citizens of Eisenach.

The original is at Wolfenbüttel, *Helmst*. 285 B. Handwritten at
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Reimst*. 108, fol. 116 and in the Weimarsche
Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. R,* p. 237. 2. Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 211;
by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 211 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 339.

> To the learned and godly man Heinrich Scholl, teacher of the youth at
> Eisenach, his friend.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I, my dear Heinrich, recognize sufficiently
that it is the envy of your citizens, or rather of the devil, which
troubles you so. But I still believe that just as the matter has been
postponed and protracted this year, so it will be protracted even
further from now on. For they have not obtained anything from us by
their request, 1) nor, if they should stop, will they do anything to
make us send another. Nor does Philip think of putting another in your
place, but of keeping you. Therefore, for the time being, stay as long
as you can, and do your duty. Furthermore, with regard to the beer
lottery, 2) which is a worldly matter, you may use your right. If they
should now complain to you, you can complain to our prince and at the
same time (if you want) add that in Philip\'s and my opinion you are a
sufficiently skilled teacher for this school, and the other things you
have written to me, whether in the meantime perhaps the envy can be
appeased. If they really want to continue, then it must be thought of.

1\) Thus *sollicitaverunt* must be translated here, as the next letter
shows.

2\) The justice to brew beer.

that you will soften and change the place. 3) We will help as much as we
can. But let Christ grant that this may not be necessary; in him you are
well. January 12, 1531 Martin Luther.

**No. 1 750.**

(Wittenberg.) January 12, 1531.

**To Johann Purgolt, mayor in Eisenach.**

About the matter of his son-in-law, M. Heinrich Scholl, discussed in the
previous letter.

Handwritten in the Weimar Archives, Reg. Lk, p. 237, No. 2. Printed in
De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 707 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
340.

Grace and peace. Dear Lord and friend! I have written my and Philippi
Melan\'s opinion to your son-in-law. I have written to your son my
opinion and Philippi Melan\'s, that we have decided that he should stay
with the school, because they have been looking for someone else from
us, but so far we have postponed it, which we are willing to do. But as
far as the Brauloos is concerned, you will probably recover the right
from the authorities, because we do not deny it to him; but if the envy
does not want to bleed to death with time, then your oath will be
allowed to do otherwise, for which I will gladly help and advise as much
as I can. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. January 12, 1531, Martin Luther.

**No. 1 751.**

(Wittenberg.) (Around mid-January 1531.)

**Concerns about Bucer\'s settlement proposals in**

**Concerning Holy Communion.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1975, no. 41 - We have dated this
concern there: \"End of January or beginning of February\" and noted in
the introduction there that it is to be placed either at the same time
as Luther\'s letter to Bucer of January 22 or shortly thereafter. Now we
see from a detailed explanation in the Erlanger Briefw., Vol. VIII, p.
341, that it is to be dated even further back by a few days, because the
Elector writes to the Landgrave already on January 17 that he had had
this concern collected by Luther.

3\) Seidemann, in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 706, reports: Scholl finally had
to give way, asked in a petition to the Elector, dated June 21, 1532
from Torgau, for the completed school office at Ringleben near Artern,
since he had to give up Eisenach after \"six years of faithful office\",
and enclosed for his testimony in copy three letters, \"the original of
which had been executed by D. Martin Luther\", among which is also this
one.

**1616**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1752. 1753.

**1617**

**No. 1752.**

(Wittenberg.) January 15, 1531.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

Request for a scholarship for Nuremberg student Lorenz Strauch.

Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 65, no. 107; in Walch, vol. XXI,
333; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 211 f. and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
54, p. 210.

> Your honorable and careful Mr. Lazaro Spengler, the city of Nuremberg
> Syndico, my favorable master and friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, careful, dear Lord and friend!
Laurentius Strauch, who now has one of the small scholarships from the
honorable council of Nuremberg, asks me to ask for him whether he would
like to receive the larger one, which is now to be given away at Easter.
However, since your person must otherwise leak all the puddles, I have
good faith in you to pour these things out as well; I kindly ask you to
represent my person, and, where it is to be done, to be helpful and
supportive to the aforementioned shrub for such a scholarship, as you
know how to do or not to do. Hereby commanded by God. Hurriedly and
weakly, another time more at your request. On January 15, 1531. Luther.

**No. 1753.**

**Wittenberg. January 15, 1531.**

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

First, news from Friesland; then a concern about the question of whether
the emperor should be resisted with arms; finally, about his condition
and his work.

The original is in Munich in the Hof- und Staatsbibliothek. Handwritten
in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, koi. 109b (incomplete; dated: Dec.
1, 1530); ibid. there, *Aug.* 11. 10, *fol.* 157 (incomplete; dated:
*mense Novembri* 1530); in Gotha, *Cod*. X 401 (Nov. 1530); ibid. there,
*Cod*. B 28, fol. 62b (incomplete; dated: Nov. 1530); in Copenhagen, Ms.
1393, koi. 219 (incomplete; dated: I. Nazi 1530) and in *Cod. CIoss*.
Printed in *Coelestin*, tom. IV, koi. 98b (incomplete; dated Nov. 1530);
in *Buddeus*, p. 215 (incomplete; dated Nov. 1530); in De Wette, vol.
IV, p. 212 and in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 343 f. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1220 (incomplete; dated: in the month of November
1530); in De Wette- Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 127 (incomplete; dated: in
Nov.

1530\) and in all editions of the Tischreden, Cap. 64, §11 (incomplete;
datirt: Anno 1530 im Wintermonden), except the St. Louis edition, Vol.
XXII, 1467, where this fragment is omitted and referred to our letter,
which we have retranslated here according to De Wette.

> Your esteemed husband, Mr. Wenceslaus Link, the faithful servant of
> Christ at Nuremberg, his superior.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have received two letters from you, my dear
Wenceslaus, which announce news. But I have nothing new to repay you,
except this evil news that in Friesland the false doctrine of the
Sacramentirans reigns free. And the count, 1) who has so far bravely
resisted, now, broken, allows that everything and anything is taught by
everyone. It seems to me that God has begun to punish the ingratitude of
the world, and that he will again \[repay\] 2) and let the ungrateful go
astray. But he will have mercy on us, amen.

That you recently asked whether it was true that we had advised that one
should resist the emperor, as you indicated was written to you, - we
have indeed not advised this in any way. But since there were some who
said publicly that one should not ask the theologians about this, or
take care of them, but the jurists, who said that this was permitted, I
said for my part: I advise as a theologian; but if the jurists could
teach according to their laws that it is permitted, then I would allow
them to use their laws; let them watch. For if the emperor has decreed
in his laws that it is permissible in this case for him to be resisted,
let him suffer the law he has given; only I do not want to advise or
pass judgment on this very law, but want to remain in my theology.

I readily conceded that it is true that a prince as a prince is a
worldly person, and by acting so, does not act as a Christian who is
neither a prince,

1\) Count Enno of Friesland, while remaining faithful to the Lutheran
doctrine himself, tired of the opposition he found from all sides, gave
free rein to the further development of Zwinglianism.

2\) We have sought to fill the gap by *reddere.*

**1618** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1753. 1754. **1619**

nor a man, nor anything that there is in the world of persons.
Therefore, if a prince, being a prince, is free to resist the emperor,
let that be left to the judgment and conscience of those. The Christian
is certainly not free to do anything, since he has died to the world. So
much has been done in this, and so much you can tell Mr. Lazarus about
my opinion, although I see that, even if we cried out against it with
all our might, they still have their minds so fixed that they want to
resist, and do not want to be made to give way, as I preach in vain that
God will help us, so that it is not necessary to resist; as indeed He
does, since He has destroyed this Diet in such a way that they have done
nothing to this day. God would do the same from now on. But faith is not
everyone\'s thing. But I console myself with the fact that, if they
absolutely do not accept our advice, they sin less or act more surely
when they act according to civil law than when they act completely
against conscience and with a determined will against the Scriptures.
Meanwhile, they believe they are not acting contrary to Scripture if
they are not acting contrary to civil law. \"So I let them do,\" I am
free.

Greetings to Mr. Spengler and your friends. The illness of the head,
which I contracted in Coburg through the old wine, has not yet been
conquered by the Wittenberg beer. Therefore, I work little, forced to
allow the head its days of rest, a burdensome leisure for me and a very
unpleasant one for the printers. I am finishing the explanations - - - -
1)We are correcting the Psalter again and for the last time, because
there were no copies left. We will try our best, not that David is
better than the others.

1\) Here is a larger gap, which we are not able to fill, since we cannot
determine which *commentaries* Luther means, since he did not publish
any interpretations of biblical writings in 1531. It is possible that
Luther called his \"Glosse auf das vermeinte kaiserliche Edict\" (St.
Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1665) so (as the Erl. Briefw. conjicirt),
because already on February 3, Spengler was \"eagerly awaiting Luther\'s
translation of the Psalter, also his Büchlein de *Comitiis*\".

but that it sounds purer German, by giving the slanderers many
opportunities that they have something on which they can exercise and
sharpen their raging hatred in our translation, but still shall not be
satiated. Greetings to your treasures 2) - - My mistress greets you.
Wittenberg, January 15, 1531. 3) Martin Luther.

**No. 1754.**

(Wittenberg.) January 16, 1531.

**To Johann Weber, Superintendent at Neustadt an der Orla.**

About a divorce.

The original is in Wittenberg in the Rathsarchiv. Printed by Schütze,
Vol. II, p. 212; by De Wette, Vol. I V, p. 214; by *Theoph. Stier,
Inclutae Academiae Jenensi*. . . *gratulatur* etc., p. 9; in Seidemann,
Lutherbriefe, p. 38 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 347.

> To the highly esteemed brother in Christ, Johann Weber, servant of the
> Word in Neustadt and faithful and loud superintendent.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I have, dear man, advised Johann Nicolai 4)
in his marriage case that he should do so: First, he should summon her
to court according to divine example, that is, by posted notices on the
doors of the churches in the neighboring towns, by which she would be
admonished and summoned to answer within a month, or as it may be,
either to you or to him, why she had run away, left her husband, broken
faith, and committed robbery and theft.

2\) The sense here is easy to determine: \"your wife and your
children\"; on the other hand, we have not succeeded in finding a
suitable word complement to the words that follow here: \"*carnis - -
bonae*\".

3\) According to De Wette, the original should have MDXXX by mistake.
Such an oversight would have been possible, but don\'t the Roman
numerals make the original suspicious, since Luther, as far as I can
see, also in his Latin letters always uses the German numerals? (Erl.
Briefw.)

4\) Joh. Nicolai, pastor in Dreitzsch near Neustadt, was engaged to a
widow Eva Erbes from Mellerstadt in Franconia in the spring of 1527 and
married her in Schweinitz. In October 1530 the woman escaped. Her
whereabouts near Würzburg were traced. She did not appear after several
citations, so in October 1531 the divorce was granted by the court, and
Nicolai was allowed to marry again.

**1620**

Letters from the year 1531. No. 1754 to 1757.

**1621**

2c. If she should not come, the same notes may threaten her, she will be
condemned and separated by divorce, and the man will be given permission
to marry another 2c. When this is done, let the whole matter be
proclaimed by you and others in a sermon to the people. And after that
one is condemned and released by divorce, you may proclaim that John is
free to take another, as he himself will tell in more detail. The
annoyance of Satau must be countered with public testimony and work.
Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. January 16, 1531.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1755**

(Wittenberg.) January 21, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Some news. Of a parish post for Bernhard von Dölen and of the new
display of the Psalter.

The original can be found in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv,
Hausmannbriefe, No. 67 (with the inscription Hausmanns: \"Hr. Bnhardt
Dolen\"). Handwritten at Zerbst in the *Frranciscaneum, Ms.* 26, fol.
42b and in Wolfenbüttel, *Helmst*. 108, fol. 116b. Printed in Schütze,
vol. II, p. 213; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 191; in De Wette, vol. IV, p.
215 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 348. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1377.

> The man to be highly honored in the Lord, Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, the
> extremely faithful bishop of the church at Zwickau, his superior in
> the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It would not have been necessary for me to
write to you, my dear Nicolaus, since our Jonas, a living letter, went
to you, from whom you can learn everything that is going on both with us
and is reported from elsewhere here. The Sacramentarians are eagerly
seeking our fellowship and in part are departing from their opinion and
speaking more softly. Let us pray that it will be a perfect and pure
harmony. Johann Pommer works bravely, but Satan resists him and has
challenged him through a possessed girl; Jonas will give an ample and,
as he is a Demosthenes, excellent account of all these things.

I wonder why Bernhard has not returned long ago. I ask you, if you can
reach him by letters, may you order him to return. For the parish under
Sebastian Kötteritz near Leisnig is waiting for him, where I hope he can
stay comfortably. But if not, I will see to it that he is provided
elsewhere. \"Tell him that he cannot eat me poor in three or four
weeks.\" Tell me this, I beg of you.

We are now reissuing the German Psalter to provoke the slanderers. But
Christ, who has begun his work, will also accomplish it for his glory
and our benefit. My mistress Käthe and the family and the whole house
greet you respectfully. January 21, 1531.

From the heart, your Martin Luther.

Greetings from me to the Mühlpfort and all ours.

**No. 1756.**

Wittenberg. January 22, 1531.

**To Martin Bucer in Strasbourg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1973, no. 40.

**No. 1757.**

(Wittenberg.) January 24, 1531.

**To Catharina Zell in Strasbourg.**

Luther testifies to his willingness to enter into good terms with the
Strasbourgians.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. II, p. 134; in the Altenburger,
vol. V, p. 567; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p. 558; in Walch, vol. XXI,
332 f.; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 218; in the Erlanger, vol. 54, p. 211
and in Röhrich, Mittheilungen aus der Gesch. der evang. Kirche des Elsaß
1855, vol. Ill, p. 164 (aps the autograph in the Strassb. Biblioth.).

> The tugendsameu women of Matthes cells at Strasbourg, my friendly dear
> friend.

Grace and peace in Christ! My dear wife, I have not been responsible for
your writing, which has been coming to me for the 1) longest time,
because

1\) Thus with De Wette, who communicates the letter from a facsimile
published in 1817 at Strasbourg in a Säcularschrift. Röhrich reads:
\"unlangest\", which does not seem to fit us.

**1622** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1757. 1758. 1759. **1623**

I thought it was still too early, because the matter was still so new;
but because (praise God) now the cupping 1) has changed a little, I now
want to hold your writing up to you again, so that you now also both
help your lords and other friends, so that (if it pleases God) peace and
unity may be preserved. For you know too well that love should be above
all things and have the precedence, except for God, who is above all
things, including love. Wherever he and his word prevail, love should
certainly have the upper hand with us, next to God. Such a noble cause
should not be attacked with our attempts or devotion, but with heartfelt
prayer and spiritual sighing; for it is God\'s cause, not ours. God must
do with it and to it, our doing is not. Pray, pray, pray, and let Him
take care. Hereby commanded by God, amen. Greetings to your dear Lord.
January 24, 1531.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1758.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. February 1531.

**To Duke Ernst of Brunswick-Lüneburg.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVII, 2002, No. 53.

**No. 1 759.**

Strasbourg. (9. ?) February 1531.

**Martin Bucer to Luther.**

Answer to Luther\'s Letter No. 1756. On the Real Presence of the Body
and Blood of Christ in the Lord\'s Supper.

The original is in Hamburg, Vol. I, fol. 59. Printed in Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 163 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 355.

> To the great defender of pure Christianity, D. Martin Luther, the
> extremely high theologian, his most esteemed teacher. ,

Grace and peace in Christ! I have read your letter, dear teacher, which
was written to me on January 22, and thank the

1\) Röhrich explains this word, which otherwise does not occur in Luther
(as far as we know), by \"Schroffheit\". To this the Erl. Briefw.:
\"Perhaps read for: Schärpfe. Lexer, Middle High German dictionary:
*schroffe*, has only the meaning: pointed stone, rock face.\" Walch
really reads, \"Schärfe.\"

Lord with my brothers and colleagues, who has granted that our
confession 2) is sufficient for you even so far. You are surprised that
I have made Zwingli and Oecolampad a part of this opinion or exposition.
You would not be surprised if you had examined what they, especially
Oecolampadius, have discussed with me about this matter according to my
judgment, not to mention the scriptures. But you want to talk with me,
and wonder again, since we confess that Christ\'s body is truly present
here in the Lord\'s Supper and is offered through the words and
sacraments, but for food of the soul, not of the belly, as these words
\"Take, eat\" 2c. teach (for this is how our confession has it), why it
troubles us to further confess that Christ\'s body is also offered with
the bread by heart to the mouths of both the godly and the godless. But
this, most esteemed Luther, does not complain us, nor have I added the
word \"for the food of the soul\" not because I do not believe that the
body of Christ can be present and presented in several things 3) at the
same time, but because I wanted to satisfy those who wrongly think that
you make the natural body of Christ the food of the body, which you deny
in explicit words in your confession^4)^ in the Torment Sij. For these
are your words from word to word: \"So from now on it is rightly said,
whoever attacks this bread attacks Christ\'s body, and whoever eats this
bread eats Christ\'s body, whoever crushes this bread with teeth or
tongue crushes Christ\'s body with teeth or tongue; and yet it remains
true throughout that no one sees, grasps, eats or bites Christ\'s body,
as one visibly sees and bites other flesh. For what is done to the bread
is rightly and properly appropriated to the body of Christ for the sake
of sacramental unity.\" In that you write, \"For that which is done to
bread,\" 2c., you recognize that it is taken with the hand, bitten with
the teeth, and thus transferred to the stomach, digested, and that which
otherwise belongs to natural food, all this is actually done to the
bread, but it is added to the body of Christ for the sake of sacramental
unity, and therefore it is not actually done.

2\) The Eintrachtsschrift to Duke Ernst of Lüneburg. (Erl. Briefw.)

3\) Instead of \"in many places,\" as Luther said in his letter, Bucer
puts here: *in pluribus rebus*.

4\) \"Luther\'s Confession of the Lord\'s Supper,\" in the St. Louis
edition, vol. XX, 1032, K 349.

**1624**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1759,

**1625**

Therefore, in the Lord\'s Supper, Christ\'s body is not given for the
food of the belly, but of the soul, for food for the latter, not for the
former, is sought here. And since we confess that Christ\'s body is
presented through the words and sacraments, we certainly acknowledge
that it is present with the bread, and therefore, for the sake of
sacramental unity, it is also presented to the mouth, both of the
ungodly and the godly. But the ungodly, as you write, 1) do not receive
it, as the blind do not receive the light of the sun, though it strikes
their eyes as well as those of the seeing. Yes, we confess that those
who know that the body of the Lord is offered here also receive it,
although their soul receives corruption from it, is not fed. For these
do not relate to it as the blind do to the light of the sun, after they
have received the words of the Lord. Of those who have absolutely
nothing of faith, and think nothing else of this bread than of any other
bread, I do not see how they differ from the mice that gnaw this bread.
And since Christ has instituted this sanctuary \[or sacrament\] for his
disciples, I do not know at all what I should ascribe to such people who
know nothing of Christ. But I would rather say: They are none of our
business who are outside, than quarrel with any Christian, let alone
with you or any other preacher of Christ about these things. Since we
hold and teach thus, for we never speak of this sacrament without
expressly expressing our abhorrence of those who seek nothing but bread
and wine, and not at the same time also the body and blood of the Lord,
and that primarily, in the Lord\'s Supper, we hold that nothing of
falsehood or blasphemy is committed when either ours take the Lord\'s
Supper with you, or yours with us. On both sides the words of the Lord
are presented in the best faith, simple faith in them is taught, the
eating of Christ is recommended above all things. And even if some
should misunderstand this, since the gifts of God do not depend on the
faith or the merit of the church minister, or even on that of the
communicants, those who receive Christ\'s promise with faith as well as
with their ears can be sure that they will receive it.

1\) In the letter of Jan. 22, St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1973.

2\) In the original it is not clear whether *sacrum* or *sacramentum is*
to be read, *sacru* or *sacram*.

They will not be deceived in their hope, and as much as they believe, as
Leo says, so much they will receive. But the more I consider how it is
now with the judgments of the people, the more I approve of your counsel
that we gradually strengthen the doctrine of the true presence and
eating of Christ in the Lord\'s Supper, in the churches where any
possibility will present itself, but that you take care to nourish these
beginnings of concord, which you freely offer, by kindness, and to
promote them by prayers to Christ, since as yet no writing has gone out
to the public concerning our concord. Certainly, I would have written
our confession much shorter, and, if I am not mistaken, more completely
to your satisfaction, if I had not feared the wrong judgments of many,
and the annoyance of very many. Therefore, to please them, I have added
the things by which I have expressed the truth of the human body in
Christ, and that it is in heaven, not spatially in the bread, nor is it
naturally mixed with the bread,^3)^ which I do not see to be contrary to
your faith. For since among the wise men according to whom Christ\'s
body is present both in heaven and in the Lord\'s Supper, you also list
these:^4)^ \"that he may sit in the midst of all creatures, in a certain
place, and when a certain place or part of creatures is presented, as
when bread and wine are presented by the word of God, then it may be
said, Behold! there is Christ\'s body truly in the bread, as one may say
when a certain part of a crystal is placed before one\'s eyes, in the
midst of which is a little spark or flame: Behold! here in the foremost
and in the rearmost part of the crystal is the little spark,\" you
certainly do not suppose that Christ\'s body is localized in heaven, nor
do you assert that it is localized in the bread: therefore, since we
confess with the Fathers, for the sake of the true manner of a body,
that Christ is in some place of heaven, and yet at the same time is
truly present in the Sacrament, I cannot see what difference there is
between us in the matter itself.

For I do not doubt that you will gladly give up those things for which
you do not stand to fight, so that you may obtain those for which
conscience does not permit you to fight. But we can easily see that
these disgusting things, as with our churches there is rest, so with
yours there is unrest.

3\) Instead of *expresse* we have assumed *expressi* ; in the former
reading a predicate is missing.

4\) See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 957, .\] Bucer did not reproduce the
passage accurately.

**1626** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1759. 1760. 1761. **1627**

I therefore suffer with the greatest equanimity that my writing about
our union be erased, and according to your advice you also gave at
Coburg, we strive on both sides to promote these beginnings of peace, on
the word which I sent before. As for Oecolampad and many ministers of
other churches, and not even a few churches, you may not doubt that the
real (*solida*) presence of Christ in the Lord\'s Supper will also be
taught with the signs (*symbolis).* Zwingli, in my opinion, still fears
too much that a natural eating of Christ, as a perishable food of the
belly, imposes itself on the people, to the detriment of the faith in
the truthfulness of a human body in Christ. But he could have suffered
that my confession, the one I sent, would be published, so there was
good hope, and still is, that from these beginnings a step would be
taken toward firm unity. Let us diligently ask Christ to bring it about,
and let us in all things put before one another that which is conducive
to peace. I have long since acquitted you of all obstinacy in your mind,
my dear teacher; I know that Christ\'s honor, not yours, fills you with
anxiety here and in other things. And I do not doubt that you will duly
consider how much this discord has hindered the course of the Gospel,
although 1) in truth we do not recognize ourselves as the people whose
fellowship you greatly need, except insofar as it helps the saints that
each one should join Christ\'s army. Trust in Christ, for whose glory
all things will finally come to pass. But I beg you, for the sake of
Christ, not to be stubborn about what is written on this side: as you,
when you had your mind fixed on these words: \"Take, eat, this is my
body\" 2c., and even now cannot hold otherwise than that here the body
of the Lord Himself is given in the bread, is also to be taken with the
mouth, and is given to all who eat this bread of the Lord, so those,
seeing their minds immovably fixed on the sayings describing Christ as
true man, were afraid to say that this saying, \"this bread is my
body,\" was a simple one (*simplicem), and* that \"is\" was taken in it
essentially (noun). For they saw that you do not deny that the bread
cannot be what the body of the Lord is. From this are after,

1\) Instead of *et si* we read *etsi.*

When the disputation had become heated, almost a thousand disputes
arose, of which I could always have sworn that they consisted only in
words. But to finally put an end to this letter, I want to remind you of
the one thing that my conscience believes, that these words of the Lord:
\"Take\" 2c. demand that we believe that the body of the Lord is truly
offered with the bread. But what I have written to M. Philip about the
ungodly, which I deliberately did not want to remember, I would like you
to receive in such a way that you understand that it seems to me, since
those words were spoken to the disciples, that by them it is not
required that we also discuss this matter with those who, in all
likelihood, do not want to be Christ\'s disciples, not that I ascribe
the presence of Christ to the soul in such a way as to make him absent
from the signs in the meantime, since I nevertheless say that he is
received and presented presently through the signs, adding only that all
this is instituted for the nourishment of the soul, not of the body,
except insofar as the power of immortality flows over to the latter from
the soul. In this you have my opinion in abundance in this matter, which
is diligently taught in our church and in very many others, and it is
good hope that we will finally also all have the same opinion here,
toward which we will work diligently. Fare well in Christ, and receive
me, as you have again begun, as a father. At Strasbourg, February 9, 2.

Venerable Lord, your most devoted Martin Bucer.

**No. 1760.**

(Wittenberg.) February 15, 1531.

**To Lazarus Spengler in Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 570.

**No. 1761.**

(Wittenberg.) February 16, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 1976, no. 43.

2\) The original has clearly as time determination: *quinto Non. Febr.*
which results in 1, Febr. for which Bucer would certainly have written
*Kal. Febr.* Kolde remarks: \"Should probably mean on the 5th, the Nones
of February.\" But even the latter date is still too early, because
Bucer writes to Zwingli on 6 Feb. that Luther\'s messenger has not yet
returned. Therefore, the Erl. Briefw. assumes that Bucer accidentally
wrote \"*Non*.\" instead of \"*Id.*\" We have followed this.

**1828** Briefs- from the year 1531. no. 1782 to 1785. **162S**

**No. 1762 .**

(Wittenberg.) (Around February 16, 1531.)

**Luther\'s, Jonas\' and Melanchthon\'s Gut-**

**The first of these was for the Elector about Bucer\'s proposals for
reconciliation.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. X VII, 1978, No. 44.

**No. 1763.**

(Wittenberg.) February 19, 1531.

**Luther\'s postscript to a letter from Melanchthon to Spalatin.**

Printed in *Corp. ref.* vol. II, no. 961, col. 481.

To a letter of Melanchthon dealing with a marriage matter, Luther added
the words:

Martin Luther greets you, even though the messenger does not want it and
prepares to flee.

**No. 1 764.**

(Wittenberg.) (February or March 1531. ) 1)

**To Justus Menius in Eisenach.**

On Bucer\'s Approach to Luther\'s Doctrine of Holy Communion.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 137 d. Printed in
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1721, p. 357 (from 1529); in *Strobel-Ranner*,
p. 258 (from 1536); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 236 (perhaps in March 1531)
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 363. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1167.

Grace and peace in the Lord! It is true, my dear Justus, what you have
heard, that Bucer has at least begun to have the same opinion with us
about the Lord\'s Supper, if the letters he addressed to me and Philip
are not deceptive (which I do not easily believe). By the way, it is
still uncertain whether the others also want the same thing; Bucer works
and works towards the fact that they want the same thing, and has done
so much that all admit that the body of the Lord is truly present in the
Lord\'s Supper and is served, even in bodily presence. But the others
say that it is only presented and present as food to a believing and
godly soul; but Bucer agrees.

1\) This letter presupposes that Luther had already received Bucer\'s
letter No. 1759, therefore Seidemann\'s dating in De Wette, Vol. VI, p.
559: \"early February\", is too early.

that it is also presented by the hand of the ungodly and taken with the
mouth. For his letters clearly testify to this.

I cannot answer the letters from others of yours and my grandfather\'s
2). I am overwhelmed with letters from all places. I am one and only,
and every single one of them thinks that his business alone is the one
that the idle Luther should carry out. Then almost all the messengers
can\'t wait, don\'t have food, and have other things to do, so that they
expect the letters to be ready for them as soon as they have delivered
theirs.

You may say this to George,^3)^ to Thomas and to my grandfather; in time
I will answer them, and will help. \"I will not\" as one \"arrange\" all
the business of all and alone quickly and at the same time. Farewell and
pray for me. 1531.

> Martin Luther.

**No. 1768.**

(Wittenberg.), (March 1, 1531.) 4)

**To the pastors of Göttingen.**

Luther sends the church order he overlooked and promoted for printing
and wishes them God\'s blessing for the use of it.

First printing: \"Christlike Ordeninge der Stadt Göttingen. Myth eyner
voerrede D. Martini Luther.\" At the end: \"Gedrücket tho Wittemberch
dorch Hans Lufft. MDXXXI.\" 16 leaves in octavo. Also in the Wittenberg
edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 282; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. IV, p.
367; in the Altenburg edition, vol. IV, p. 427; in the Leipzig edition,
vol. XXII, p. 554; in Walch, vol. XXI, 255; in De Wette, vol. Ill, p.
328 f. and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 7. Everywhere the wrong
date: June 1528, and the superscription is missing.

2\) his mother\'s brother, Ziegler; according to Richter, (*Geneal.
Luth.*, p. 19: Lindemann. (Erl. Briefw.)

3\) \"Georg\" is Georg Thomas, pastor in Eisenach; \"Thomas\" is Thomas
Neuenhagen, likewise pastor there.

4\) This letter is incorrectly dated in the editions: *Mense Junio Anno*
1528, because the Reformation did not begin in Göttingen until October
1529, and the church order mentioned at the beginning of this letter was
not printed in Wittenberg until 1531. Luther sent the same on March I,
1531 (as the following letter shows) to the council and no doubt on the
same day also to the preachers with this letter. However, if this letter
(which seems credible to us according to No. 1767) is Luther\'s
*preface* to the church order itself, then a somewhat earlier date would
have to be set.

**1630**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1765. 1766.

**1631**

> To the worthy pastors and preachers of the city of Göttingen Mart.
> Luth.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have read over your desire for this church
order of yours and promoted it through printing; God, the Father of all
wisdom, grant His grace that it may gain a strong continuation, amen.

For we know well, praise God, what an adversary we have in such matters,
namely Satan with all his angels: therefore it is not enough to have
good order, good law, good doctrine; indeed, there is (in short) no
counsel, no wisdom, no precept so good and right, that anything should
be built on it and anything should be attempted; indeed, even if it is a
divine right, it is not useful, but rather harmful, Rom. 4:15: \"The law
provokes wrath.\"

How many a wise man, yes, how many a holy man has missed his most
beautiful and best cause and his most sacred right. Why is that? Because
there is one more thing that belongs to right and good order, that is,
to prosper, so that St. Paul himself says that the gospel (which is not
only God\'s order, but also God\'s power) does not create anything if
God does not prosper it \[1 Cor. 3:7\].

Therefore these are foolish men, which say, I have a good right, I will
do it; who shall forbid me? For that they say, I am well justified, is
well said; but that they also say, I will do it, is too much. For such
doing is not yours, as little as the right is yours. God must help it to
be done; otherwise you will see if it is not done for you.

Even if you are right, God will not suffer your defiance and insistence
on justice; You should also humbly ask for help, so that he, and not you
yourself, may preserve justice, so that you may learn what the devil is,
yes, what you yourself are, as you are not able, if he has you right,
and the devil is a warrior against everything that is right and good,
that God must help you, not only from injustice, but also to justice,
both in great and small, yes, all kinds of things. Therefore wisdom
says, Proverbs 8:14: \"Mine is counsel and advice. Many have good
counsel, but

The device does not follow, but becomes a great evil out of great
counsel, as many examples and histories prove.

Therefore, dear lords and friends, I have informed you that you should
keep yourselves and your people in mind, not only to rely on your church
order, as if there were no need for it now that it has been established,
but also to give humble thanks to God and ask Him to grant you
prosperity and guidance, and to go on blessedly.

For there will be enough obstacles and hindrances; and he who is a
prince in the world (believe me) will also want to be a prince in
Göttingen, and will not like to be a beggar.

God cast him under you, as St. Paul asks Rom. 16, 20: God tread Satan
under your feet. Which I also wish for you, and pray that God will bless
you and keep you, and make you grow blameless and strong for His praise
and glory, Amen. \[March 1, 1531. 1)

**No. 1766**

(Wittenberg.)March 1. March 1531.

**To the City Council of Göttingen.**

Luther sends the printed church order and reports that Basilius Schumann
will not come to them as a preacher.

Printed by *Heumann*, *diss. de lenit. A. C.*, p. 45; in the same
*Sylloge dissertat., App.*, I, p. 57; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 66,
No. 109; in Walch, vol. XXI, 334 f.; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 335; in
the Erlanger Ausg., vol. 54, p. 217 and in the Gött. Zeit- und Gesch.-
Beschr., vol. II, p. 394.

> To the honorable and wise gentlemen, mayor and council of Göttingen,
> my favorable gentlemen and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable wise sirs! I have had your order
printed, as you see. But why the licentiate Basil does not come, you
will hear from his writing 2). I am not at ease that I have thus brought
up the good man, and must leave him sitting there for nothing. That is
my pious

1\) See the first note.

2\) On Feb. 5, the council appointed Lic. Basilius and gave him a salary
of only 60 fl. per year, and also made difficulties about reimbursement
of moving expenses. The matter came to nothing. Cyriacus Gericke, who
was appointed after him, was offered an annual salary of 70 fl.

**1632** Letters from 1531. no. 1766. 1767. 1768. **1633**

It\'s my fault that I didn\'t inquire about all the things beforehand.
Well, it is not my first mistake, nor will it be the last. God grant
that you may always be certain of these things beforehand, and that you
may first become one before you undertake such a thing. Hereby commanded
by God, Amen. On the first of March, 1531. Luther.

**No. 1767.**

(Wittenberg.)March 1. March 1531.

**To Johann Tütel, pastor in Göttingen.**

Luther reports that the church order of the city of Göttingen had been
printed in Wittenberg and that he had provided it with a preface to the
preachers (probably No. 1765). Luther complains about the meagerness of
the Göttingen against the preachers to be hired. Answer to the question:
whether Sutel could administer Holy Communion without having been
anointed.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst.* 108, fol. 122 b. Printed in
Zeit- und Gesch.-Beschr. der Stadt Göttingen, vol. II, p. 395; in I. M.
Sixt, Reformationsgeschichte Schweinfurt. 1794. p. 195; in Schütze, vol.
II, p. 218; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 225 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol.
VIII, p. 366 f.

> To the highly venerable brother, Johann Sutel, the faithful servant of
> the Word in Göttingen.

Grace and peace in the Lord! We have taken care of the printing of your
\[church\] order, my dear Sutel, which I have provided, as best I could,
with a preface dedicated to you preachers. 1) You may see whether it
will be of any use. I see that the sings find themselves complained if
they have to pay the church servants a little more, 2) also take no
account of the time. Perhaps they hope they may have superfluous people
to administer the preaching office, but since they hoped this, church
servants should not have been sought from me. For here there is the
greatest shortage of suitable men, and I can only drive them out with
great difficulty, so that we are beginning to suffer mailgel in this
city as well. In the past they wasted thousands of florins on
innumerable seducers, while

1\) See the first note to No. 1765.

2\) Here the Erl. Briefw. makes the not quite correct remark: \"The
salary promised to Schumann satisfied Luther (cf. to Gericke March 28),
so the rebuke concerns the objection to the moving expenses.\" The
letter to Gericke rather shows that the latter was immediately offered
10 guilders more than the licentiate Basilius.

they do not want to turn to one hundred now. Therefore, we will let them
go. It is better that they should be the servants of the pope and
subject to the devil, than that they should be lords over Christ and
trample on his word. Many such things occur in other places, but the
Lord knows His own \[2 Tim. 2:19\]. \"They make themselves believe that
we must be glad of them, and that without them we cannot remain
anywhere.\" This is not seeking the gospel with earnestness. Therefore I
cannot answer anything about what you ask: whether you should partake of
the Lord\'s Supper unshorn and unanointed, 3). For if it should not be a
serious matter there, then I would like you to abstain from it, as
before; but if it should be a serious matter, then you can receive
testimony publicly before the altar from the other church ministers with
a speech and the laying on of hands, and the power to administer the
Lord\'s Supper. But excuse my brevity. I am moved by so many examples of
ingratitude, that I am brought to give myself severely to these things,
and to make myself a partaker of these disgusting Jews, who are
disgusted with the manna \[Deut. 21:5\]. You are well, brave in Christ.
On the first of March, 1531, Martin Luther.

**No. 1768.**

(Wittenberg.)March 4. March 1531.

**To Stephan Roth in Zwickau.**

Luther very sharply rebukes the proceedings of Roth and the Zwickau
against their preachers.

Manuscript in Gotha, *Cod.* 451 k. Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 219;
by Hildebrand, Archiv für Parochialgeschichte. Zwickau 1834, I, 1, p. 25
(slightly more than half German, the conclusion Latin); in De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 226 f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 368. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1378.

> To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Stephan Roth, town clerk at Zwickau,
> his friend.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Although I am more than overly afflicted,
my dear Stephan, for the sake of the Word of God, it pains me not a
little that you and your Zwickau God are not being treated with the same
care.

3\) Sutel had previously been Rector in Melsungen and had not received
priestly ordination.

**1634** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1768. 1769. **1635**

and his servants so extraordinarily despised. You have expelled Lorenz
Soranus 1) with disgrace, but you have not even heard the one so branded
with this public punishment, who had not yet been convicted of a public
offense, and publicly everyone is crying out that you are both the
author of this disgraceful deed and the helper in it. And however much
you may excuse yourself, this cannot be excused in any way, that you
have done this by your own violence, rather by your own sacrilege,
without involving the priest, the very good man, and against his will,
who after all was most anxious to know it and to give his consent to it.
\"But do you think, you dear noblemen, that you want to dominate the
churches, and to snatch and steal the pensions, which you did not endow
and which are not yours, and give them to whom you want, as if you were
lords over the churches? As the Lord lives, I will make you and these
Zwickau beasts a public example of such a great shameful deed in some
booklet. But we have earned this through such great hardships, through
such great fights for the Word of God, such thanks you pay us, you
friends! But I will consider you again, together with yours, as having
been put out of the fellowship of my Lord Jesus Christ. \"This you and
they all shall see,\" as surely you also

1\) Lorenz Soranus (Sorer, Sörer, from Sohra near Freiberg) was first
reading master in the Freiberg Franciscan monastery, where he preached
in Luther\'s spirit already in 1524. Through him, the Duchess Ursula of
Münsterberg seems to have first become acquainted with Luther\'s
writings. In 1526 he became the first Protestant preacher at Reichenbach
in the Vogtland and in 1528, appointed by the city council, came as a
preacher to the Catharinen church at Zwickau. At the end of February
1531, the council suddenly dismissed him on May 1 \"because the
congregation had no desire for his person and teaching. He was accused
of living an annoying life with his wife. A justification of Soranus was
unsuccessful, which is why he demanded his immediate dismissal, which
was also granted to him with the granting of his salary until May 1.
This dismissal, which had taken place without the consent of the pastor
Hausmann, was seen by the latter as an encroachment on his rights, and
he demanded the reinstatement of the dismissed man, which the council
refused. Hausmann then traveled with Soranus to Wittenberg and
complained to Luther, who sided with the clergy. Thus a violent quarrel
arose between Luther and the Zwickau council, which also caused
Hausmann\'s departure in August. The breakdown of friendly relations
between Luther and Roth lasted for several years.

always despise this now. May the Lord Jesus Christ disgrace your and
your family\'s counsels and presumptions, amen. March 4, 1531.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1769.**

(Wittenberg.)March 4. March 1531.

**To the Mayor and City Council of Zwickau.**

Luther sharply chastises them for their ungodly behavior against their
clergy.

The original is in the Rathsarchiv at Zwickau. Printed by Hildebrand,
Archiv für Parochialgeschichte, Zwickau 1834, I, 1, p. 25 ; by De
Wette - Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 437 (without the supplement) and in Erl.
Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 370. The supplement alone: in Kolde, *Analecta,*
p. 169.

> To the honorable, prudent gentlemen, mayor and council of Zwickau, my
> favorable gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, prudent, dear sirs! Your parish
priest and Laurentio Sorano have been here with us, and I have been told
how the said Laurentius Soranus has been given leave of absence from you
without the knowledge and will of the parish priest, no differently than
a lord gives leave to his servant, since he is not your servant, and you
are not lord of the churches, nor may you steal and rob such office at
your pleasure, if and to whom you wish, but it is due to the sovereign,
until the matter with the bishops has ended. 2) Although I am now well
aware that you have no interest in what I think is wrong or unjust,
regardless of the fact that you should spare me, as I so hardly acquired
and preserved the gospel (of which you have now become a part and need
against all of us), and not trouble me, a poor afflicted man, with such
presumption. Unfortunately, there is too much else that grieves my
miserable heart, so that I should have cheaper consolation and joy from
you. But because it will not be otherwise, I must command God and
consider you again as cut off members of Christ. Unfortunately, you are
too comfortable. But you shall not, if God wills it, resound with the
defiance that you, as lords and princes of the land, would set up and
depose preachers without the knowledge and will of the pastor.

2\) That is, until Protestant bishops are installed.

**1636** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1769. 1770. 1771. **1637**

Office and interest are not yours. It may be that you will lose more
than you gain. This I have said to you as a reminder. Whoever does not
want to have preachers, let him leave it; in time it will be different.
The merciful God will protect your and all your peers\' conduct in such
a case. No priest nor preacher can stay with you for months, you make
such a hue and cry for your city yourselves. Well, I have nothing to do
with it, but to admonish you faithfully and brotherly. It is more for
you than for me. God help you, amen. March 4, 1531, Martin Luther.

(Inserted note.)

The messenger got the first answer: there should be no answer; then he
told me that he would not have to come home without an answer. But when
I wrote this letter and told him to wait, he went away. Do not send me
the proud messenger. Otherwise it makes you think.

**No. 1770.**

(Wittenberg.)March 4. March 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther asks him, on the basis of the expulsion of Soranus, to resist the
arbitrary procedure of the council of Zwickau. .

Handwritten in the Rathsarchiv at Zwickau (simultaneous, very poorly
written copy). Printed by Kolde, p. 167 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII,
p. 372.

Most gracious Lord! The City Council of Zwickau has suspended their
preacher, Mr. Lorenz Soran, which is both burdensome to the pastor and
preacher, because they have done so without the will of the pastor, even
without cause against the preacher. Now, the Elector General knows very
well where the example should be set that a preacher should be appointed
and dismissed against the pastor, if they want to appoint 1) a Münzer or
Carlstadt today or tomorrow, depending on whether they are inclined or
disinclined toward the pastor. In addition, the Electorate is not to
suffer, because now all monasteries and offices are in the hands of the
Electorate, due to necessity and the bishops\' abandonment of the idea
that a city should be subject to having monasteries and offices for
itself as its own.

1\) \"they\" put by us instead of: \"themselves\".

thum. Also, where it should apply that a city may depose preachers and
pastors if it wishes, and, the most serious, to burden an unindicted and
unconvinced 2) preacher with such punishments that he is driven out in
disgrace and cast into misery, the Elector General will not keep
preachers in the country. The punishment should not be carried out^3)^
before the guilt is proven and the cause is brought forward. Therefore,
to prevent such a bad example, I humbly request that your Lordship have
a serious understanding, because the city of Zwickau has a cry that they
can not stand a preacher,^4)^ and very hard-headed (hartt koppick),
nevertheless want to be evangelical, to little honor of the Gospel.
Further, the pastor himself will report to E. churf. G.. Hereby
commanded by God, Amen. Marcii 4, 1531.

E. churf. G. subordinate

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1771 .**

(Wittenberg.) March 7, 1531.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther asks him to get a letter to the Elector and tells him about a
difficult night he had. -

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 128; ibid.
*Extrav*. 64, 4, fol. 305; in Hamburg, O 14, 107 (as addressed to
Hausmann); in Zurich, Siml. Sammt., vol. 19 (to Hausmann; incomplete)
and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 189. Printed in Buddeus, p. 218; in Schütze,
vol. II, p. 220 (to Hausmann; incomplete); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 229
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 373. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1222
f.

Grace and peace in Christ! See to it, my dear Jonas, that this letter is
properly delivered to the prince, either by you or by someone else
through you, and obtain an answer for me, so that I may put to rest
those people who think that I am able to do everything at court,
although nothing has been done.

2\) In the manuscript: \"vnubezcewgten\", which Kolde has added a
question mark, but the Erl. Briefw. but not correctly resolved by
\"unbezeugten\". It is: *non convictum*.

3\) Handwriting: \"Jhenn\".

4\) Already in 1515, the people of Zwickau had a dispute with their
preachers, according to a letter from Elector Friedrich to the bishop of
Naumburg in the town hall archives of Zwickau. (Kolde.)

**1638** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1771. 1772. **1639**

is less true. I will write about Doctor Basil 1) in the meantime, while
you are there, but on another day than this one (so that I do not
overwhelm the prince). In the meantime, you build, prepare, talk, walk
and stand in front, so that the times will be suitable for us to talk,
2) because I will certainly come.

If you should hear something sad about me, do not believe it easily. For
this night (I do not remember ever having done this before) I slept on
my right side for six hours, although I always sleep on my left side, so
tired was I. For the previous night I carried stones and wood far into
the day (*ad multam diem*) in hell, not in Egypt. It was not the iron
furnace of Egypt, but such as cannot be talked out with words, so that I
seemed to myself a corpse. But I write this so that you may see that it
is true that Christ is the King of power in weakness, who can rule,
moderate and settle what is hot with what is cold, what is hard with
what is soft, death with life, sin with righteousness, indeed everything
opposed with what is opposed, according to the greatness of his glorious
power; to him be praise and glory, amen. March 7, 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 772.**

Torgau. 3) March 8, 1531.

**The mayors of Zwickau, M. Lorenz Bärensprung and Hermann Mühlpfort the
like, to Luther.**

They complain that Luther had written so vehemently because of the
dismissal of Soranus; if he had known the circumstances correctly, he
would have used them to

1\) D. Basilius Axt. He came to Königsberg in August 1531 as physicist
to Duke Albrecht of Prussia.

2\) *mollia Tempora fandi*. Cf. *Virg. Aen. lib*. IV, v. 293 sq.

3\) In any case, the messenger who had to deliver the letter to the
Elector (No. 1770) will also have taken the letter to the council of
Zwickau (No. 1769). Since he now found the two mayors of Zwickau in
Torgau, he delivered the letter to them. Their answer is therefore only
a personal one, not on behalf of the council.

have spared. An interrogation would show that they were justified in
such dismissal. If it should be necessary, they would show further
excuse.

Printed in Hildebrand, Archiv, vol. I, issue 1, p. 277; in Neues Archiv
für sächsische Geschichte, edited by H. Ermisch, vol. 5 (1884), p. 338
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 374.

> To the respectable, highly respected and worthy Mr. Martin Luther,
> holy and evangelical scripture doctor, our special favorable gentleman
> and friend.

Our very willing services of possible diligence before. Respectable,
worthy, dear Doctor! We have now received E. A.\'s letter at Torgau
concerning the leave of absence of Mr. Lorenzen, the preacher at St.
Catherine\'s; however, because we are burdened with letters at^4)^ , we
have not been able to give E. A. a correct and proper answer as we would
have liked. However, we are not a little concerned and alienated by your
letter, and we have no doubt that E. A. will report to us, along with
all the circumstances, that you have spared us your almost vanishing
letter, because we, through divine help and grace, would also like to
live and act in a way that is pleasing to God, that will make us
blessed, and that will not be punishable by the world. We must, however,
tolerate this and other letters, which are addressed to us and against
us, in view of the fact that we are innocent of the dishonor inflicted
upon us; 5) under the name of the holy word of God, and the holy gospel
is to be called preached; but if we would have our regiment discharged,
it should not be highly contrary to us to hand it over to the pastors
and preachers, as is their intention. ^6)^ At our discretion, our
business shall, as we request and ask, be brought to trial: 7) it shall
apparently be found that we are justified in such dismissal. Be that as
it may, we want to send E. A.\'s letter to other friends of ours as
well. Whether E. A. needs to write further, our excuse shall also remain
undisturbed. For we are willing and eager to serve E. A. and his
dignity, as our favorable lord. Dated Wednesday after Reminiscere
\[March 8\] *Anno Domini* XXXI.

> E. A. und Würden willige Laurentius Bernsprung Mgst. und Hermann
> Mühlpfort der Aeltere, beide Bürger zu Zwickau, jetzt zu Torgau.

4), Erl. Briefw.: \"s. v. a. Schreibereien\". - Shouldn\'t \"business\"
be read?

5\) Inserted by us to give meaning.\'

6\) The now following is drawn in our template (as we think\", wrongly)
to the preceding.

7\) There is an item here in our template.

**1640**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1773 to 1777.

**1641**

**No. 1773.**

Wittenberg. March 12, 1531.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Luther recommends Basil to him and reports his unhappiness.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 128. Printed by
Schütze, vol. II, p. 221 (wrong: March 13); by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 230
and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 375 f.

Grace and peace! My dear Amsdorf, my Basil is coming; 1) he is
recommended to you, and the Lord create fruit through him, amen. It is a
constant rumor that the Turk will come; God have mercy on us! I have no
other news. I am very weak, especially in the head. Therefore, I am
prevented from writing, reading, talking much, and live like a sick
person. Pray for me. Wittenberg, Sunday Oculi \[March 12\] 1531.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1774.**

(Wittenberg.) March 13, 1531.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Luther promises to act for D. Basilius Axe ; of the Turkish danger.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 121b and 122 and
in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 190. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 219; by De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 230 and in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 376. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1224 f.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I see, my dear Jonas, from your answers
that I did not try to act for Doctor Basil at the right time, since I
was most moved by the assumption that meanwhile, while you were
deliberating, the prince would have greater leisure. But since this hope
has failed, I will do what I can at another time, and shortly.

1\) Whether *Lic.* Basilius Schumann or D. Basilius Axt is meant here is
disputed, but we lean towards the opinion expressed by De Wette:
\"Probably the same one who was earlier destined for Göttingen. He may
have taken his way via Magdeburg on the journey to Goslar, where he had
been appointed (cf. No. 1778).

A certain Mr. Peter 2) from Präg, whose son is a scientist here, writes
to me that the Turk is surely coming, and last fall he had innumerable
baptized bushels of grain sown in the kingdom of Hungary in order to
feed his army. What this means, we Germans must bravely despise, so that
we will perish. But if fate wants us to perish, it is easier for us to
perish with the wicked than to live with them, since while they live,
they do not allow us to live with them, and if we die with them, we will
lack nothing, but those will perish completely. Be well and pray to the
Lord for me; in him be well and live. Monday after Gregory \[March 13\]
1531.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1775.**

Wittenberg. March 17, 1531.

**To the mayors and judges of Frauenstein.**

Luther advises them to continue to partake of both forms of the Lord\'s
Supper despite the external violence, and to confess this when asked.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2216.

**No. 177 6.**

Wittenberg. March 18, \'1531.

**To a citizen of Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 568.

**No. 1777.**

(Wittenberg.) March 20, 1531.

**A marginal note and postscript by Luther to one of Melanchthon\'s
letters to Spalatin.**

The original is in Basel, *Cod. F* 101, op. 102 (with Spalatin\'s
inscription: 1.5.3.1.). Printed in *Corp. Ref.*, vol. II, 490 and (in
part) in Erl. Briefwechsel, vol. VIII, p. 379.

Melanchthon writes: The passages of Peter \[1 Petr. 3, 18. ff. and 4,
6.\] I cannot explain. Our Pomeranian firmly asserts that only the
Gentiles are there.

2\) At that time there was only one student from Prague in Wittenberg,
Johannes Trscko, inscribed in the winter semester 1530 (Alb. 141), whose
father will be meant.

**1642** Priese from the year 1531. no. 1777 to 1780. **1643**

The apostles preached the gospel to them after the resurrection of
Christ. He interprets it in such a way that these had been in prison
before they heard the gospel, and almost persuaded Luther to his
opinion.

Luther wrote in the margin: \"That is not true. M. L. with his own hand.

\[Postscript.\]

Greetings from the sick and yet not \[dying\] 1) Brother Martin Luther.

**No. 1778.**

(Wittenberg.) March 28, 1631.

**To the City Council of Göttingen.**

Luther reports that Basilius Schumann has gone to Goslar and suggests
the preacher Chriacus Gerrcke in Köthen instead of him.

Printed by *Heumann, diss. de lenitate A. C.*; in the same *Syllog.
dissertat., Append.* I, p. 58; in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 66, No.
110; in Walch, vol. XXI, 335; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 234; in the Zeit-
und Gesch.Beschr. von Göttingen, vol. 11, p. 396 and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 54, p.2Ä2.

> To the honorable and wise gentlemen, mayor and council of Göttingen,
> my favorable dear gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace. Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! The Licentiate Basil,
of whom you write, is now no longer available, but has been demanded to
Goslar, as I also indicated earlier that the personnel has become
strange and expensive, and the longer the more so that I know of no one
here who is capable of speaking the Saxon language for you. However, I
have spoken to your envoy, he should try to deal with one in Köthen,
called Mr. Cyriaks, who has been in the preaching ministry in Zerbst. If
he now wants to accept this and you like it, I would like to be
conducive to it as much as I can. Hereby commanded by God. Date Tuesday
after Judica \[March 28\] 1531.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1779.**

Wittenberg. March 28, 1531.

**To Cyriacus Gericke in Köthen.**

Luther offers him the pastorate in Göttingen.

1\) This word is not legible. Bretschneider thought it was
*Steuriguadus*; perhaps: *moribundus*.

Printed by Neumann, *Heumann, dissert., Append.* I,

p\. 59; in the same *dissert. de lenitate* V. 6. p. 46; in the Zeit- und
Gesch.-Beschr. der Stadt Göttingen, vol. II, p. 396; in *Strobel-Ranner,
p.* 192; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 234f. and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII,
p. 380.

> To the highly esteemed man Cyriacus N., servant of the Word at the
> castle in Köthen, his brother. \"To Cöten at the castle, the
> preacher.\"

Grace and peace! The Göttingen council demands a servant of the word
from me, dearest brother, who is also to be superintendent; I had
promised him the licentiate Basilius Schumann, but he has been called to
Goslar. Therefore, if it seems good to you, you can talk to this
Göttingen envoy about this matter. For I have so advised him that he
should go to you to hear your will. The all-offer is respectable enough,
as it seems to me, 70 fl. of annual income. If, therefore, the Senate
will persuade you to accept it, then it is good; if not, then you should
answer yourself and indicate your opinion to the Göttingen Council. Fare
well in the Lord. Wittenberg, \"Tuesdays\" after Judica \[March 28\]
1531. Martin Luther.

**No. 1780.**

Wittenberg. March 28, 1531.

**To Johann Frosch^2)^ in Augsburg.**

Luther corrects the false rumors about the agreement concluded between
him and the Zwinglians, and admonishes him to remain firm in the right
doctrine.

Handwritten in Dresdeu, C. 351, fol. 26 d. Printed in Schütze, vol. II,
p. 222; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 235 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p.
381.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have heard about the boasting of your
Michaelists 3),

2\) Schütze has read *Rana* (Frog) in \"Nauve\" and lets this be the
addressee. De Wette has followed him.

3\) The followers of the leader of the Zwinglians, Michael Keller.
Frosch and Stephan Agricola (Kastenbauer) had been dismissed during the
Diet but recalled at the beginning of 1531, but at the same time Keller
and two of his companions, Wolfgang Musculus and Bonifacius Wolfhard,
had been called. Now the old quarrel flared up again, and the council
forbade to bring the question of oral enjoyment and eating of the
unbelievers to the pulpit. As a result, Frosch and Agricola took their
leave; Caspar Huber stayed. Both went to Nuremberg. Frosch became a
preacher at St. Sebaldus Church, but Agricola was a guest of Wenceslaus
Link until Margrave George of Brandenburg summoned him to court.

**1644** Letters from the\" years

1531st no. 1780. 1781. **1645 \'**

who boast that an agreement has been made between us and the Zwinglians,
so that there is also a rumor that we have completely agreed with their
opinion. But you, my dear Frog (*Rana*), with your colleagues, firmly
believe that we have not yielded anything of our opinion. But this is
how it is: Martin Pucer is quite diligent and, as the words say,
sincerely anxious to hold and teach with us. And therefore, as far as
his person is concerned, I have good hope that at least he himself will
return to the right path. I have nothing certain about the others, but
if they sincerely wish for harmony, I would like to be lenient with
them, so that they will gradually be lured in after their
interpretations have been tolerated for a little while, but always
without prejudice to our opinion, which we have defended up to now. This
is what love seems to demand. If they do not sincerely desire the same,
the cause itself will cry out and stand against them for us. In the
meantime, be strong with our brethren and persevere as you do, not
broken or changed by any boasts of any scoundrels (*spermologorum*
\[Apost. 17, 18\]) and their boasts, and, God willing, I will not change
in my opinion and faith. The grace of God be with you. Greet Doctor
Stephan and all our brothers reverently. Wittenberg, \"Tuesday\" after
Judica \[March 28\] 1531.

> Martin Luther.

Greetings from the scribe M. Veit Dieterich, who wrote this letter.

**No. 1 781.**

(Wittenberg.) Probably still in March 1531.

**To Valentin Hausmann^1)^ in Freiberg.**

Luther defends Nicolaus Hausmann against the one-sided and implausible
accusations of the Zwickauers.

I\) All older editions leave the letter addressed to Valentin Hausmann,
only De Wette, which is assigned to *Cod.*

*Goth*. followed, makes Nicolaus Hausmann the addressee. The Erlangen
edition does not come into consideration because it is a mere reprint of
De Wette. Seidemann in De Wette, vol. VI, p. 508, note 4, says: \"The
indication of *Cod. Goth*. is wrong. In general, it is becoming more and
more apparent that the value of these copies in the various *Codicibus
falls* variously short of the expectations.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 402, fol. (as from the year 1532). Printed
in the Eisleben edition, vol. II, p. 303; in the Altenburger, vol. V, p.
1015; in the Leipziger, vol. XXII, p: 561; in Walch, vol. XXI, 356
(1532); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 228 (to Nicolaus Hausmann) and in the
Erlanger, vol. 54, p. 218.

Grace and peace in Christ! Your brother N\[icolaus\] has let me see your
writing, in which you comfort the good man \"with many words\" almost
little, and shows enough cause that moves you; and it is true that your
writing has moved me to thoughts. But I ask you, for God\'s sake, to
also mean that the people of Zwickau cannot have more as an adversary
than one man\'s word, and God commands that all things be placed in the
hands of two or three men. So I, D. Martin, praise God, am now gone in
such a way that I have more land and people, also greater lords and
sovereigns, than Zwickau is, loaded onto me, and as little as I want to
do injustice to the same, so little do I truly want to do injustice to
those of Zwickau. For I care for my soul more than 100,000 Zwickau. If
my teaching is right, then the people of Zwickau should not lead their
defiance outside. If I could be with you, I would also tell you so that
you could answer the \"sharp Zwickauers. Therefore I kindly ask you to
excuse your dear brother and not to believe everything those of Zwickau
say, especially because they are crying out that they cannot stand any
preacher or pastor, and no one wants to go to them, as I have
experienced so far. For you can see that for yourselves

tungen\". The Erlanger Briefwechsel, Vol. VIII, p. 383, has the heading:
\"Luther an N. N. in Zwickau\", and justifies this with the fact that
our letter \"is obviously addressed to Zwickau\". To us, the opposite
seems to be the case. Nowhere does Luther say: you of Zwickau, but
throughout: \"those of Zwickau\". Luther could not write to someone
living in Zwickau: \"do not want to believe those of Zwickau\", because
he himself was an eye and ear witness 2c. The matter will be like this:
from Zwickau a colored report will have gone out to Valentin Hausmann,
which the latter joined in his letter to his brother, without having
heard the same as a second witness. Therefore, at the end of the letter,
Luther identifies him to a certain extent with the Zwickauers, but
separates him from them there: \"Do those at Zwickau, or you yourself,
not want to feed your brother\" 2c. We have set March as the date,
partly because of the significant echoes that our letter has of No. 1769
and No. 1770, and partly because Nicolaus would not have let a long time
pass without telling his brother something about this deal.

**1646** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1781. 1782. **1647**

But it may well mean that a good man, who has studied his life away, who
has consumed his father\'s goods and suffered all kinds of misfortune,
should be a pastor in Zwickau, as they have let themselves be told, that
they should be lords, and the pastor Kriecht, who would be sitting all
day on the Schuckel: if Mühlpfort wanted him, he would stay; if not, he
would have to leave. No, my dear sir, you shall not take it there, nor
shall you keep a pastor; we will not do it, nor suffer it, unless they
confess that they do not want to be Christians. From pagans we shall and
will suffer it; from Christians Christ himself will not suffer it. If
they at Zwickau or you yourselves, my dear sirs and friends, do not want
to feed your brother, you may well leave that alone. Christ is a little
richer than the world, even if he pretends to be poor. It is said:
*Esurientes implebit*; we will leave it at that and let those at Zwickau
go on.

**No. 1 782.**

(Zwickau.) 3. April 1531.

**Stephan Roth to Luther.**

Roth complains about Luther\'s vehement writing and hasty judgment.

Printed by Walch, vol. XXI, 1379 (who does not indicate his Latin
source) and subsequently in Erlanger Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 384.

> To the excellent and honored Mr. Martin Luther, Doctor of Theology and
> Ecclesiastics at Wittenberg, to his own hands, his Lord to be
> especially revered.

Grace and peace in the Lord! In this one thing I boast before God and
the world, in Christ, most beloved Father, that through you I have been
given to know Christ and the mystery of the Gospel, and that I am a
witness of your labors, watches, tribulations and sufferings, which for
the sake of the Gospel you are now almost into your fifteenth year,
steadfastly and generously enduring, for which I give you, but
especially our God, undying thanks. For the rest, I cannot be surprised
enough at the hasty judgment you have passed on me and my Zwickauers,
who have not even been heard, let alone convicted, but are rather
innocent and do not deserve it. You condemn this some of us, that we
have disgracefully hunted out that Soranum, who is best known to you,
unheard and not referred.

have. Why do you condemn us unheard? although it is not true in the
least that we have expelled Soranum unheard and punished him publicly,
but rather we have released him most honestly, namely by setting a time
for his departure (of which^1)^ occasion, which the Council with
reverence and for the honor of the Gospel not without prior counsel and
cultivated mature consideration, still exists with us a copy and, if I
am not mistaken, the manuscript itself). Why have you, venerable father,
been tempted by this man\'s greatest ingratitude? That in the most
difficult and important matter, namely the welfare of souls, you do not
hear one party and pass such a terrible judgment. And if I, whom you
consider the author and promoter of this tragedy, were not aware that I
am innocent in this matter, you would have taken this very Soranum, upon
our priests, whether they like it or not, as a witness, and, God forbid,
condemned me to the rope. Not even unjust judges do this, that they are
so hasty in passing judgment, even in small matters, when the other
party is not heard and is absent. For thus it is said in Proverbs, \"One
man\'s speech is not speech; they shall both be heard. I am sorry for
you and I am sorry that you give a complete hearing to such slanderers,
who are only looking for their own thing from you. For I know for
certain that you will not be deceived once by such beasts, but will be
led behind the light countless times. Perhaps the Lord will send it so
that I can excuse myself and mine verbally. For how do we poor people
come to be so innocent and so suddenly, for the sake of one man\'s
testimony and untruthful accusation, to obtain both an ungracious God
and an ungracious sovereign? God did not want that! They eat salt with
you in Wittenberg as long as with us, so you will know them as well as
we do. Not all of them are good cooks who carry knives for a long time.
There are many name Christians and preachers of the gospel whom you
would find, if you knew them better, that they seek their own things
more than the things of Christ. These will cause us a lot of trouble in
future times, which a prophet would certainly predict, and God would
have me speak falsely. But enough of that. Incidentally, as far as the
threatening words are concerned, namely that you will use me and the
Zwickau beasts in a book as a general example.

1\) This is: their.

**1648**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1782. 1783.

**1649**

If you want to take it around, we leave the matter to God. But you may
see what you will achieve with this decision with the enemies of the
Gospel, or what you will bring my Zwickauer to. The church goods are
dealt with in such a way that the council is not ashamed to give an
account of every penny at any moment. They do not seize the goods of the
church and take them as robbery, as they are also falsely accused by
those who are concerned that they defend their conscience. Why do you
hear the bringers in this piece? And in short, in all these things the
council will prove its innocence. Believe me, the council is holier and
more innocent in this matter than that it should remain silent and allow
itself to be accused of this disgrace. This is what I recently wanted to
say in reply to your vehement letter, so that you may see that we are
not at all afraid of these accusers, but are courageous and steadfast,
and give an account of all our words and deeds, not only to you,
venerable father, but also to our prince, and to anyone else who is
interested, when and as often as it is necessary. Therefore, for the
sake of Christ and Christian peace, I ask you to hold back your hasty
judgment, even to withdraw it, until you have also heard us or read our
apology. There will be little lack, as I believe, that you should not
regret having so hastily condemned us poor, unheard, innocent people. It
is also not without cause that Soranus has been dismissed without prior
knowledge and inquiry with our pastor - as you will also hear in due
time. We may therefore not be out of the fellowship of Jesus Christ, as
you judge, since you are wrongly prejudiced by the other part. Rather,
we are driven by the holiest zeal, and that by virtue of our knowledge
and the gospel of Christ. If you will not deny this, that even among
those who boast of the gospel, ungodly men are sometimes found, who,
under the pretext of the gospel, follow their affections more, and
interfere with their preaching with such great bitterness, immodesty and
impetuosity, that nothing is above it, than doing the work of Christ.
There is hardly a sermon in which one does not hear: you sticks, you
blocks, you rogues, you rogue necks, you knuckle-draggers, you oxen, you
coarse daggers, you godless people, I have to call you whales,^1)^ I
have to reel you in, hew you, prune you, and the like. How much un

1\) \"waltraufen\" will be the same as \"forest rights\", to make forest
right, to cut.

Whether this excites the mob, or how much the people are edified by it,
you may consider for yourselves according to your modesty; but whether
this means anything else than denying the spirit, I do not know. From
this follows the greatest and unspeakable contempt for the Gospel and
the true servants of the Word of God. The rest I pass over with good
deliberation. May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, who
will preserve you for a long time and strengthen your heart, so that you
will be strong and an iron wall to bear all the tribulations of the
enemy. Do not take offense at the present, for your letter has forced me
to reply. You may attribute it to the same if I have transgressed here.
Greet your Catharina and all who are with you. Do not so hastily expel
an old friend from your community, and if you have time, and it seems
good to you in your eyes, write again, 2) so that I may know whether I
am in favor or in disfavor with you, for I am anxious to know. Given on
the Monday after Palmarum \[April 3\] in the year after the birth of
Christ 1531.

**No. 1 783.**

(Wittenberg.) April 5, 1531.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

About a marriage case.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 347. Printed by Buddeus, p. 220 (as
from 1530); by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 237 and in Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII,
p. 387. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1225 f. (among the letters of 1531,
but with the year 1530).

> To the worthy man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, servant of the word at
> Altenburg, his brother.

Grace and peace! M. Philippus, my dear Spalatin, writes my opinion about
the presented marriage case. 3) For I write little and in stolen and
intervening moments, so that I do not again irritate my head more
severely, which is otherwise already too much irritated. Greetings to
your exceedingly dear Hind, to whom God give a little deer, amen. But
that the answer about the aforementioned case is delayed, is perhaps due
to the very

2\) Luther sent this letter back unbroken through Hausmann.

3\) This letter of Melanchthon is in *Corp. Ref.* vol. II, 492.

**1650**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1783 to 1787.

**1651**

It was the fault of the good man, the pastor at Zwickau, who either did
not remember or did not stop enough. Fare well in the Lord. April 5,
1531.

Mart. Luther.

**No. 1 784.**

(Wittenberg.) 16. ApWril 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1745, no. 1162.

**No. 1 785.**

(Wittenberg.) April 17, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1618.

**No. 1 786.**

(Wittenberg.) April 18, 1531.

**To Justus Jonas.**

Request for a letter of recommendation for the sexton of the church near
Eilenburg.

The original is in Wolfenbüttel, *Helmst*. 285. B. Handwritten there,
*Cod. Helmst.* 108, fol. 129 (inserted leaf). Printed in Schütze, vol.
II, p. 223; in J. Th. Wideburg, Osterprogramm des Gymnasiums zu
Helmstädt vom Jahre 1818, p. VII; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 245 and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 896.

> His superior in the Lord, Mr. Justus Jonas, the extremely faithful
> archbishop of Saxony.

Grace and peace! If this Laurentius finds you, the gatekeeper of the
church outside Eilenburg, 1) my dear Jonas, please provide him with any
letter of recommendation, wherever he desires it. I otherwise already
shower the prince with such writings that I must be ashamed. If this
perhaps does not seem useful or advisable, then let him be comforted
with good words. \"After all, it is becoming too much of a thing!\" And
we are forced to give away more than we have, especially I, although the
Lord amply repays it. Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. April 18,
1531, Martin Luther.

1\) Sexton at the mountain church near Eilenburg.

**No. 1 787.**

(Wittenberg.) April 24, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

Luther sends back the letters of the Zwickau council and Stephan Roth
unbroken and unread, because he does not want to have anything more to
do with them because of their hostile behavior against him. About a
marriage matter.

Handwritten in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 123b; again fol.
459b (dated July 27, 1545); same, *Aug*. 11. 10, fol. 232 (without day
and year); same, *Cod.* 214, fol. 2; in Hamburg, Ms. 66, fol. 186; in
Gotha, *Cod.* 451, fol. and in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 156. Printed by
Buddeus, p. 226; by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 249 f. (datirt 1. Mai) and in
Erl. Briefw., vol. VIII, p. 397. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1227.

Grace and peace in Christ! I do not know what your council has written
to me, nor do I want to know, my dear Nicolaus, which is why I have
returned his letters unbroken and unread, because I have decided that I
do not want to hear, see or read them, but have nothing to do with their
fellowship and their doings. Therefore, I am also returning your earlier
letter, which I opened but did not read, since I had seen that it was
from Zwickau, together with the still unopened letter from Stephan Roth.
A certain rumor comes to me that they have talked against me in Torgau
2) and put it into action, therefore \"they should leave me alone with
their letters, I will go idle. Finally, I am also sending the letter I
intended to address to you,^3)^ which is marked with the letter B. You
will see what you have to do. You will see what you have to do. I will
take care that I do not participate in any part of her advice or
actions. What I have written to them before, that shall be written. But
I will also write to the preacher at St. Catharine\'s 4) and tell him in
conscience why he has taken the boldness to preach in the office
entrusted to you without asking you for advice. I

2\) On March 11, a preliminary decision was made in Torgau. The mayors
of Zwickau submitted a letter of apology to the Elector regarding the
dismissal of Soranus, and his decision was that the matter should be
settled amicably; the discharge of Soranus, however, was approved.

3\) No. 1785.

4\) Stanislaus Hoffmann, a Bohemian clergyman, was appointed by the
Council as the successor of Soranus. The next letter is addressed to
him.

**1652** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1787. 1788. 1789. **1653**

I would like you, together with Cordatus, to press the case and the
matter so that he, frightened, will desist from this stolen preaching
office.

By the way, what you write about Erhard Goetz, you should know that the
opponent did not appear, as the note of the settlement indicated. And I
have the suspicion that your council is spreading this fairy tale to
your and all our disgrace, so that they alone are Zwickauers and the
first to trample on and defile all servants of the word. Therefore I
hold that Erhard is free from that accuser, who is convicted of adultery
by so many witnesses and her own confession. 1) But you know that we
have taken the matrimonial matters, which the authorities have not taken
care of so far, upon ourselves out of necessity, but that I have now
thrown them back upon the authorities in a public book 2). For, among
others, the children of Belial \[2 Chron; 13, 7.) from your senate have
also expressed this brand to me at Torgan with lying and malicious
words, that I was playing a game with dissolving and confirming the
marriage according to my will, and arrogated to myself the rule over it.
\"They are boys in their skin.\" Therefore, if they are not satisfied
with this judgment of ours, \"let them judge for themselves and rule in
the devil\'s name. Neither let them trample under foot the ministry of
the word, as they do, or let any other name pass over them.\" The Lord
be with you, dear brother, and pray for me. Monday after George \[April
24\] 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1788.**

(Wittenberg.) April 24, 1531.

**All Stanislaus Hoffmann in Zwickau.**

Luther points out to him that without the knowledge and will of the
priest Hausmann of the Zwickau council he had taken the place of

1\) About this decision of Luther, as well as about the one in the case
of Pocher (letter to Hausmann of May 10), the council deputies
repeatedly complained at the hearing on August 3 in Torgau: Luther had,
as they had already pointed out at the first hearing on March 11, often
decided arbitrarily and unjustly in matrimonial matters, especially in
the case with Götz and Pectold (Pocher), whom he had acquitted of the
suspicion of adultery.

2\) \"Of Matrimonial Matters. 1530.\" St. Louis edition, vol. X, 754.

of Soranus, and indicates to him that he does not want to have any part
in this offense; Hoffmann may exercise his conscience.

The original is in the Zwickauer Rathsarchiv. Printed by De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 488.

> To the highly esteemed man, Mr. Stanislaus Hoffmann, preacher of the
> council of Zwickau at St. Catharinen, his friend in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I hear, my good man, that you are preacher
at St. Catharine\'s in place of Laurentius Soranus, who was shamefully
and ignobly expelled, and who has neither been charged nor transferred,
and I am very surprised at your audacity, since you knew very well that
the church at Zwickau is commanded to the pastor Nicolaus, and entrusts
these souls to his faithful care, for which he must give account to
Christ. And yet dll, without asking him and without his will, entered
this office or took it over. But with what kind of conscience could you
do this and persist in this doing? It may be that the council has
appointed you, but it has appointed you without the knowledge and will
of the pastor, to whose care this city is entrusted. I am writing this
to you to admonish you, but at the same time to inform you that I do not
want to take part in this deed of yours or your senate\'s, nor do I
approve of it, but have nothing to do with it and be pure from your sin,
if Christ should judge. You may see what you have done, but you will
have me neither as a comrade nor as a justifier. Fare well in the Lord,
and take heed to your conscience. On Monday after George \[April 24\]
1531. Martin Luther.

**No. 1789.**

(Wittenberg.) April 24, 1531.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther recommends Georg Tors, who is looking for a position. From the
theurung.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 259. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 225 and
by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 251. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1226.

**1654**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1789 to 1794.

**1655**

> To the esteemed man, Mr. Georg Spalatin, the faithful and fair pastor
> of the church at Altenburg, his exceedingly dear brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! This Georg Tors 1) has been with me, my
best Spalatin, in the intention of finding some position. Since none
presented itself at present, and he could not stay here in this place,
he has decided to stay outside of Wittenberg for the time being,
somewhere where an opportunity should always present itself, until a
position is offered to him. Therefore, he asks me for letters of
recommendation to you and the other visitators, if you could advise him
with any position. Therefore, either help the man or comfort him with a
word that inspires confidence.

We have no news, except that the theurization of grain has suddenly
risen beyond all measure, and there is a tremendous clamor among the
people. But what does the unbelievable neglect of the word not deserve,
rather the contempt and hatred even among our people? God convert our
hearts, and so have mercy on us, Amen. Greetings to your chain
(*Catenam*, Kethe), the very good wife. On the day after George \[April
24\] 1531, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 790.**

Wittenberg. April 29, 1881.

**To Brosius Heinrich zu Dittersdorf.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 746. - There, according to De Wette\'s
processes, provided with the date: \"April 30\". But already Seidemann
at De Wette, vol. VI, p. 508, note 6, says that \"Saturday after
Misericordias Domini\", thus April 29, is the more probable date, which
this citation in all editions of the Tischreden, Cap. 43, § 122 actually
has. Similarly, this dating is found in the *Bibl. Wolf*. Ill, 64 at
Hamburg, as Burkhardt, p. 190 reports.

**No. 1791.**

(Wittenberg.) April 30, 1531.

**To Barbara Lischner in Freiberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1744.

1\) Seidemann in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 657 writes \"Dors\".

> **No. 1792.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. May 1531.

**To the Reval City Council.**

(Regest.)

The candidate for superintendent refuses to accept the office, and
Luther has not found anyone else, so he admonishes the council to
support his city children in their studies, for which two suitable
persons are named.

According to the original in the Rathsarchiv zu Reval, reported by O.
Waltz in Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte, II, 134. A regest in Kolde,
\^naleeta, p. 169, which we have reproduced here.

> **No. 1793 .**

(Wittenberg.) May 8, 1531.

**All the Chancellor Brück.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1749, no. 1163. - There, the heading
reads \"1531\".

**No. 1784**

(Wittenberg.) May 10, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau. About the marriage case of Georg
Pocher.**

The original is in Dessaus) Manuscript in *Cod. Jen*. b, fol. 211 and in
Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst*. 108, fol. 128 (identical with Aurifaber,
vol. III). Printed by *Buddeus*, v. 227 and by De Wette, vol. IV, p.
253. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1229.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have read your letter for your relative
Georg Pocher and heard the man in detail. But because you demand my
counsel in this matter, I have consulted with Magister Philippus, and it
seems advisable to us, if the danger is so great and such, that he
abstain from attending his wife out of *just* fear (*justo metu*, as the
lawyers speak), whether perhaps time will finally reveal her to be
either guilty or innocent. And this is supposed to be a thing, which the
1 Cor. 7

2\) Since we have essentially worked according to De Wette and Burkhardt
in the following, we have followed their designations of the locations.
The archive in Dessau was, as the Erl. Briefw. states, was brought from
Dessau to Zerbst ; Burkhardt has the indication: \"Original in Dessau.\"
Aurifaber\'s manuscript in Wolfenbüttel, *Cod. Helmst.* 108, is referred
to by De Wette either as \"Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection\" or as
\"Aurifaber, vol. III,\" and in this we have followed both.

**1656** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1794. 1795. **1657**

is the same where enraged spouses depart from each other. But a divorce,
that both may marry, is not to be made, except in the public court,
where each of the two parties is personally accused and charged. It is
not up to us to advise this, nor does it fall within the bounds of
conscience. Conscience, however, is safe if he abstains from the
presence of the woman as long as he is in probable fear of such great
danger. Now whether this fear is probable must be determined from the
man\'s manners, character, and reputation, as when he is not notorious
for levity or malice, but has a good reputation and serious manners;
then when the woman is notorious by the opposite manners and character,
that is, when the man complains of nothing but such danger, and would
suffer everything else, as you write. For if this is found to be true,
he must not be forced into the danger, regardless of the annoyance. But
such great signs of danger (even though the woman denies it), as he
relates, are sufficient to cause a just fear. But enough of that. We see
in such cases the very real works of the devil. The Lord be with you.
Salute the Lord Cordatus in the Lord. May 10, 1531, Martin Luther.

^1)^ Because your council wants to judge this case, we want to be free
and refer it to them; only that we want to consult the conscience, if a
temporary separation should be ordered.

**No. 1795.**

Wittenberg. May 12, 1531.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther instructs him that in the case where one is not sure whether
someone is baptized or not, one must not give conditional baptism.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 402. fol. and in Aurifaber, vol. Ill, p.
129. Printed in *Buddeus*, p. 78 (incomplete; from 1529); in Schütze,
vol. Ill, p. 171 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 254. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1194 (as from 1529).

1\) In Buddeus, De Wette and Walch this postscript is added to the
letter itself, according to the original it is a postscript.

> To Mr. Wenceslaus Link, Ecclesiastics at Nuremberg.

Grace and peace! Concerning the question you put to me in your last
letter, my dear Wenceslaus, about conditional baptism, I have consulted
with Master Philip, and after carefully considering the matter, we have
come to the decision that conditional baptism is to be absolutely
rejected in the church, and where one either doubts or does not know
whether a person has been baptized, he should simply be baptized without
condition, as if he had never been baptized. And our reason is this,
that a conditional baptism says nothing, neither denies nor affirms,
neither gives nor takes away. For suppose someone is baptized
conditionally, he will then be forced to say, \"Now I know as little and
am as uncertain whether I was baptized as before, and with me all those
who baptized me. For if the former baptism was right (which must be
unknown, I may want or not), then the later one (because a conditional
one) is nothing. Now if the earlier baptism was not a right one (which
again I am obliged not to know), then the later baptism is again
nothing, because it is and must be uncertain as long as the former is
uncertain, since it is founded by the condition on the earlier one,
which was uncertain, therefore it likewise remains uncertain forever.
But now this must be done so that baptism is certain, at least for the
baptizers themselves, who can testify to the church afterwards. In this
case, therefore, it is safer to err with rebaptism, if a mistake is made
at all (which we do not believe), than by giving an uncertain baptism,
where in truth a sin is committed, because then it is also not a true
rebaptism, but an uncertain rebaptism, that is, a true and certain
baptism, against an uncertain baptism. In this way, we do not become
raging rebaptizers. For those, as you know, publicly condemn the certain
first baptism and do not want it to be called a baptism. But we want to
leave the uncertain to its fate and God\'s judgment and offer a certain
baptism. Thus we believe to be right and safe

**1658**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1795 to 1799.

**1659**

act. Furthermore, if someone baptizes with an altered baptismal formula,
as you write: in the name of the Father and of the Son and of St.
Michael, we are certain that it is not a baptism at all, not even a
conditional one.

The conditional law of the Zeal Law \[Deut. 5\] has a different meaning.
Because law and gospel are different things. The gospel is a promise of
God that must be certain. The law is about things and our works, and can
be omitted and not omitted, and easily suffers a condition. Then also
the law shows the hearts of men, which we do not know. But the promise
gives us the things of God, whether we know them or not, since we know
for certain that men need them, but we do not know for certain whether
men have sinned against the law.

As I am busy, I write confusedly and hurriedly; you will arrange it and
gather the best from this forest of my clumsy writing.

I thank you for the oranges you gave. There was a small washbasin
enclosed along with a two-armed candlestick, I don\'t know if you gave
it; you didn\'t indicate anything. Farewell and pray for me. Wittenberg,
May 12, 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1796.**

(Wittenberg.) May 13, 1531.

**To Andreas Osiander in Nuremberg.**

On the baptism of children not yet fully born and on emergency baptism.

In Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection. Printed by *Strobel-Ranner,* p.
192; in Strobel\'s Miscell. vol. Ill, p. 85 and by De Wette, vol. IV, p.
256.

> To Mr. Andreas Osiander, preacher at Nuremberg.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Since you ask about the baptism of children
who have not yet come out of their mother\'s womb, my dear Osiander, I
will gladly give you my opinion without interfering with yours. I have
forbidden our wives to have a

to baptize a child not yet born. For some used to run the fruit when the
crown was barely showing. But why do they not baptize the mother\'s womb
in the same way, or rather the mother\'s womb itself, so that the fruit
may be thought to have been baptized? I have commanded that the woman in
childbirth be assisted with prayers. But the baptism of women, with
which they baptize a child that has come into the world because of the
danger of weakness, I consider valid, but it should still be brought
into the church, so that public prayers are said over it and the baptism
is publicly approved by the laying on of hands of the church minister,
as confirmed by the testimony of the church. However, I cannot condemn
an unconditional 1) baptism of a child born and brought into the world,
if one doubts the certainty of the privately administered baptism; the
situation is different if one does not doubt. I am writing very briefly,
because my head is suffering and my hands are shaking. Pray for us and
be well in Christ forever. Given on May 13, 1531.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 797.**

(Wittenberg.) May 19, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1614. - There, as in De Wette, with the
wrong date: \"May 26\".

**No. 1708.**

(Wittenberg.) 20, May 1531.

**To his mother.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1798.

**No. 1799.**

(Wittenberg.) May 23, 1531.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.** See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1612.

1\) The text is in any case corrupted here, since it says the opposite
of what Luther wrote to Wenceslaus Link on the previous day; therefore,
we have assumed *Conditionalem* instead: *Inconditionalem*. Possibly the
error can come from Luther himself, because he was, as the following
says, very suffering. Obviously, also here the speech is about a baptism
after happened emergency baptism.

**1660** Letters from 1531. no. 1800 to 1803. **1661**

**No. 1800.**

(Wittenberg.) June 1531.

**To Nicolaus Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

About the reconciliation of several Magdeburg preachers with each other;
Luther wants Simon Hafritz to come to him; about the matter of a
betrayed fiancée.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 131; in Schütze, vol. II, p.
230 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 262.

\"Grace and peace in Christ!\" I have reconciled Mr. Melchior 1) and the
other two, M. Stephan and Fritzhans, my dear Amsdorf. Now it remains
that you also treat the man in a friendly manner, as a comrade in the
ministry of preaching. He is neither a wicked nor a bitter man, but of a
somewhat petty disposition, who can easily suspect that he is despised;
in this affliction of the brother, you know best how to advise. I have
asked them to act respectfully and in love toward each other; if this
were done, the people would also easily become calm. I have taken away
from him the opinion he had formed concerning (*erga*) Simon Hafritz,
and he will henceforth not favor the man as he did before, when he was
deceived. But we agreed that I call Simon to me. \"And I ask you
herewith, only let said Simon, when I shall write, which shall be soon,
as I will also ask an honorable council.\" You can make this opinion of
mine known; perhaps it will serve to calm the minds, if perhaps some are
agitated. But because I am burdened with these people, I have asked that
he go away with a considerable gift, so that I will not be forced to
feed the man, since I am poor myself. \"And kindly ask, together with my
dear Käthe, that you help diligently so that the dean Erhard Kapp may
keep the cloth and rings that he gave and promised to the other
betrothed virgin. For this is a just verdict, \"considering that he
deceived her so wantonly, and also slandered the first one so with
trivial things, and prevented both of them from marrying.

1\) Mirisch.

come. You will, God willing, do it all better than I can write it\". May
the grace of God be with you. In the month of June, Anno 1531, your
Martin Luther.

**No. 1 801.**

(Wittenberg.) June 1, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for Wolf Hornung for timber.

The original is in the Coburg House and State Archives. Printed by
Burkhardt, D. Martin Luthers Briefwechsel, p. 191.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Wolf Hornung also intends to improve the town of Kemberg with a
small house, and has purchased 40 logs in the southern district. He
humbly requests that E. C. F. G. graciously give him 30 more logs in
addition to the 40 in the same office, because it does not make much
money. E. C. F. G. will know how to show mercy to him, because I write
too much to E. C. F. G., and I want to tell everyone his cause through
me. May God strengthen E. C. F. G. with His grace, Amen. June 1, 1531.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 802.**

Wittenberg. June 7, 1531.

**To Caspar Löner and Nicolaus Medler in Hof.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1618.

**No. 1 803.**

(Wittenberg.) June 8, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Intercession for Nickel Werner.

The original is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. Nn,* p. 674.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 191.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! Good people have managed to write me to E. C. F. G. for this
Werner, letter

**1662** Letters from your year 1531

. No. 1803. 1804. **1663.**

Zeiger, which the Amtmann zur Nenenstadt, Erph vom Ende, almost
unreasonably beschweret 1) and E. C. F. G. too harshly. Therefore asks
that, after having received E. C. F. G.\'s award earlier, as I have seen
and read, E. C. F. G. would graciously handle it, and if it is found
that he has run over such award and E. C. F. G. is to be punished. C. F.
G. too close, he does not request intercession. Because he did not seek
his own in this, but his ward\'s need as a faithful guardian, and E. C.
F. G.\'s need as a faithful guardian. C. F. G. himself experiences daily
[how the officials take cause from this dwindling time to be princes of
Saxony themselves and to do what they want, not what they
should]{.underline} (as I do not like to report such things), my humble
request (which I do not know how to refuse the good journeyman, and
would rather let stand) is that E. C. F. G. want to intercede for Werner
at such arbitration, in E. C. F. G.\'s name. C. F. G.\'s name given to
him.\" He desires nothing more, which E. C. F. G. would gladly do
without that, we all know (praise God) almost well. Christ, nuser HErr,
strengthen E. C. F. G. with his spirit, Amen. June 8, 1531.

E. C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1804.**

(Wittenberg.) June 16, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther complains about the lifestyle of the captain Hans Metzsch and
reports the insecurity of the city by tearing down a large part of the
wall.

The original is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. S*, fol. 31b to
37. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 192.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I should not and do not want to take on the secular regiment, nor
disparage E. C. F. G.\'s officials. However, because the common clamor
is so strong, and I believe that E. C. F. G. is showing loyalty and love
to me, which I do not want.

1\) The statement of claim proves 18 points in which the defendant not
only denies justice, but has also done the plaintiff, who is the
guardian, all kinds of wrong, up to the imprisonment. The matter was
investigated and Nickel Werner was released. (Burkhardt.)

I am also guilty in many ways, and do not like to have the name
afterwards, where something went wrong, as if I had kept silent to the
detriment of E. C. F. G: Our captain Hans Metzsch is much and often
amicably and seriously admonished by me that he should refrain from
fornication and fornication with women, 2) it would not be too long for
me, as a preacher, to suffer such a great annoying being nor to remain
silent. About this he continues and makes it so fine that all people\'s
mouths and noses, ears and eyes are full, he also confessed to me in
private that he could not be without women. Thereupon I refused him all
fellowship for my person and secretly forbade the sacrament. But since
he hangs so tightly in his whores\' braids that he shows little fear of
God with them, and henceforth I also want to act against him in public
sermons and judgments, I hereby request the opinion of E. C. F. G. that,
if E. C. F. G. were to learn that I am working on these matters with
him, E. C. F. G. would graciously remember this instruction, for such
annoyance wants to shut me up, and also give others room for malice. He
may be a good warrior, but he should not defend me in times of need,
when he does not have God before his eyes, who has protected us so far
without the stroke of a sword and still preserves us daily.

On the other hand, I also want to prove my loyalty to E. C. F. G.. I
have also spoken to him and others in a friendly manner about the
demolition of the city wall. But since I was told that [I was a scribe
and did not understand such things,]{.underline} I let it go.
Nevertheless, whether it would be otherwise, because such builders think
that no one may say that I have not warned E. C. F. G. of damage. For I
know very well how much attention was paid to the gates until now, that
the city would be closed, but now the city is open day and night for
more than a hundred steps, so that pigs and everything can run in, and
from the field to the market, from the market to the field, they can
stand, walk and shoot freely, because the wall is broken down to the
ground, and nothing is built or put up for it. Is it good and fine that

2\) Maybe: come off?

**1664**

Letters from the year 1531. No. 1804 to 1807.

**1665**

I let it happen. E. C. F. G. will graciously recognize my report and
consider the matter. My head is worried because there are now many
children of great honest people here, and the fears are almost annual
that something might happen by God\'s decree, about which we would have
to complain too slowly and in vain. He goes through with his head and
makes a big noise against himself, that nevertheless E. C. F. G. is to
be put in, so that no displeasure arises; for pious people suffer, [but
too much tears the sack,]{.underline} and a spark might easily arise
among the impatient, who would not be satisfied with his defiance,
cursing and tyranny. It is, praise God, a pious, peaceful, obedient
city. But the oppression and defiance may turn them back, so that they
would not think of fearing a bailiff over their sovereign. Please again,
E. C. F. G. want to receive this writing as out of pure loyalty. I have
kept silent long enough so that I would not disparage anyone. But, if I
am being nonsensical, then they will use E. C. F. G.\'s goods and money
as they please; even though E. C. F. G. may know all this, I still
wanted to do my service. May God strengthen and comfort E. C. F. G.\'s
heart against all the deceitfulness of the afflicted, amen. On the
Friday after Viti \[June 16\] 1531.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1805.**

(Wittenberg.) June 21, 1531.

**To the preachers at Zwickau.**

Luther speaks courage to them because of the vexations they had to
suffer from the Zwickauers in their trade against Hausmann and Cordatus.

Manuscript in Aurifaber, vol. Ill, p. 133; in *Cod. Goth*. 451. fol. and
in *Cod. Jen*. d, fol. 161. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 228 and by De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 264. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1230 f.

> To the worthy men, the ministers of the Word at the church in Zwickau
> in general and especially to his brothers who are to be highly honored
> in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I believe sufficiently, worthy men, that you
at Zwickau

You will have many troubles, and you will be forced to listen to
Zwickau\'s boasts and invectives against the pastor and Cordatus. But
bear it for the sake of Christ, who will defend and judge you and this
cause. In the meantime, faithfully and quietly administer Word and
Sacrament to the godly and faithful until we have the prince\'s verdict.
If they should now demand of you that you approve or condemn their deeds
against the priest and Cordatus, you may say that you are not judges,
but that the matter is pending at the court, and from there the judgment
must be expected; as the Lord himself will enter this and all things
better.

I have pity on the priest and Cordatus. But I am so displeased with
these raging furies that I will not even dignify them with a letter or a
word forever, and have decided to consider them as people who are
excluded from my community. May God punish their iniquity, Amen. May
Christ, who began the good work through you, strengthen it and carry it
out until that day when we will be freed from this mundane rage and from
all evils, amen. June 21, 1531.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1806.**

(Wittenberg.) June 21, 1531.

**To the Christians of Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1922.

**No. 1807.**

Torgau. June 25, 1531.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Credenzbrief for Hans von der Planitz, Gregor Brück and Hans von Dolzig.

The original is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. S*, fol. 31b-37.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 194.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotee! We have the
noble, esteemed, our councilors, and dear faithful, Hansen Edlen von der
Plaunitz, knight, our bailiff at Grimma (Grym), Gregorien Brück, doctor,
and Hansen von Doltzk, you of etzlicher things

**1666** Letters from 1531. no. 1807 to 1811. **1667**

1\) as you will hear from them, and therefore it is our gracious request
that you give them faith therein, as you do to us, and show yourselves
in such a way as we graciously provide for you. This is done for our
benefit and we are graciously inclined to you. Date Torgau, Sunday after
Johannis Baptistä \[25 June\] Anno 1531.

**No. 1808.**

(Wittenberg.) June 26, 1531.

**Concerns, jointly with Melanchthon.**

About a marriage case.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 28, p. 8b and in *Cod*. *Goth*. 166, p.
179b. Printed in *Manlii Farrago*, p. 105; in *Melauth. Consilia lat*,
tom. II, p. 642; in *Corp. Ref.* , vol. II, 509 and in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 130.

Luther speaks about Hartung\'s matter in this way: the woman must be
cited before the doors of the church, as is the custom. If she now
appears, she may state the reason why she left the husband and accuse
him. But if she should not appear, the man, since he has good testimony,
shall be acquitted of that woman who has gone astray, and shall be left
to his conscience to decide whether he wishes to marry again. The matter
does not contain a difficult dispute. On Monday after John the Baptist
\[June 26\] 1531.

**No. 1809.**

(Wittenberg.) June 26, 1531.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Luther complains about his sickliness. One more word about the
conditional baptism.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 134, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
228 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 267.

Mercy and peace! Satan is tormenting me with various blows, my dear
Wenceslaus, so that he makes the health of my body uncertain, because he
now prevents me from crying out so much through his malice.

1\) According to the enclosed instruction, they had the task of
investigating Luther\'s points of complaint in his letter of June 16,
and to establish a good understanding between Luther and Metzsch. The
results are unknown (Burkhardt).

I write and do very seldom and very little; perhaps he will also kill me
in a short time. But let it not be his will, but his will, which has
destroyed him with his whole kingdom, amen. I have read Brenz\'s opinion
on conditional baptism, and I like, among other things, his sincere
speech about the freedom of conscience. But I suspect that when he has
heard ours, he will not join unwillingly. I have no other news. You can
learn everything from Christian Goldschmied. Be well in Christ and pray
for me. June 26, Anno 1531. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1810.**

(Wittenberg.) June 27, 1531.

**To the Christians at Frauenstein near Freiberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2218. - \"Herr N.\" is Hieronymus Weller,
to whom the following letter is addressed. - \"Caspar von N.\" is Caspar
III von Schönberg, hereditary lord. - Col. 2219, in the text Z. 6 v. o.
read: \"where\" instead of: \"how\".

**No. 1811.**

(Wittenberg.) June 27, 1531.

**To Hieronymus Weller.**

Luther sends the previous letter to Hieronymus. Weller, who had
initiated it, for his disposal.

From the Börner collection in Leipzig in Schütze, vol. II, p.? (De
Wette: 1531); in Strobel\'s Miscell., vol. III, p. 89; in
*Strobel-Ranner, p.* 193 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 269. Handwritten
in *Cod. Goth*. 402. fol.

Grace and peace in Christ! In many respects I detest the utterly vile
and sacrilegious actions of this preacher, my dear Jerome, who under
Caspar von Schönberg 2) (as you write) persuaded the simple-minded souls
to take upon themselves the danger of enjoying both, and now the
hireling himself, having seen the wolf, flees and leaves the sheep,
which are neither firm enough nor fortified. What shall I do now as an
absentee to those from whom I am absent? That hireling has not come
before my eyes. Now revoke may

2\) Hereditary lord of Frauenstein, a town situated between Freiberg and
the Bohemian border.

**1668**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1811. 1812. 1813.

**1669**

They cannot ask for forgiveness, and yet they may not be able to
persevere and steadfastly confess their godly deeds. How much more right
they would act under these tyrants, for example, by strengthening
consciences through the word alone, or by teaching that only those
should submit to \[the enjoyment of both forms\] who would be willing to
suffer everything for Christ. For it is better to have believed silently
than to deny publicly after the fact. Nevertheless, I am writing to
them, but I do not know whether my letter will bring them comfort or
grief. You will judge and send it to them only when it seems good to
you. You did not indicate the name of the city, and I did not want to
inquire about it from the messenger. In a short time, your brother Peter
Weller will come to you, and you will learn everything from our scout.
On Tuesday after John the Baptist \[June 27\] Anno 1531.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1 812.**

(Wittenberg.) Perhaps in June 1531.

**To M. Oswald Losan in Leipzig.**

On the consumption of the Lord\'s Supper under both forms.

From the collection of Caspar Sagittarius at Jena in Schütze, vol. II,
p. 253 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 270. German in Walch, vol. XXI,
1586. (This proof is missing in De Wette.)

To M. Oswald Losan at Leipzig, on both forms of the sacrament.

If conscience is certain that both forms of the sacrament are Christ\'s
institution, which is not at the discretion of men, that they may freely
change it as they please: if it is not permitted to use both forms, then
it is better to abstain entirely \[from the sacrament\] than to use only
one form, contrary to conscience and contrary to Christ\'s institution,
with a change in the form handed down by God. For abstaining from it
altogether is done here without sin, since it is not a sin.

1\) In the text: \"*Scorpionario* (?)\", for which we have conjicirt
*scopionario*, formed from xxxxx, the Wait.

but is forcibly stolen from us by those who should administer it. And
here, at the same time, the answer to the third question is given: that,
in the meantime, the communion of faith or spiritual nourishment is
sufficient, of which Augustine says: \"Believe, then you have eaten,
because the pastors are not allowed to rob the bodily food in a
tyrannical way or to force it by force. Therefore, the spiritual food
remains with necessity.

Secondly, one must be careful that the sacrament is not taken privately
or secretly, both because of many disadvantages and dangers, and
especially because of the institution of Christ, who wants this
sacrament to serve for public confession, saying: \"Do this in
remembrance of me,\" that is, for preaching and proclamation, as Paul
calls it \[1 Cor. 11:26\]. Therefore, it is more correct to abstain from
it altogether.

Thirdly, if some have communicated elsewhere under both forms, they are
obliged to confess when they are questioned about it afterwards,
although it is not necessary that you, if it is denied you at home in
your parish, receive it in another parish, because you are not a member
of the foreign parish, but it is enough to suffer the tyranny in your
parish patiently and to keep silent, or to travel elsewhere for the time
being, until you are questioned about your faith. Anno 1531.

Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1813.**

(Wittenberg.) Perhaps in June 1531.

**To Johann Brenz in Schwäbisch-Hall.**

Luther\'s postscript to a letter from Melanchthon to Brenz on the
doctrine of justification. Brenz\'s reply came on June 30.

Melanchthon\'s letter with Luther\'s postscript is found in Buddeus, p.
295; in *Corp. Ref.,* Vol. II, 501, No. 984 (dated: mid-May). The
postscript alone is found in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 271.

I, too, my dear Brenz, in order to understand this matter better, use to
imagine it as if there were no quality (*qualitas*) in my heart which
could be faith or love.

**1670**

Letters from 1531.

No. 1813. 1814. 1815. **1671**

but in their place I put Jesus Christ, saying, \"This is my
righteousness, he is the attribute and (as it is called) my formal
righteousness, that I may thus free and disengage myself from the
respect of the law and works, even from the respect of the objective
Christ, who is understood either as teacher or giver (*donator).* But I
nullify that he is the gift or teaching to me in and of himself, so that
I have everything in him. Thus he says: \"I am the way, the truth and
the life\"; he does not say: I give you the way, the truth and the life,
as if standing apart from me he works such in me. In me he must be,
remain, live, speak, not through me or into me (xxx xxx), 2 Cor. 5,
21.:^1)^ \"that we might have in him the righteousness that is before
God\", not: in love or through the following gifts.

**No. 1 814.**

Schwäbisch-Hall. June 30,^2)^ 1531.

**Brenz to Luther.**

Brenz sets forth his view of the doctrine of justification by faith
alone, and reports on the reception of Luther\'s writings against the
imperial edict. This letter is the answer to the previous letter.

Ans of a copy in *Cod. Obenandr.*, p. 41, printed in *Corp. Ref.,* vol.
II, 510 f., note.

Hail in Christ! I know that you, most esteemed teacher in Christ, are so
busy with holy business, by which you build up the church, that you
certainly do not have time to deal with my trifles for long\'.
Therefore, I will first greet you very briefly in JEsu Christo, our
salvation, then indicate to you that what you recently added to the end
of the letter of our Lord Philip was very pleasant to me. I now
understand very well, as I suppose, that just as our adversaries make
idols out of their works, worshipping them instead of Christ, so it can
happen that an idol is erected out of the work of faith, and faith is
worshipped instead of Christ Himself, whom we must accept in faith. Now,
lest I, by ignoring the cha

1\) De Wette: 2 Cor. VI.

2\) \"Friday after Petri and Pauli\" in 1531 is June 30. Kolde,
*Analecta,* p. 169, has in his regest the \"July 1\" and Bretschneider
in *Corp. Ref.* Vol. II, 510 even the \"July 5\".

rybdis, I hold thus: that faith only accepts justification, namely
Christ, but does not in the same way communicate justification through
the worthiness of its work. And when it is said that faith purifies the
heart, I do not mean the work or the merit or the worthiness of faith,
but Christ who has been taken in faith. But more about this in the
letter to Philip. The wise men of this world are moved against your
German books about the edict of the emperor 3) in many ways. They are
exceedingly unwilling that things should be called by their right name,
and while they demand of us that, when they have declared a robber to be
a robber, in order that they may rightfully execute punishment upon him
with the sword, If, on account of this unpleasant duty, they justify and
approve their deed, they do not have so much brain as to realize that
the lawful words of an ecclesiastical authority are not invectives but
just censures, that they are not invectives but due chastisements and
divine judgments pronounced against the wicked. But they may have a good
year, and, if they will, perish. Therefore, continue as you are doing,
strengthen the church of Christ, who may keep us strong in spirit and
healthy in body as long as possible. Pray for me. Farewell. From
\[Swabian\] Hall, on Friday after Peter and Paul \[June 30\] in the year
of Christ 31. Yours, Brenz.

**No. 1 815.**

(Wittenberg.) Perhaps in June 1531.

**To Nicolaus Gerbel in Strasbourg.**

Luther complains about his state of health; he promises to intercede on
behalf of the Count of Hohenlohe. About the political situation in
Germany.

From the Kraft collection in Ulm in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 252 and from
the original in Basel at the University Library, *autograph*. Vol. XXV,
fol. 33 in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 271.

> To the highly famous and worthy man, Mr. Nicolaus Gerbel, the Doctor
> of Law at Strasbourg, his brother who is extremely dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace! I write with few words, my dear Gerbel, because of
my,Ge

3\) \"Luther\'s Warning to His Dear Germans,\" St. Louis edition, vol.
XVI, 1616, no. 1156, and \"Glosse auf das vermeinte kaiserliche Edict,\"
ibid. there, Col. 1665, no. 1157.

**1672** Letters from the year 1531. no. 18.15 to 1818. **1673**

s health, which is becoming more and more shaky day by day as Satan
rages against me. I will gladly support the Count of Hohenlohe, if I
can, by writing letters to the court. We are firmly convinced that
Ferdinand will not (as you believe) wage war on the Hessians, but rather
that the Hessians are terrible to him and that Ferdinand is incapable of
anything. I and mine admire God\'s miraculous works and thank Him that
He has made the so terrifying threats of the Reichstag a washout, that
we enjoy such great peace against the expectation of all. For everyone
was gauz certain that this summer and the spring that has just passed 1)
would be the most horrible war in Germany. But God has shown that he has
the hearts of kings and all in his hand. Fare well in the Lord and pray
for me. Anno 1531, 6. *Calend\....* Yours, Mart. Luther.

**No. 1816.**

(Wittenberg.) June or July 1531.

**To Michael Stiesel.**

Luther announces his and his family\'s visit at cherry time.

Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 232 and by De Wette, vol. I V, p. 272. German
by Walch, vol. XXI, 1238.

Grace and peace! Greetings, greetings, greetings, my dear Michael! I
have nothing else to write, but so that you would not complain that I do
not write anything to you, I wanted to write at least this \"Greetings\"
to you, and at the same time indicate that we will come to you soon, God
willing, and visit your cherries with many cherry-loving children. Fare
well in the Lord. 1531 Martin Luther.

**No. 1 817.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. July 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther complains that the sequestrators want to take from Magdalena
Staupitz the little house in Grimma that was prescribed to her.

From the original in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. Oo,* p. 792,
No. 421, in Burkhardt, p. 194.

1\) Out results the time determination of this letter.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! There are some poor people coming to me, among them Doctor
Staupitz\'s sister, Magdalen von Staupitz; the visitators have given her
a little house from the monastery in Grimma (Grym) and appointed her
schoolmistress of the maidens. But the gentlemen \"Sequestrator\", as
they are called, go to her and want to take it away from her again. Now
mau tells me credibly that neither E. C. F. G. nor the landscape opinion
has not been that mau should tear up the order of visitation, but
everyone says and boasts that not only E. C. F. G. is of the serious
opinion, but also that the whole countryside has most humbly requested
that the order of the visitation be observed. Accordingly, my most
submissive request is that E. C. F. G., if it does not want to be done
any longer, should suspend such sequestration for a while and postpone
it until further notice. Dean, if it should be the opinion that
sequestration should destroy the visitation, that would be an unpleasant
insult to E. C. F. G.. I want to be silent of the damage, as all
parishes and ecclesiastical office order would go to ruin; for my person
I would rather that E. C. F. G. take such goods, which (*sic*) the
monastery (of which one makes such unnecessary clamor and elevates
foreign part to service), to himself and did with it what they only
wanted. I wanted to help, to answer to God and the world. What should it
be, then, that one gathers mosquitoes and devours camels, and weighs
down E. C. F. G.\'s heart with loose futile things. I believe that I
also mean E. C. F. G. with fidelity and do not want to harm him gladly.
May the merciful God give E. C. F. G. His spirit to intervene with a
merciful wrath, since they otherwise have power and right, amen. July 3,
1531.

> E C. F. G. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1 818.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. July 1531.

**To one of Abel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 822. - There, just as in De Wette, in the
heading: \"July 5\", but at the end of the letter: \"July 3\".

**1674** Letters from the year 1531 No. 1819. 1820. 1821. **1675**

**No. 1819.**

Wittenberg. July 5, 1531. ^1)^

**To Spalatin, Eberhard Brisger, and Erhard**

Steinbach in Altenburg.

Luther gives hope that a poor former abbot could be taken care of.

The original is in *Cod. chart.* 122 f. *Bibl. Goth.*, not written by
Luther himself, but only signed, Printed in *Schlegelii vita Spalntini,*
p. 246 and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 131. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1292.

> To the highly venerable men, M. Georg Spalatin, Eberhard Brisger,
> Eberhard N., 2) Servants of the Word at Altenburg, his exceedingly
> dear brothers in the Lord.

Grace and peace. Dear men! The one you once recommended to me, the Abbot
of Hof (? *Curiniensem*), that poor man, I gladly accepted as a
recommended one. But now there is no vacancy, but I hope that in a short
time not only one will be free, especially in Pomerania, where, after
the prince died, they recalled five from Lübeck, who had previously been
expelled from Pomerania. Therefore, you also comfort and admonish the
people to have patience for a little while. As soon as I can, I will do
my best to make him realize that your recommendation has benefited him.
Be well in Christ. Do not be surprised that I have written by a foreign
hand, for my health is very shaky, as you know. Wittenberg, July 5.
Martin Luther.

**No. 1820**

(Wittenberg.) July 10, 1531.

**To Conrad Cordatus in Zwickau.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1606. - An old copy in the Rathsarchiv at
Zwickau suggests that this letter was addressed to Hieronymus Nopus,
preacher and teacher of the Greek language at Zwickau.

1\) The original has no year. Schlegel, *vita Spalatini,* p. 246, has
the year 1539 and so does Walch, vol. XXI, 1292. Seidemann notes that
the letter fits better into the year 1531, where on May 9 Duke George I
had died, who had so far hindered the Reformation.

2\) Schlegel remarks: \"He means the Erhard Steinbach.\"

**No. 1821.**

(Wittenberg.) July 13, 1531.

**To Bernhard von Dölen, pastor in Sion.**

About Dölen\'s intention to marry.

Printed from a manuscript in the Innocent News 1733, p. 13; in
*Strobel-Ranner*, p. 194 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 275. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1233.

> The man to be revered in the Lord, Bernhard von Dölen, pastor in
> Sitten, his brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! Greetings to you, my dear Bernhard, from my
mistress Kätha \[reverently\]. 3) She herself instructed me to write
this to you. The other things that you write about the carelessness of
the church servants and about the contempt of the peasants are all too
true; in any case, patience is not only useful to us, but also, as we
have seen so far, necessary.

With regard to marriage, I praise your will, but see to it that you do
not marry in any case before the parsonage is completed, so that you can
live alone with your wife. For it is unbearable to live with a wife in
another master\'s house. I know that virgin, Hanna Zeschin, well; I have
good hope of her righteousness and good character; Then I am sure of her
good education (*disciplina*), since she was taught by a strict mistress
to learn and to do and to suffer everything concerning domestic duties,
so that I believe that she is well practiced and experienced in
housekeeping, but nevertheless I do not want you to believe my judgment;
you must not admit anything to anyone until you have seen the girl
yourself on some occasion. For in figure she is not very outstanding,
but mediocre, if perhaps you also want to keep an eye out in this
respect. Be well in the Lord and pray for me. We are still quite healthy
through God\'s goodness. On Margaret\'s Day \[July 13\] 1531.

3\) Here is a gap in the Latin which we have filled by rsveroutsr.

**1676** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1822 to 1826. **1677**

**No. 1822.**

(Wittenberg.) July 14, 1531.

**To Spalatin in Altenburg.**

About the employment of M. Georg Mohr in Coburg.

The original is in Dessau. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 230 and by De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 275. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1234.

> To the worthy man, Magister Georg Spalatin, Bishop of Altenburg, his
> extremely dear brother in the Lord.

Grace and peace in the Lord! Finally, I have written to the Count or
Prince of Anhalt, the captain at Coburg, for M. Georg Mohr, my dear
Spalatin; God wanted that in a short time some suitable position for him
would become empty there. I do not know of any yet. Then I have decided
to recall my pastor at Coburg in the castle from there to this area, if
I can. There are so many vacancies here that even this very good man is
not yet provided for, nor is M. Fesel, to whom the prince, while we were
present, lent an apartment in the monastery. But one of the robbers has
come and obtained it, and that one has been driven into his former cave,
where he lives with his wife and children as if in a prison. \"So it is
with the faithful servants of God. \"The Scharrhansen rule; God help us,
amen.\" Farewell in Christo with your exceedingly lovely chain, of which
we have been told by rumor that she is with child; God grant it, amen.
Friday after Margaret \[July 14\] 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1823.**

Torgau. July 14, 1531.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Reply to the letter of July 3 concerning the little house of
Staupitzen\'s sister.

Ans dem Weimarschen Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. Oo,* p. 792 printed by
Burkhardt, p. 195.

Our greeting before. Venerable and reverend, dear devotee! A few days
ago you sent us half of Doctor Staupitz\'s sister, who had been given
the little house in Grimma, which we had given her out of mercy, by the
deceased.

We have written that, because we have, in the grant that has been made,
prescribed for ourselves the houses that we have graciously given to the
poor in towns and villages, that no change should be made in them, in
addition to others, so that our minds and the minds of the countryside
would not be troubled, that in what I and the Visitatores have ordered
to be done, some disruption (zerraitung) or change should be made, as
well as such not happening at all, provided and ordered that it should
remain unhindered and be left, we did not want to leave you unopened in
your gracious opinion. Date Torgau, on Friday after Margarethe \[July
14\] Anno 1531.

**No. 1824.**

(Wittenberg.) July 29, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1798, no. 1196.

**No. 1825.**

(Wittenberg.) (End of July) 1531.

**To Chancellor Brück.**

Luther counsels compliance in the conciliar question.

From the original in Weimar\'s Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. H,* p. 42, in
Burkhardt, p. 196.

My dear Chancellor! I believe that the proposed action of the Council of
Mainz cannot be rejected. So it is also easy to advise from the previous
dealings what can be conceded or not. And where one could work to make
peace and postpone our part\'s affairs, it would be well to assume,
according to the saying: Night deadline year deadline, comes day, comes
council 2c. Mart. Luther.

**No. 1826.**

(Wittenberg.) August 13, 1531.

**To the City Council of Brunswick.**

Luther exhorted the city council to maintain unity in the doctrine of
the Sacrament, which a preacher named Kopmann was trying to disrupt.

The original is in the city archives at Braunschweig. Printed in the
Unschuldige Nachrichten 1760, p. 260; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 277 and
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 241.

**1678**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1826. 1827. 1828. **1679**

> To the honorable and wise gentlemen, mayor and council of Brunswick,
> my favorable gentlemen and good friends.

Grace and peace. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! I did not like to
experience the discord of your preachers. But because one of them,
Johann Kopmann, stands against all the others, also against your
evangelist Johann Pomers and all our faith, the next way is that E. W.
should command the aforementioned Johann Kopmann to be silent, and such
discord is not to be suffered; for even his opinion has no reason, as he
also shows no reason nor scripture in this note of his. So his spirit is
almost suspicious to me, that he so falsely twists and interprets my
words, as his notes prove, when my words are of a much different opinion
in my booklet, because of which I can do little good to him. The other
preachers have spoken quite rightly and well. For we also know well that
one must spiritually eat Christ\'s body and drink his blood, that is,
believe in him; he must not teach us such things. But still the words of
Christ must not be false, because he says: \"Take and eat, this is my
body\", and calls the same bread, which he offers bodily, his body. No
one can go beyond these words, and faith is just as much here in the
bodily meal as in baptism and the gospel. Otherwise, even baptism would
not be valid, because faith cannot be without baptism. But just as
spiritual faith is in bodily baptism, and bodily baptism is not denied
but rather confirmed by faith: so also the bodily eating of the body of
Christ in the sacrament is not denied but rather confirmed by faith (or
spiritual eating); as can be read further in Johann Pomer\'s and my
booklet. Let E. Wisdom see to it that neither discord nor disgusting
doctrine arises in E. W. City. W. city, lest a little spark become a
fire, but he who will not teach with the others according to the order
which ye have received, that he be silent and depart. For this matter
has now been pursued and tried for so long that it has been found pure
and firm, and many have come back who were previously hard against it.

than Martin Bucerus and the city of Strasbourg 2c. Therefore it would be
unfortunate that, if other cities were to come here again, it should now
first of all begin anew in your city; for all of our adversaries are
selling these things very badly 1) for the first time. Christ our Lord
protect and strengthen you all in his word, which he has revealed to you
so purely and abundantly, amen. I thank E. W. gift giver, would have
been without need, because your inclined will and favor to our dear
Gospel is to me the highest comfort and treasure. Hiemit GOtt befohlen,
Amen. Sunday after St. Laurentii \[Aug. 13\] 1531.

Martinus Luther. M. pp.

**No. 1827.**

Wittenberg. August 14, 1531.

To the Elector John of Saxony.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1720.

**No. 1828.**

(Wittenberg.) August 14, 1531.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf in Magdeburg.**

Luther asks him to have a pamphlet by Alexius Chrosner von Colditz,
which was not allowed to be printed in Wittenberg, printed in Magdeburg.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection in Schlitze, vol. II, p. 231 and
in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 280.

Grace and peace! M. Alexius von Colditz, my dear Amsdorf, asks me that
you help to have his book against the priest of Duke George of Cologne,
who is called the \"Dresden assassin,\" printed by you. I have not seen
the booklet, nor have I wanted to see it because of the peace treaty
recently made at Grimma. You know all this toxicity, and he himself will
write you the reasons why it could not be printed here in Wittenberg.
Fare well in the Lord and pray for me. On the day before the Assumption
\[Aug. 14\] Anno 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

1\) In the original: \"fehl\", \"feil geben\" will probably be as much
as: darangeben, aufgeben. The reading of the Erl. Edition: \"feihl\"
(that is: fehl) will be wrong. Cf. Dietz, \"Wörterbuch zu D. Martin
Luthers Schriften\" s. v. feil.

**1680**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1829. 1830. 1831.

**1681**

**No. 1 829.**

(Wittenberg.) August 1531.

**Concerns of Luther, Melanchthon, and Bugenhagen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1792, no. 1195.

**No. 1 830.**

(Wittenberg.) August 15, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request for travel money for D. Basilius Axt, who wanted to go to
Prussia.

The original is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. N,* fol. 108.41.
Printed in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 68, No. 114; in De Wette, vol. I
V, p. 286; in Walch, vol. XXI, 339 and in the Erl. Edition, vol. 54, p.
251.

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave in Meissen, my
> most gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have been asked by D. Basilius Axt has asked me, after he has
gone to the duke in Prussia, and the way is far away, that I wanted to
ask E. C. F. G. for him for a grant. Although I know that E. C. F. G.
has much too much to give; but if it seems good to E. C. F. G., and he
wants to see that he serves at court, absent D. Caspar and D. Augustin.
Augustin, then I ask that only 20 gulden be graciously given to him, but
everything according to E. C. F. G.\'s good pleasure, and not according
to burden. Christ our Lord strengthen and comfort E. C. F. G. forever,
Amen. On the day of the *Assumption of Mary* \[Aug. 15\] MDXXXI.

E. C. F. G. undersigned Mart. Luther.

**No. 1 831.**

(Wittenberg.) August 18, 1531.

**To the clergy in Zwickau.**

Luther informs them that their pastor, Nic. Hausmann, had been relieved
of his office in Zwickau by the Elector.

Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 451. fol. Printed in the Innocent News 1721,
p. 715; in *Strobel-.*

*Ranner*, p. 193 and De Wette, vol. I V, p. 287. German by Walch (after
the Unsch. Nachr. as from the year 1529), vol. XXI, 1180 and again (with
the correct dating) ibid. col. 1385.

> To the men highly esteemed in the Lord, Johann Goebel, Liborin of
> Magdeburg, Matthias Kroitsch (*Krotisch*), 1) Adam Schumann, true
> servants of the Word in Zwickau, his exceedingly dear brothers in
> Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I wish it to be known to you, dearest
brethren, that through my efforts and the cooperation of other very good
men, we have finally, with great difficulty, persuaded the prince and
the rulers to release your pastor from those trustworthy blocks 2) of
yours. For they were very reluctant to release him and wanted to force
him on those people again, but we, moved by his danger that it would not
be useful for him to remain there with those bitter beasts, finally
managed to get him released with grace, adding this condition that he
should not leave the prince\'s territory for another ministry. For the
prince wants to employ him in his lands, not among beasts, as those are,
but at least among men. I am writing this so that, if those beasts
should boast, you may have the certain truth of the matter, which you
can prove, for as I have said, the matter is in truth. The priest is in
grace and favor with all good men, those beasts are hated, detested, as
their extraordinary hopefulness and ingratitude deserve. For they belong
to the number of those of whom Jacob said \[Gen. 49:7, 6.\], \"Cursed be
their wrath, that it is so fierce, and their fury, that it is so
troublesome; let not my soul enter into their counsel.\" Now if any of
you, or all of you, should be troubled to stay there, I will turn you
out of the way.

1\) In an old copy in Zwickau, filed in an old memorial book of the city
council archives, this name is missing, probably rightly, because Luther
wrote the next letter to him on the same day. - Cordatus is not
mentioned among the addressees, because he had already left Zwickau
before.

2\) The Zwickau Magisratspersonen are meant (De Wette), .

**1882** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1831. 1832. 1833. **1683**

I do not advise you to leave, nor do I urge you to stay. I am free to do
whatever you like with those enemies and haters of the servants of God
and the Gospel. You are not bound to serve these hard-minded people
(eorvi6O8i8 - Köppische) against their will and without their thanks.
Therefore, take comfort among yourselves in Christ, who is favorable to
you, even though a certain poisonous part of the world hates you; in Him
you are quite well, amen. On the 18th day of August, 1531.

**No. 1832.**

(Wittenberg.) August 18, 1531.

**To Matthias Crozsch^1)^ in Zwickau.**

Luther writes to Crozsch especially the same as in the previous letter
to all clergy in general.

Handwritten in Cod. Goth. 451, fol. 187. 4. printed from the autograph
in Unschuldige Nachrichten 1719, p. 574; from it in *Strobel-Ranner*, p.
197; from Börner\'s collection in Schütze, vol. II, p. 232, and in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 288. German in Walch, vol. XXI, 1235.

> To the highly venerable man, Matthias Crozsch of Borna, shepherd
> (ka8tori) at Zwickau, his brother who is exceedingly dear to the Lord.

Grace and peace! Dear Matthias, as you see, by the great grace of the
prince, your priest, the very good man, has been released by the prince
from those people with you. For he was in fear because of danger for him
with those hard people, and ordered him to stay in his lands by all
means. For he intends to take care of him in another place, which I hope
will happen shortly. Therefore, for Christ\'s sake, do not worry, nor be
anxious, but have a little patience and let the)e furies make and boast.
It is enough for us that we not only have Christ, whom they afflict and
torment, graciously in spirit, but also the prince and the best men at
court exceedingly favorably. Therefore we are not forsaken, but are
exalted in the best way, only

1\) Seidemann in De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 489, Note 5, says: \"An old copy
in Zwickau, bound into *an old memorial book of the Rathsarchiv there,
has: Ad Mat- thiam Groitzsch, presbyterum, oeconomum Haus- manni*. He
was Diaconus at St. Catharina.\"

we have to wait a little while 2). \"Neither do they have what they
want, and much less than they thought they had.\" I am sorry for the
immense hopefulness and ingratitude of these people, but God will reward
them according to their works. In the meantime, therefore, you too,
together with the priest, take comfort in Christ. The matter is well,
thank God. Then, if the people of Zwickau should also add this
ingratitude, that they do not forgive the debts of the pastor, who has
served them and carried them for so many years, as a parting gift
(*valete),* then I will try to cooperate, and, as much as I can, they
shall never find a pastor. Their reputation already stinks enough, since
they could not stand such people until now; it will continue to stink
from day to day. Christ be with you all, Amen. On Friday after the
Assumption of Mary \[Aug. 18\] Anno 1531. Yours, Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1833.**

(Wittenberg.) August 18, 1531.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

Of rumors of war and a comet.

From Kraft\'s collection in Hufum in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 165, under the
year 1530, and again from Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 135,
under the year 1531, and in De Wette, Vol. I V, p. 289 f.

\"Grace and peace!\" My dear Wenceslaus, I beg you not to take offense
at my writing briefly. This is how it is: I am showered, I am showered,
I will be showered, as I see, as long as I live. Tell Osiander that I
will also write to him in a short while about the matter that moves me
and is worth it, because he says that there is war in Lower Germany.
Pray for me, my dear Wenceslaus. With us a comet appears towards the
west (as far as my astronomy reaches) in the angle of the Tropic of
Cancer and the Colur of the equinoxes, whose tail reaches to the middle
between the Tropic \[and\] 3) the tail of the Bear. It does not mean
anything good. May Christ guide it, amen. August 18, 1531.

Your Martin Luther.

2\) De Wette reads: *medium,* the Cod. Goth.: *medicum*; we have
conjicirt *modicum* (a small, Joh. 16, 16.).

3\) Bon us inserted to give meaning.

**1684** Letters from the year

. No. 1834. 1835. **1685**

**No 1834.**

(Wittenberg.) August 24, 1531.

**To Albrecht, Duke of Prussia.**

Luther gives his opinion about the Apology against the Deutschmeister.
In the insertion he recommends D. Basilius Axt, and his brother-in-law
Hans von Bors, who served in Memel, and promises to procure a preacher
to Liefland in Brismann\'s place.

From Faber\'s collection of letters, p. 6, reprinted in De Wette, vol.
IV, p. 290 and in Erl. Ausg., vol. 54, p. 252.

Grace and peace in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! As
E. F. G. has written to us and requested to see the Apologia 1) or
Responsibility, we have done so, and also find that much good reason and
causes are sufficiently set forth therein, and at the request of our
most gracious Lord, the Elector, have sent our opinion to the Court, and
provide that it has come to E. F. G. at last, or will now come with
Doctor Basilio. It has also seemed good to us that it should not be
necessary to be so precise and expansive in the indicated matters,
because all adversaries are of a kind and nature where they cannot do
anything to the right main reasons, they tweak a word or two, and
cleverly get it over with, so that the matter gets off track, and the
main reasons get out of sight and lose their appearance, as has happened
to me daily in all my letters up to now; therefore, the best thing to do
with such people is to keep it short and firm, and not to let oneself be
led by the main reasons. However, E. F. G. will know how to understand
such things better than we can indicate. E. F. G. only be confident and
do not let such things worry you, God will do it well. If they did not
have this to talk about, they would have to have another, so they have
this more than another; no one can shut the devil\'s mouth, he must
talk. Christ our Lord strengthen and comfort E. F. G. to do and suffer
all his gracious will, Amen. August 24, 1531.

E. F. G. williger

Martinus LutheR of all of us.

1\) The Apology against the German Master Walther von Kronberg.

Insert.

Here also comes Doctor Basilius Aftus, 2) E. F. G. Physicus; command the
same E. F. G., they will have in him a fine, faithful, diligent man and
good, learned, experienced physician, and his wife a theur, pious wife.

Also, where E. F. G. does not want it to be burdensome, since my
Käthe\'s brother, Hans von Bore, has nothing and does not have enough
clothing and food at the court, that E. F. G. wanted to procure that a
few florins would be thrown to him every quarter of the year, so that he
could also pay for shirt and other necessities, as E. F. G. can well
consider; however, I place it in E. F. G.\'s good pleasure. F. G.\'s
pleasure, which I do not wish to burden. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen.

To send a preacher to D. Brismann 3) instead of Liefland (as E. F. G.
desires), I will look around with diligence, because the good people
have written to me about it before; but it will become thin, and there
are not many such preachers, so that one may well say: Whoever has
something, let him keep it.

**No. 1835.**

(Wittenberg.) August 24, 1531.

**To Johann Brismann.**

Luther promises to look for another preacher in lieu of Brismann in
Liefland and recommends D. Basilius Axt to him.

The original is in the Wallenrodt Library in Königsberg. Printed by
*Vogler*; by *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 198; in *Acta Borussia,* I, 808 and by
De Wette, vol.

> To the worthy man, Mr. Johann Brismann, Doctor of Theology, the
> faithful servant of Christ, his brother who is exceedingly dear to the
> Lord.

I wish you luck, my dear Brismann, that you have been brought back to
Prussia from Liefland, but what you desire, that another be put in your
place, the same the people of Riga themselves have requested of me, and

2\) \"Astus\" == Axe.

3\) Brismann went to Liefland in 1527 at the request of Margrave
Wilhelm, coadjutor of the Archbishop of Riga Thomas von Schöning, and
returned to Prussia in 1531. See his biography in the Erläut. Prussia,
Th. Ill, p. 201.

**1686** Letters from 1531. no. 1835. 1836. 1837. **1687**

Now Prince Albrecht is also asking for it. But where are the people who
are able to do it, or who want to do it? I see everywhere around, and
everywhere is a great shortage of such people. It is time to say to the
princes and the cities concerning the ministers of the Word: Hold what
you have, lest another take your pastor \[Revelation 3:11\]. There are
some cities that have been without a preacher for two years. But I will
be diligent to remove any from his place, and to bring him thither, if
Christ give grace.

I recommend to you this new arrival (*novum virum*) in Prussia, the
Doctor Basilius with his wife, who, I believe, is known to you. She was
a companion of my wife as a nun, 1) but he was the apothecary of the
painter Lucas; you will hear everything from him yourself.

You are well and pray for me. The amount of business forces me to write
briefly, especially since Pommer is absent. August 24, 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1836.**

Wittenberg. August 26, 1531.

**To Nicolaus hon Amsdorf.**

About the supply of Simon Hafritz, and political rumors.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 135, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
234 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 293.

Grace and peace in the Lord! I am somewhat slow in calling Simon Hafritz
2) back, my dear Amsdorf, because there is no place where I can
accommodate him, and your Magdeburgers have given him very little, so
that afterwards I will be forced to feed the poor man who is poor
himself. For you know my household; but if it cannot be done otherwise,
it is safer that you relieve him, and it is better that I should be
burdened,^3)^ than that you should have trouble. Therefore may he come
in the name of the Lord.

1\) Ave von Schönfeld was the wife of O. Basilius Axt. - Lucas Cranach,
the painter, also ran a pharmacy, which D. Basilius board.

2\) Compare Luther\'s letter to Amsdorf of June.

3\) Instead of: *pravari* in De Wette, which we think is a misprint, we
have assumed *gravari.*

Whether there will be a Diet, I do not know. That I know, may it be held
or not held, a harmony is impossible, not only because of the matter
itself, for who will reconcile Christ and Belial? or how will the pope
admit that faith alone justifies and that the papist works are damnable?
or will he be able to admit that he becomes nothing and Luther reigns?
and yet, if he does not admit this, there can be no concord, but also
because of the persons on our side, whom, even if we wanted to, we will
not persuade; there will be either a more shameful or a more confused
discord among us. But it is said that an Imperial Diet is being held for
the purpose of having Ferdinand accepted by all as Roman king. It has
been written to us that three strange stars have been seen in the sky
among you, and that your *clergy* (*clerum*) seek their ruin. Give us
news of this. In Augsburg Satan rules through the enemies of the
sacrament and baptism and the whole faith. The same thing is happening
in Ulm. It is said that the people of Strasbourg want to return to the
right path. The pope stubbornly refuses the emperor a concilium. What
happened to Gandanus, the cardinal and son of the pope, I believe you
have already heard. Pray for me, and be well in the Lord. Wittenberg, on
Saturday after Bartholomew \[Aug. 26\] Anno 1531. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1 837.**

(Wittenberg.) 4. September 1531.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Recommendation of D. Robert Barnes; via Hafritz.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 244 and
in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 294.

Grace and peace! I recommend this Doctor Antonius, an Englishman, to
you, my dear Amsdorf, because he is making a journey from here to
Lübeck. You will be able to get plenty of information from him, if you
wish to learn something about us. I have called Simon Hafritz, although
I do not yet know in which nest I can put this bird.

**1688** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1837. 1838. **1689**

And your caste lords have given his so numerous army 1) with a small
travel money. But Luther has a broad (*crassum*) back, he will also bear
this burden. We give thanks that you have sent him back clothed and well
provided for (*ornatum*). May the Lord be with you and pray for me.
September 4, 1531. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1 838.**

Wittenberg. September 3 or 5,^2)^ 1831.

**To D. Robert Barnes.**

On the intended divorce of King Henry VIII of England. - This concern
exists in two very different relations. We have already reported one of
them in our edition, Vol. XVII, 202, No. 1268. The one given here is, as
Kolde I. c. p. 397, is to be regarded as the original one already
because of its more personal character.

This relation is found in *Buddeus*, p. 325 (incomplete); from
Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection in Schütze, vol. II, p. 235; in *Cod.
Goth*. 168. 4. and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 300. German in Walch, vol.
XXI, 1386.

Grace and peace in Christ! Concerning the matter of the King of England,
my opinion is that which you heard orally, my dear Antonius,^3)^ since
we discussed this matter in confidence, namely, that I like the decision
of the Louvain most of all those who judge the opposite, and the king
can follow it with a very sure conscience, indeed, he must follow it, if
he wants to be safe before God, that is, he cannot in any way repudiate
the queen, the wife of the deceased brother, whom he has married, and by
this repudiation make both the mother and the daughter incestuous. For
now I do not dispute what the dispensation of the pope to take the wife
of the deceased brother is worth, but I say this: It may be, after all,
that the king, by taking the wife of the deceased

1\) This will mean its large family.

2\) De Wette dates this letter from September 5, while Kolde, M. Luther,
Vol. II, p. 396 and p. 598 ad p. 396, perhaps places it more correctly
(in view of the previous letter) on Sept. 3, and Luther will have given
this concern, which is put in the form of a letter, to Barnes himself.

3\) Barnes was staying in Wittenberg under this name at the time.

However, it will be a far more heinous and greater sin to repudiate the
married woman and dissolve the marriage in such a cruel way that both
the king and even the queen and princess must always be under the shame
of incest, although in fact there is no reason why he would want to
disgrace her with this terrible accusation, and above that also dissolve
the marriage. These two exceedingly great sins are so great that no
consideration is to be given to a lesser sin, especially one that is
past and already forgiven, and in truth no longer a sin. For the
conjugal union of the man and the woman is divine and natural right. But
the prohibition to take the wife of the deceased brother belongs to the
given (*positivi*), not to the divine right, unless one wants to argue
that all rights are divine, because God has approved all rights.
Therefore, those who call upon the king to violate his rights torture
his conscience in vain; indeed, they sin most grievously against the
divine law.

But that they say that it is against the divine right to marry the wife
of the deceased brother, namely 3 Mos. 18, 16.If they want to follow the
Mosaic Law and push us under this law, then they will make it so that
the king in this case is not only required to keep the married queen,
but also, if she is not yet married, to take her in any case and raise
up his brother\'s seed, since the deceased brother has left no children
by this woman, as clearly 5 Mos. 25, 5. and Matth. 22,^4)^ 24. is
mentioned by the Sadducees before Christ.

But here they say that the law 5 Mos. 25 was a ceremonial one, which had
to give way to the law 3 Mos. 18, which was a moral one, because the
things concerning ceremonies had ceased, those concerning morals
(*moralia*) had not ceased. Who does not see here that such gloss makers
either be

4\) Wrong in Latin: *Matthaei* XVIII.

**1690**

Letters from the year 1531. No. 1838.

**1691**

or that these things are not said by them with good judgment nor with
any truthfulness? Namely, so quickly they found a gloss with which they
could make a mockery of the law 3 Mos. 18; here they did not want to
have a gloss. Therefore, it is clear that they have set out to gloss
over the law that is inconvenient to them, not with good judgment, but
according to their will.

Then, how do they prove that the law of Deut. 25 is or was ceremonial,
especially since they want the conscience to be made certain? Is it
enough to say: We want it so, we say so: therefore it should be a
ceremonial one. On the other hand, we say that the law in the 5th book
of Moses is a ceremonial one. We say that the law in the 5th book of
Moses was a *moral one,* because it was in fact a law that served the
community, to preserve families, to keep inheritances, to obtain heirs,
that is, it was given to obtain goods, to increase and strengthen the
community, Like cultivating the field at this or that time, in this or
that way, so that it bears fruit all the more abundantly, is something
that truly serves the community and is moral, because through this
custom goods are brought about both for the household and for the
community. Therefore, the Jews had to observe this law no less than any
other law, and the text clearly indicates that it speaks of the
preservation of families and inheritance, which are certainly not
ceremonial matters, but those that concern the community and necessary
moral matters.

And, dear, we want to assume that the law in the 5th book of Moses was a
ceremonial one, as these people argue, what is the point? since it is
nevertheless established that the Jews under Moses were forced to keep
this law, like circumcision and other ceremonies. Here they may answer
us how the Jews could take the wife of a dead brother when it was
forbidden by divine right 3 Mos. 18. For these two laws dispute against
each other, if both are to be understood also by the deceased brother.
Therefore it is obvious that they do not consider the words and persons
of the law right.

But if they want to pretend that the ceremonial offences have been
removed and the moral offences have remained, therefore one must not
keep the law in the 5th book of Moses, but one must keep the law in the
3rd book of Moses, then first of all it is still certain that the Jews
have kept both, as I have said. Therefore, these people will be forced
to admit with necessity that the Jews did not sin against the law in the
3rd book of Moses by keeping the law of the 5th book of Moses.
Therefore, those who have such an opinion that ceremonial things are
abolished, that they are fatal for us, and that we are not allowed to
keep them, must not cite the contrary law in the 3rd book of Moses, but
the abolition itself. Now, however, they conclude from the abrogation
and base themselves on it, and yet they cite the contrary law as a
saying of Moses in order to give credence to their opinion. But just by
this they show that they do such sophistry not out of the striving for
truth but out of the desire for victory, and that they practice that
deception which Aristotle calls the inference from a non thing to a
thing (*a non causa, ad causam*.). For under Moses, where the law had
not yet been abolished in the 5th chapter of Moses, neither the
abolition could give an opportunity for a reason for proof, nor the
opposition of the laws, since both laws had validity and were kept.
Therefore, the reason for the proof of the opposition must have much
less validity now. But if there is any ground of proof, let it be the
doctrine of abolition itself, and let these people desist from urging
still further the contrary law in the 3rd book of Moses. Those who think
that ceremonial things are forbidden to us, do not understand anything
about it, neither what abolition is, nor what a ceremonial thing is.
Ceremonial things after abolition are free and *indifferent* things
(*indifferentia*), no longer required and necessary, 1 Cor. 7:18: \"If a
man is circumcised, let him not have a foreskin, where he teaches that
it is not necessary to have a foreskin, otherwise believing Jews would
be obliged to restore the foreskin. Therefore, the ablation

**1692**

Letters from the year 1531. No. 1838.

**1693**

The creation of the law is a release from the law, but not a
prohibition, as St. Jerome errs against Augustine. As, if a king in any
place wished to legislate anew, he could, for certain reasons, order
some ceremonies of Moses, which are now done and free. But then these
ceremonies would not be binding by the prestige of Moses, but by the new
command of the king. Therefore, even if this law in the 5th book of
Moses were a ceremonial one, and were now abrogated, the king of England
could nevertheless, for a just cause, as he now has before him, decree
the same anew against these shrewd people, and command in what place he
would that a brother should marry the wife of the deceased brother. Then
this law would force the subjects to obey completely, just like any
other law of the king or his civil rule, Rom. 13, 1: \"Let every man be
a subject\" 2c.

To return to the law in the 3rd book of Moses, which is opposed to the
law in the 5th book of Moses, as these people say, we admit that they
are mutually repugnant laws, which must not be glossed over in such a
way that one of the two is completely abolished, but that both are
preserved and kept, because this gloss would not have applied to the
Jews, who were forced to keep both, even though they were apparently
opposed to each other. But this is the correct gloss, that the law in
the 3rd book of Moses speaks of the wife of the living brother, and the
law in the 5th book of Moses speaks of the wife of the deceased brother.
So they do not argue against each other, but are both kept, because the
law in the 3rd book of Moses speaks of the brother par excellence, but
the one in the 5th book of Moses specifically names the deceased one to
indicate that it speaks of a different brother than the 3rd book of
Moses. So John the Baptist punishes Herod for having the wife of his
living brother, because polygamy did not make Herod blameworthy, which
was allowed to all, but in such a way that a brother should not make the
wife of the still living brother averse with a semblance of right or
with flattery, as they could easily do with a house and other things. By
this offense to

of his brother Philip\'s wife, Herod was criminal.

Nor can the opponents, even if they want to, prove that the 3rd book of
Moses speaks of the dead brother, nor can they bring forward any other
union of the two laws, especially one that would be sufficient to
appease a conscience. But who is so unlearned that he could not invent
or dream something to disturb the consciences?

Also this is sacrilegious, that they conclude: from the law in the 5th
book of Moses it follows that in a given case someone could take his
daughter or would be forced to it, as if Athniel, when he died, had left
his wife Achsa, the daughter of his brother Caleb, then Caleb would have
been forced, as the brother of Athniel, to marry his own daughter. Who
does not see the effort to protect an evil thing, as if they did not
know that a higher law cancels a lower one, as the law of circumcision
violates the law of the Sabbath, Joh. 7, 22.Where Christ Himself
disputes that a man is circumcised on the Sabbath, that is, that he is
annulled or sins against the law of the Sabbath with impunity,^1)^ so
that he does not sin against the law of circumcision, which was before
the law of the Sabbath and came from the fathers. What need is there of
many words? It is known that a lower law and a lower lawgiver cannot
close the hand of the higher law and lawgiver, but any law and \[the
authority\] 2) of any lawgiver keeps within the bounds of the authority
given to him by God, as, a father of a family gives laws for his family
and his house as far as his authority extends. But the authorities or
the city do not obey his laws, but subject him to the laws of the
commonwealth, so that it is necessary that he be forced to stand still
with his laws and be subservient to the common laws. Thus the king is
lord over the kingdom or the city with his laws, in that he allows them
to be governed according to their own laws.

1\) Instead of *peccare, peccari* will be read.

2\) Added by us.

**1694**

Letters from the year 1531. No. 1838.

**1695**

The king\'s laws are not violated, but they obey the king and do not
rule over the king\'s laws. Thus, God allows all authorities, yes, He
approves of them using their own laws, but with the reservation and
exception of His will, which they must yield to and obey with their
laws. Thus, the given laws, where they conflict with the law of God or
nature, always give way to these very laws of God or nature as the
higher one. Therefore, since the law in the 5th book of Moses is a given
law, and not a law of nature, if in any matter it offends against the
law of nature, it must yield to the law of nature and give way, as the
lower to the higher. And so also, if according to the law in the 5. Book
of Moses it seems that he is forced to take his daughter Achsa as wife,
nevertheless, because Achsa is not only his brother\'s wife (for the
words of the law are actually and simply to take), but also his
daughter, he is therefore prevented by another and higher law from
taking such a brother\'s wife, who is a daughter for him, because the
law of nature forbids to marry the daughter, although the given law
commands to take the wife of the deceased brother. But why this lengthy
discussion, my dear Antony, unless perhaps in the future you would have
to dispute with people who are ignorant of the law?

We want to come to the point and say: that Moses was dead, but lived for
the Jewish people, and that we are not bound by his laws. Therefore, we
do not want to allow anything that comes from Moses as a lawgiver,
unless it is also approved by our laws, that is, natural and secular,
and we do not want to put the communities of the whole world in
confusion, but we want to flee the seditions and disturbances of all
laws and respectability as a poison. The same may serve his
commonwealth, we have our legislators in these matters. Therefore, this
is to be discussed: if by the laws of the pope or the emperor, the
marriage

1\) Instead of *et,* we have assumed *ut.*

between a brother and the wife of the deceased brother is forbidden,
whether then 2) the King of England is bound not to marry the queen
forbidden to him^3)^ and, having taken her, to repudiate her. Here must
be answered: By all means not, but he shall be obliged to keep her,
under danger of bliss and eternal damnation. This is proved thus: First,
it is not established that it is forbidden to marry one\'s brother\'s
wife, neither by natural law nor by divine law, but only by a given
right. For the lawgiver Moses is dead and nothing to us. For we read
that Abraham and Nahor, who lived before the Law of Moses and under the
natural law, married their brother\'s daughters; this degree was
subsequently forbidden by Moses by a given law. And Jacob married two
sisters,^4)^ which afterwards Moses also forbade. Therefore it remains
only that it is forbidden by a human and given right to marry the wife
of the deceased brother. But, as we have said, marriage is a divine and
natural right. Now, where the divine and the given law conflict with
each other, the given law must give way to the divine; therefore Christ
also abolished the law of divorce in Moses in order to establish the
divine law of marriage. Therefore, if the king of England sinned by
marrying his dead brother\'s wife, if he sinned against the human and
civil law of the emperor or the pope; If, then, the emperor or the pope
have indulged him in their laws, he has not sinned at all, because the
same God who approves of the civil law given by the emperor also
approves of the emperor\'s law, which is indulged by the emperor,
because he has given him the power to give and indulge in laws, and,
that I may say so, the keys of binding and loosing in the country which
is subject to him. The same I say about the pope, where he

2\) Instead of *tamen, tum* will be read.

3\) Here we have inserted *non*; Walch already added so.

4\) Instead of uxores we have assumed *sorores*; this has also Walch.

**1696** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1838. 1839. **1697**

with civil tyranny; although he does not bind with any right, it is much
more valid if he slackens than if he binds. But if the king repudiates
the queen, he will sin with the gravest offense against the divine law,
which says: \"What God has joined together, let not man put asunder,\"
that is, let not man put asunder those 1) whom God has joined together
either in His order or by His permission, because His joining together,
whether by right or by a human act, is higher than a human order.
Therefore, if these two laws conflict with each other, let Ulan take
care that the king of England does not keep a human law, so that he sins
against the divine one, but so that he keeps the divine law, let him be
forgiven if a sin is committed against the human law. But, as I have
said, where the pope or the emperor (if he recognizes the emperor\'s
laws) have dispensed, there is no sin.

There you have, my dear Antonius, poured out my opinion into your bosom.
For I do not know whether it is useful that the same be published, lest
perhaps my name harm this matter more, which, as you know well enough,
is so hated and detested that, although I speak the truth, it is
nevertheless condemned out of hatred for my name. However, so that you
can safely discuss my opinion with friends, I will allow you to either
suppress or publish it at your discretion. Indeed, if the hatred of my
name were not in the way, I would wish it to be useful to the king and
queen, so that they would not be seduced and driven by the sophists to
such a worthless and wicked divorce, from which, when it is done, they
will suffer constant misery in their consciences. But whatever may
happen, be it that this divorce has already happened, be it that the
king is driven by the prestige of arid doctors to make the marriage

1\) Instead of: *Quid est homo? non* separat etc. we have read after the
first relation (De Wette, vol. IV, p. 300): *id est, homo non separat
etc.*.

If the king does not divorce the queen, advise his friends, all of whom
you can, to abhor this divorce. And if the adversaries should have
completely taken the king, let ours try with all diligence to at least
persuade the queen not to consent to the divorce in any way, but rather
die than let her conscience be guilty of such a great offense before
God, but firmly believe that she is the right and lawful queen of
England, made and approved for that purpose by God Himself. For it must
not be allowed that she complains with a false accusation, believing
such a great sin, which is no sin. For that would be to fear falsehood
in an erring conscience and to worship instead of God. For if they
cannot save the king (which God forbid), they may at least save the
queen\'s soul alone, so that, if the divorce cannot be prevented, she
may bear this great evil of the greatest injustice as her cross, but by
no means approve or consent to it. I, who am unable to do anything else,
turn to God in prayer, that Christ may prevent this divorce and make the
advice of Ahitophel, who advises it, null and void, or if he does not
want to prevent it, that he at least give the queen a strong faith and a
constant and sure conscience, that she is and will be the lawful and
rightful queen of England, against the will of the gates of the world
and of hell. You are quite at ease in Christ. Given at Wittenberg,
September 5, 1531.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1839.**

Antwerp. September 12, 1531.

**Leonhard Munssoor 3) to Luther.**

(Regest.)

On behalf of several brothers, Munssoor asks Luther whether they may
have Holy Communion served to them by a papist when they are in mortal
danger. Until now, they had held communion in secret meetings, but now
they were in distress of conscience about it, because

2\) Instead of *versa,* Wohl *versor* will be read.

3\) Kolde reads the name according to the original, not like Krafft:
\"Mussoius (?)\". But Kolde has the wrong date: \"21. Sept.\" ; probably
a misprint.

**1698** Letters from 1531. no. 1839 to 1843. **1699**

little fruit results from it, but many dangers and impulses, even among
those who love the gospel. And since the choice of preachers is up to
the whole church, they only edify themselves by talking to each other.
In the postscript, the news that the emperor, after his return from
Augsburg, had raged with fire and sword against the evangelicals; now
everything is calm, only the mob is murmuring against the gospel.

The original is in the Wolff Collection of the Hamburg City Library, 1,
50. From *Cod*, a 11 of the Bremen City Library in Krafft, Briefe und
Documente, p. 70.

**No. 1840.**

Wittenberg. September 13, 1531.

**Jonas, Luther and Melanchthon to Hans Löser zu Pretsch.**

Intercession for a certain Bartel Schechtel from Pretsch.

Copy in *Cod. chart. Goth*. 187, fol. 18. According to this, the
original is by Jonas\' hand. Printed in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 170.

> To the strict and honorable Hansen Löser zu Pretzsch, hereditary
> marshal of Saxony, our special dear lord and friend.

Our willing services before. Strict and honorable, special master and
friend! Shortly after, we have written and asked on manifold and heated
request and petition that you, for the sake of our intercession, let
Bartel Schechtel, about your judge at Pretzsch, who at the moment, out
of God\'s fate, has dismissed one of your game wardens, \[whom he\] has
not been inferior to, come to escort, 1) to get along with the report
(?) and friendship. And if you then do not want to suffer him in the
spot, nor can you, to grant him to sell his own and to turn elsewhere.
So far, however, we have not received an answer from you. For this
reason, we ask you again with all due diligence to have mercy on the
poor man, considering that he, as we have reported, came to such a case
quite miserably and without his prior will, so that (uff)

1\) The text is here quite badly in order. Kolde offers: \"about your
judge at Pretzsch, who at this time on God\'s condemnation let come one
of your Wildschultzen (*sic*) out of no proceeding nor pushed (?), has
emptied, to slide\" 2c. Instead of \"anff\" we put \"aus\" twice,
because in this letter \"auf\" is given by \"uff\". - \"Wildschultze\"
will probably be as much as gamekeeper.

he, together with his wife and child, must not be allowed to grow into a
peasant, and especially into misery, as we highly trust you, so that the
poor man may again have a clear conscience, and thus find himself
enjoying our support and intercession. This is what we want to be found
to deserve and ask of God for you at all times. Dat. Wittenberg, on
Wednesday after the Nativity of Mary \[Sept. 13\] in the year of the
Lord 31 Jonas Probst,

Martinus Luther, both Doctor, and

> Philip Melanchthon.

**No. 1 841.**

(Wittenberg.) September 14, 1531.

**To Margrave George of Brandenburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1216, Na. 146.

**No. 1842.**

Wittenberg. September 22, 1531.

**To the Landgrave Philip of Hesse.**

(Regest.)

Luther sends his expert opinion in the matter of the King of England.

Printed by M. Lenz in the Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte IV, 136. A
regest in Kolde, *Analecta,* which we have included here.

**No. 1843.**

(Wittenberg.) October 7, 1531.

**To the mayor and council of Zerbst.**

Upon request, Luther sends Conrad Mauser, a licentiate, as a competent
legal expert.

The original is in the secret archive at Zerbst. From it in the
memorandum of Sintenis, p. 46 and according to Sintenis in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 56, p. 183. According to the original itself in De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 132. - The Zerbsters needed a capable
jurist in their dispute with the Provincial of the Franciscan Order.

> To the honorable and wise, Mayor and Rathmann of the city of Zerbst,
> my favorable gentlemen and good friends.

G. and F. Honorable Sirs! At your request, I have looked around for a
lawyer. So you stayed outside for so long

**1700** Letters from the year 1531.

No. 1843. 1844. 1845.

**1701**

and prevented from doing so, especially the one you mentioned, that with
the good advice of my friends and gentlemen I have managed to find the
respectable Licentiate Conradum Mauser, who is almost famous among our
people for his art and skill, and also practiced and used, so that I
hope you will be well provided for with him, and he is to appear with
you on Tuesday next. So the matter is also good in itself and God\'s
own; he will help. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Saturday after Francisci
\[October 7\] 1531.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1844.**

(Wittenberg.) October 9, 1531.

**To Martin Görlitz in Braunschweig.**

Luther advises him to leave because he cannot tolerate the climate there
and promises to find him another position.

From the *Cod. Jen*. 8 24 n, fol. 181 in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 309.

Grace and peace in Christ! I will not forget you, my dear Martin, but I
look out and constantly expect some position suitable for you. And how
often it has grieved me that you were taken away from Torgau; but we did
this in good hope and in obedience to Christ. If your health can no
longer bear the condition of the land there, I would advise you to leave
before the appointed time and in the meantime stay in Torgau in milder
air until the Lord provides for you. It is up to you what you want to do
to restore your little body (*corpusculum*). Fare well in Christ with
wife and children. October 9, 1531, Mart. Luther.

**No. 1845.**

Wittenberg. October 10, 1531.

**To Spalatin.**

About a remedy against the plague, which Spalatin had requested from
Luther. About a Zwickau affair; about Luther\'s work. Political rumors.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. a, fol. 347. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 230 and
by De Wette, vol. IV, p. 309. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1336.

> To the dear and very sincere man, Mr. M. G. Spalatin, the brave and
> faithful servant of Christ, his exceedingly dear brother.

Grace and peace in Christ! My dear George, nothing is known or has been
heard here of that miraculous powder that is healing against the plague.
Christ, the true physician, protect and keep you, amen. But I hope that
this plague, as almost everywhere else, will be slow and mild.

No one has given us the confession of John Fresleben, nor have we ever
seen it. The Lord will repay the Zwickau lumps for what they deserve
through this great ingratitude and their raging against the very good
man. But their custom is to grieve the Holy Spirit, yet to their
undoing. I would like to write my defense, but I am so distracted by
incidental business and so detained by the duties I owe that not even
the seventh part of me could be at her service, while she demands me
completely; so one day after the other always passes and postpones the
matter. Every day I spend two hours correcting the prophets. But why am
I writing this to you, since you know it very well?

It is certain that the Roman pope is estranged from the emperor, and one
must assume that the Frauzose is also averse to him, because he has
ordered the plundering of the goods and chattels of the Genevese 1)
throughout France (I do not know for what small insult), out of hatred
(as one believes) against the emperor. The same is suspected of the
Englishman, namely because of the sign that he seeks to push the queen
away from him by divorce, for you know that she is the mother-sister of
the emperor. This is how it goes in this exceedingly wicked world, these
are the aspirations of the children of men. May God graciously look upon
the emperor for us, and, as before all his \[the emperor\'s\] enemies,
put the pope to shame, Amen. The comet makes me think that both the
emperor and Ferdinand are threatened with evil, because it first raises
its tail.

1\) Walch passes *Genevensium:* \"Genuenser\".

**1702** Letters from 1531. no. 1845. 1846. 1847. **1703**

The first part of the image is the one that has been turned to the north
and then to the south, as if it were showing a brother on both sides.

God grant that your rib may bear the fruit happily and give birth, and
please you both with a beautiful and holy Abelchen, Amen. Greet and
comfort M. Brisger in the Lord. Wittenberg, October 10, 1531.

> Your M. L.

**No. 1846.**

(Wittenberg.) , October 10, 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Luther\'s intercession to waive the work on the dams and the investment
money for the maintenance of the dams for the pastors in the \"Bratische
Au\" near Wittenberg.

From the original in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. S*, fol. 17-21,
printed by Burkhardt, p. 197.

G. and F. in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious Lord!
Although there would be no need to trouble E. C. F. G. with this
writing: but because the poor pastors so nearly ask me and fear that
their Supplication should thereby work the more faith and grace with E.
C. F. G., I do not know how to refuse. E. C. F. G. will probably hear
the matter from your petition, as you are required to dampen (temmen)
the farmer immediately. Now, the C.F.G. themselves know that there is
great poverty. The parish estates are not hereditary, like the
peasants\' estates,^1)^ and, as indentured servants, they honestly have
their bread from it and must leave the same today or tomorrow, go away
with empty hands. If their daily bread, which they hardly have, should
also be burdened like the hereditary estates, then several such parishes
must leave it, as they cannot bear it, and it is fair, because they
should wait for the souls that they, as common servants, are subjected
to such a burden. There is almost a lack of parish priests, so that it
is not necessary to discourage them with further burdens, as they did
not care for it before, are poorer now than before, and are real beggars
with their wives and children. E. C. F. G. will know well

1\) Burkhardt: \"baurguter\".

to be graciously kept therein. Hiemit GOtt befohlen, Amen. Tuesday after
St. Francisci \[Oct. 10\] 1531. 2)

E. C. F. G. subservient

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1847.**

(Wittenberg.) October 18, 1531.

**To Justus Menius.**

Luther demands from Menius the last part of the manuscript of one of his
books. About despisers of the sacrament. By Wicel and by Crotus
Rubeanus.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 245 and
in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 311.

Grace and peace! See that you send us your copy of the use of the
history of the holy scripture as soon as possible, as much as is still
left. For what you have sent is already in print, my dear Justus.

I am also very pleased that you want our opinion about those who do not
communicate; I think that you have done your duty enough if you have
done as you write. Let those go who do not want to. For it is not yet
time to do something harder, for the sake of the present difficult time
(*paroxysmum* == crisis), until God changes it, which will inevitably
happen shortly. In the meantime, suffer, as before, also this dragon.

We will not suffer that Wicel (*Weselium*), this disgraceful man, who is
also gone from here by pure lies, with deception of the prince, 3) makes
his nest with you. He has promised that he will go to his father, and
after resigning his office, he will become a secular man. For so a
letter shows, whether it be true or false or fictitious, which calls him
under the name of his father We will write to the court, and you
meanwhile avoid him like the devil; he is looking for a place to pour
out his poison.

2\) The resolution that followed kept to the custom that the parish
priests were to be called in for the dam work and the investment money
for the maintenance of the dams, only it was decreed that the poor
parish priests would be reimbursed for what they spent on the
construction. (Burkhardt.)

3\) Wicel had just been released from captivity (De Wette). Compare No.
1525.

**1704** Letters from the year 1531. no. 1847. 1848. 1849. **1705**

scatter, if he seeks in such a way to make his nest. It is wonderful how
I detest the man who gets pregnant with any monstrosity, as you will
learn elsewhere.

But behold that Crotus, the Epicurer, who venomously persecutes us and
flatters the bishop of Halle. ^1)^ We send a copy to you, and you send
yourself in the meantime to send him back to us well beaten (*depexum*)
and paint him with the colors of his epicurism. For this will be your
office. I am writing under a lot of business. Be well. I must have your
writing against the Mainz idol, but certainly. 2) The prophets have been
given to the press to be finished in German. On St. Lucy\'s Day \[Oct.
18\] Anno 1531, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1848.**

Magdeburg. October 18, 1531.

**Nicolaus von Amsdorf to Luther.**

Amsdorf asks Luther to reply to the letter sent to him. About the
obvious hostility and the outrageous extortions of the Cardinal at
Mainz.

From *Cod.* a 11 of the Bremen City Library, reprinted in Krafft, Briefe
und Documente, p. 71.

Hans Hornbeck, a godly man, an exceedingly great friend and patron of
Luther, greets you very respectfully, my dearest father in Christ, and
humbly asks that you reply to his enclosed letter, and has asked me very
much that I should send it to you and request a reply. If you do this,
you will be doing something pleasing to a Christian man.

1\) \"It is indisputable that a writing of the poet Crotus Rubeanus is
meant, who had been Luther\'s friend earlier, and had turned back to
Catholicism\" (De Wette). On this, Seidemann notes in De Wette, vol. VI,
p. 559, note 3: *Apologia Alberti Archiepi- scopi Mogunt. Lipsiae* 1531.
4.

2\) In De Wette the text reads: *Ego* must have *in idolum magnum tuum,
(?) sed certe Prophetae etc.*. Instead we have assumed: *in idolum
Mogun- tinum, sed certe. Prophetae etc*. Also in the letter to Spalatin
of Oct. 7, 1521 (No. 430), the Cardinal of Mainz is called *idolum
Moguntinum* (the Erlanger Briefw., Vol. Ill, p. 237 offers:
*Maguntinum*). Menius complied with this request to write against the
Mainzer by his writing: *Ad Apologiam Jo. Croti Rubeani Responsio*. See
Burkhardt, p. 199.

But since you are idle, as Ebeling Alemann 3) reported, so that Luther
has nothing to do but lecture, preach, and write so many books and
letters in all parts of the world, you will be able to answer this
letter all the better. For I hear that the authors of the letter are
good men who love Christ with all their hearts, who do not want to do
anything that is incompatible with the Gospel, which you can easily see
from the letter they have written to you. I believe that you know what
the Mainz bride is planning to do in Halle, for he^4)^ has publicly spat
out what he had already thought of himself long ago, and no longer wants
to limp along on either side, but to fight with us in open warfare. I do
not dare to write how large a sum and amount of money the tyrant extorts
from his subjects, namely an unbelievable one and hardly ever heard of
in these lands. He has appointed new advisors at court, namely \"the
provost of the cathedral is his court master, three canons and an abbot
are his highest advisors. Farewell in Christ, my dear father. Magdeburg,
October 18, 1531.

Your Nic. Ambsdorff.

**No. 1849.**

Wittenberg. October 25, 1531.

**Jonas and Luther to the Elector John.**

Intercession for the Rev. Hertwig.

The original chancery from *Oo* 792. Herzberg 1531. (Burkhardt.) Printed
in Burkhardt\'s Briefwechsel, p. 199.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince and Lord! Your Lordship\'s graces are our
obedient and willing services in subservience before. Most gracious
Lord! Christanus Hertwick, pastor of Bucko, who was a member of the
order of St. Augustine in the monastery of Herzberg, has now complained
to us that he has a very narrow and small parish.

3\) *Alman* == Alemann. In the following, Amsdorf jokes with Luther.

4\) That is, the Mainzer, through Crotus Rubeanus, who in September 1531
had published the protective writing for the Cardinal at Mainz mentioned
in the previous number. \"The Mainz bride\" will be the Cardinal
himself, as well as St. Louiser Ausg., vol. XIX, 1930, not Crotus
Rubeanus, as Krafft assumes, which Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 171, follows in
his regest. Still during the Diet of Augsburg, the Cardinal had behaved
in such a way that one thought well of him, as can be seen from the
documents in the 16th volume of our edition. See there, for example, No.
979 and No. 987.

**1706**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1849. 1850. 1851.

**1707**

God endowed him with a wife and several small children, to whom,
according to God\'s will, he would have to leave very little or nothing
after his death. However, since he has received nothing at all from the
monastery\'s property and would like to provide his wife and children
with their own home and inheritance after his death, even if nothing
remains, he has further informed us that two parts of a barn in the
Herzberg monastery have been inherited by Johann Kolben and Ern
Dionisio, and that the third part is still left and unoccupied. Grace,
and to request that the same E. churfürstl. Grace will hereditarily
grant him and his children such a third part with the gateway, and at
the back up to the walled house, then he will, with God\'s and pious
people\'s help, put a little house on it, and when this has been
completed (brought forward), bring it into citizenship, and gladly take
upon himself quite a civic burden. Since we know that all things, as
stated above, behave in such a way, we ask E. ch. F. G. we ask in
submission, to have mercy on the poor man together with his wife and
children, and to hereditarily provide them with the said space out of
the leniency of the Electorate. We are graciously pleased to provide and
grant them this space out of electoral clemency. For the same E. churf.
G. we want to earn with submissive obedience at all times. Date
Wittenberg, Wednesday after the eleventh thousand virgins \[Oct. 25\]
Anno 1531.

> E. C. G. submissive obedient Just Jonas, provost, and Martinus Luther,
> both doctor.

**No. 1850.**

(Magdeburg.) October 30, 1531.

**Laurentius Zoch, Chancellor of Magdeburg, to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Zoch reports that he was released from his imprisonment for the sake of
the Gospel by Luther\'s use (\"vorschrifft\"), during which God did not
let him waver. Joyful confession of the Gospel.

From the original in the Wolff Collection of the Hamburg City Library,
*Cod. I, fol.* 51 f., reprinted in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 173.

**No. 1831.**

(Wittenberg.) October 31, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther invites him to come to him again, and comforts him because of the
economic embarrassment he has gotten into due to the ingratitude of the
Zwickauers.

The original is in Dessau. Handwritten in *Cod*. *chart. Goth*. 402,
fol. 185. 4. and in Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 135. Printed
in Schütze, vol. II, p. 246 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 312. German in
Walch, vol. XXI, 1398.

Grace and peace in Christ, which is higher than your tribulations that
have come to you from Zwickau. My best Nicolaus! I am writing to you
late because of the infrequency of messengers and their uncertainty, and
also because of the amount of my business. I was very unhappy to read
that you write that you will not return to me, although I like to see
you with me very much, and I still ask you to return to us, if it can be
done in any way; you will not be a burden or a burden to me, but only a
comfort and a benefit. I will keep your room ready for you and arrange
everything. It is wonderful how the rage of the Zwickauers and the hope
of their ingratitude outrage me, who, after you have administered your
office with them for so many years under the greatest dangers and
hardships, demand these small debts from you so severely, while they
have paid you less each year than they owed and you have added to your
fortune with them. But we also want to bring this abominable wickedness
home to the one who judges rightly. Christ will also set you free from
these debts and repay them what they deserve. And this same Lord, our
hope and our crown, our life and our peace, strengthen and gladden your
heart, that you may despise these poisonous tongues and the boastfulness
of these angry men. And clearly you must rejoice and exult against them,
seeing that they are so smitten with rage and nonsense that they are not
worthy to speak well of you, or to know the gift of God. It is honor and
praise to be rebuked and hated by exceedingly evil people. My Käthe
greets you reverently; she is expecting the birth of her daughter any
hour.

**1708**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1851. 1852.

**1709**

helping hand of God. The grace of God and the comfort of the Holy Spirit
be with you, Amen. On the last day of October, Anno 1531.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1852 .**

Wittenberg. November 10, 1531.

**To the City Council of Rostock.**

Luther and Melanchthon give their expert opinion on the discord caused
by a preacher in Rostock over the forms of worship.

Printed in Schröder, Evangelisches Mecklenburg, Vol. I, p. 193; in Krey,
Andenken der Rostock. Gelehrten, Anh., p. 61; in De Wette, Bd. I V, p.
313 and in Erlanger Ausg., Bd. 54, p. 256.

> To the honorable, respectable and wise, mayors and council of the city
> of Rostock, our favorable friends.

Grace and peace from God through Jesus Christ. Honorable, respectable,
wise, favorable friends! We have received your writing concerning the
discord of the preachers among you, and at the same time a short list of
your church ceremonies, and in turn we kindly inform you that we are
meant to advise you for the peace of your churches, as much as we are
able. For we desire nothing more than that true Christian doctrine be
taught peacefully and in harmony, in honor of God and for the comfort of
souls. You may think, however, that we can give little advice or act on
this matter of yours, since your preachers are not known to us or
related to us. But we do not want to hide our opinion from you. We have
read the list of ceremonies, and find nothing unchristian or criminal in
it, and especially as far as private absolution is concerned, it is good
for many reasons that this *private absolutio* be preserved. Because the
time of the preacher 1) the private interrogation and absolu

1\) Here De Wette asks the question, \"Is that the man\'s name?\" We
answer: No. It will mean the early preacher (Mettenprediger). For each
regular sermon on Sundays a special clergyman is employed in Rostock;
for the early service the Frühprediger, for the main service the Pastor,
for the afternoon service the Diaconus, who is called Magister in
Rostock. It was not until the first quarter of the nineteenth century
that the early service was abolished and the early preachers died out. -
The from

We mean that it is good that you summon him before an honorable council
and deal with him seriously, so that he will put an end to such
bickering as reported and teach more peacefully those things that serve
for correction, godliness, faith and the knowledge of Christ, and the
obedience of the people. And even though we think that he does not
respect our advice very much, you may nevertheless tell him from me,
Martino Luther, that I kindly admonish him, as the one who has now for a
long time led and tried the preaching ministry by God\'s grace, as he
was also admonished by D. Johann Pomeranus has previously admonished him
not to be too bold in spiritual matters. For such boldness is annual, as
has been found in many examples in our time. That he also see to it that
he does not cause trouble by his futile quarreling. But if he will not
mend his ways by this action and admonition of yours, it is our advice
that you let him go out of your city in a friendly manner and do not
shun the support of the common people. For you shall do your office for
the peace of the city in God\'s name, and not fear the mob, but trust
God to assist you in your office, as far as you seek and serve God\'s
honor. In addition, the other preachers are to exhort and instruct the
people to obedience to the authorities, and without a doubt, honorable
and pious people will not sit down in this against a council. So we do
not doubt that you are skilled enough that, although there are some
useless people who want to cause trouble, you know how to calm them.

This is our concern upon your report, and we hereby request and admonish
you that you should not, through these or such annoyances, distance
yourselves from the Holy Gospel and

Burkhardt, p. 200, for the explanation of the word \"Misseprediger,\"
according to which it is supposed to mean a *monachus missator,* a
*sacerdos missarius*, a \"Mißling,\" i.e., a papist measuring monkey, do
not fit here. Even the words taken from Bugenhagen\'s expert opinion (in
Lisch, Jahrb. XXIV, p. 149): \"bespottet de bunte Misse, alse he se
nömet\", prove that the Misse preacher of that time (\"at that time\")
was not a papist missal priest, but rather a radical opponent of the
papist mass.

**1710** Letters from the year

1531\. no. 1852. 1853. **1711**

not to be turned away from the comforting doctrine of Christ that we
preach, but to think that the devil is causing such trouble to bring
dishonor to God and to frighten people away from the comfort they have
in Christ, and as Christians you should be prepared and firm against the
devil\'s wiles, so that you, to praise God and comfort your souls, may
receive the holy gospel, in which God, for Christ\'s sake, gives you
forgiveness of sins and blessedness, and promises to be your helper in
all distress. May God grant you His grace for this, Amen. Given at
Wittenberg, the 10th of *November, anno* MDXXXI.

> *D. Martin Luther. Philip Melanchthon*.

**No. 1853.**

(Wittenberg.) 16. November 1531.

**To Margrave George of Brandenburg.**

Luther exhorts the margrave to take better care of the gospel and the
evangelical preachers, who were ill-behaved by the officials.

From the Ansbach Archives in Reinhard\'s Beitr., vol. I, p. 140; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 315 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 258.

> To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Georgen, Margrave of
> Brandenburg 2c., Duke of Stettin, Pomerania 2c., my gracious lord.

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus. Sublime, highborn Prince, gracious
Lord! Preachers from Kulmbach and from the mountains have often asked me
in writings and now personally that I should humbly exhort them to be
strong and steadfast in the Gospel against such great and manifold
offences and troubles, which the devil daily stirs up and increases
against it. But because E. F. G. at Augsburg, together with the rest of
us, so confidently confessed the Gospel and so joyfully dared to do so,
I did not think it necessary to admonish E. F. G. further. For E. F. G.
knows that Christ here on earth must be weak, frail and angry in his
own, as he himself says: \"Blessed is he who does not take offense at
me,\" and thus let his Christianity be hidden with tribulation, riots,
infirmities and weakness, so that it cannot be understood by reason.

but must be seen by faith alone and recognized in the Gospel, as we say
in the *Creed*: \"I believe in a Christian church. Although Christians
bear much fruit of the Spirit and live holy lives, there still remain
many sins and infirmities, so that the article does not stand idle: \"I
believe in the forgiveness of sins,\" and in the Lord\'s Prayer the
fifth petition remains: \"Forgive us our trespasses,\" 2c., as Paul also
says in Galatians 6:2, \"Christ is the law if anyone bears the burden of
another; this is the common law in his kingdom of grace, which E.F.G.
knows better than I can write it. But the fact that F. G.\'s preachers
have been able to exhort me in this way is not because they doubted F.
G.\'s faith, but because F. G. has a great country to govern. has a
large country to govern, and cannot govern it by himself alone, but must
command officials and sub-regents, and trust everything to them, among
whom (as with us) some secretly oppose the Gospel, and some also despise
it completely, Hence comes many an evil trick and abandonment of the
preachers, that they can have neither protection nor help and are acted
upon in such a way that they finally leave the parishes to famine and
poverty, and thus in time the Gospel will fall and perish among our
people: so the good men, E. The good men worry that E. F. G. will never
find out about it, and those who go along with the parish priests in
this way may of course conceal it from E. F. G. and talk far out of
turn, as happens with us every day. Thus they say on their conscience,
how one M. Ludwig is unjustly and falsely accused of fornication against
E. F. G.; thus they take wanton causes to open people\'s mouths and to
cause obstacles and trouble for the Gospel. So E. F. G. is a man as well
as I, who often get so tired of things and annoyances that I can hardly
bear it: what should E. F. G. not encounter, who have to carry such a
large, heavy regiment next to the Gospel? For this reason I ask God, the
Father of all strength and comfort, to strengthen F. F. G. in His dear
Son JESUS Christ, and through

1\) \"before\" put by us instead of: \"here\" (in the handwriting
probably: \"for\"); immediately following: \"Pfarren\" instead of:
\"Pfarrherrn\".

**1712**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1853. 1854. 1855.

**1713**

His Holy Spirit comforts us to bear all such burdens, toils and troubles
of his Christians chivalrously, and protects us from the fiery darts of
Satan, who, since he cannot win us over by art or force, still wants to
make us tired and weary at last with his persistence and incessant
annoyances and obstacles. *Nam quod vi et arte non potest, saepius
vincit assiduitate et taedio*. \[For what he cannot do by force and art,
he often overcomes by stopping and weariness\]. Please also, E. F. G.,
let these preachers be graciously commanded, and be earnest that they be
kept a little better. For if we consider them servants of God and His
Word, and want to be Christians, they cannot be despised without
contempt for God Himself and His Word. This is what I want to ask of E.
F. G. from their adherence, so that they do not think that I do not want
to serve them at all. For I am in no doubt that I am very sorry for E.
F. G., where God\'s word and His servants are held worthless. But who
can make all boys pious? We preachers should and must also have patience
and help the world bear all its wickedness. E. F. G. would graciously
grant me such a letter. May the merciful God comfort and guide E.F.G.
according to all His good pleasure, Amen. Dornstägs nach St. Martini
\[Nov. 16\] 1531. E. F. G. williger

> D. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1854.**

(Wittenberg.) November 22, 1531.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann.**

Luther invites him to join him once again.

The original is in Dessau. From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection in
Schlitze, Vol. II, p. 247; in Strobel-Ranner, p. 200 and in De Wette,
Vol. IV, p. 317. German in Walch, Vol. XXI, 1399.

> To the much beloved Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, your servant of God, his
> superior in the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have recently written to you, dear man, 1)

1\) the letter of Oct. 31.

and begged you very much to return to me, but because you did not
answer, I am afraid that you did not receive my letter. Therefore, I ask
you again for the sake of Christ that you return to me as soon as
possible. Here you have a new, empty room, which awaits you and is
prepared only for you to come. Do not doubt that you will not be a
burden to me, but a relief and a comfort, and yet God would have you be
with me all your life. It would not be difficult to feed you, rather
easy, and a good opportunity to deny to the ungrateful and vexatious
people, for your sake, what otherwise must not be denied. The same thing
will be told to you verbally by this priest at Buchholz. Therefore, do
not hesitate, but come soon. I am waiting for you and will receive you
with joy; do not worry about the money either. \[Farewell in Christ.
Wednesday after Elizabeth \[Nov. 22\] Anno 1531.

M. L. 2)

**No. 1855 .**

Wittenberg. November 22, 1531.

**Facutätszeugniss for Veit Oertel von Winsheim, issued by Luther, Jonas
and Melanchthon.**

The city of Winsheim had chosen its compatriot Veit Oertel (Seidemann in
De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 495) as pastor and asked the Elector to dismiss
him. He agreed, in case the Wittenberg theologians would give him the
testimony that he was fit for the administration of this office. This
was done by the present document.

Alls Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 140, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
248 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 318.

> The Wittenberg theologians wish the newly appointed minister of the
> Word at Winsheim

Hail! Since your citizens of Winsheim have asked our most illustrious
prince, the Duke of Saxony, to allow you to go to them to govern the
church of this city, the most illustrious prince has handed this matter
over to us for decision, and has ordered that we should write to you, he

2\) This signature is added after Walch.

**1714** Letters from the year

1531\. no. 1855. 1856. **1715**

Graciously allow you to go to your fatherland, if we judge that you are
fit for this office. For the very good prince wishes to advise not only
his own lands, but also the churches of other lands, as much as he can.
But since we approve of your teaching, and your modesty, and your
insight and diligence in every kind of office, we have judged that the
office of teaching and governing the church at Winsheim can be safely
entrusted to you. And we have written this judgment of ours about you to
the most noble prince, and he has ordered that you be graciously
permitted to move to Winsheim, and we exhort you that you faithfully
present the gospel of Christ, which you have hitherto taught purely with
us, also there, in order to glorify Christ\'s honor and for the
salvation of the people, and not suffer the purity of our teaching to be
corrupted by new teachings, which godless people sow everywhere, who do
not know Christ; and only remind you to be continually mindful of the
dangers of the times, which, if ever, especially now require careful and
vigilant teachers. For we see that disputations are arising everywhere
which aim especially at overthrowing that part of our doctrine which we
believe to be most necessary for the church, that is, the doctrine of
the forgiveness of sins and of righteousness by faith. This is what we
thought we had to write to you about the will of our prince, the Duke of
Saxony, Elector, in accordance with our love for you, and we ask Christ
to govern your ministry for his glory and for the salvation of the
people. Given at Wittenberg, Wednesday after Elizabeth \[22 Nov.\^ Anno
1531.

> Martin Luther. Justus Jonas. Philip Melanchthon.

**No. 185 6.**

(Wittenberg.) November 24, 1531.

**To Johann Bugenhagen in Lübeck.**

Luther asks him to leave Lübeck as soon as possible and return to
Wittenberg, where he is urgently needed. Luther informs him that in
addition to the one Zwinglian (Kvpmann, see the letter of Aug. 13, 1),
Campanus (Johann Wulf von Campen) has also been sent to Braun.

He asks him to either defend himself against them in writing or to take
personal action against them on his way to Wittenberg. About the birth
of his son Martin and the prevailing theurge.

From Aurifaber, vol. Ill, p. 141, in Schütze, vol. ll, p. 250 and in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 319 f.

> To the Lord Johann Pommer, Bishop of Wittenberg, Legate of Lübeck.

Grace and peace in Christ! We expect you, my dear Pommer, as a returning
one, as soon as it can be done comfortably because of the birth of your
wife (for which I pray that it may be a happy one). We have served the
Lübeckers enough, especially through your absence \[from here\], which
is finally beginning to be difficult for us, because I am overloaded and
often ill; then I neglect the church treasury and it demands its pastor.
\"I can\'t wait.\" The world is the world, and the devil is its god. You
know that this same devil has sent a Zwinglian wolf into your church in
Brunswick. Zero also comes into this wolf\'s church that Campanus, 1)
the known one. I do not know if God punishes the ingratitude of this
city like this, or if he wants to try us by extreme suffering
(*patientia*). You can remind the Senate by sending letters there or on
the journey you make here. I fear that this little spark will be a
conflagration for many. But Christ has One who said to him \[Ps.
110:1\], \"Sit thou at my right hand,\" and \[Ps. 2:7\], \"Thou art my
son.\" If this one lies, let us worship Campanus and his god, amen, that
is, it will not happen. To me the Lord has given a Martin full of my
Käthe, and we are well, only that the peasants, who have become rich in
this year, make us a theurung (*carstiam*, as they say) by their
wickedness, to show themselves grateful for the Gospel, by which they
have been delivered from so many evils. May the world that refuses to be
blessed perish, amen. Greet your Eva and Sarah in my and my wife\'s
name, and all ours. On Friday after Elizabeth \[Nov. 24\] 1531, your
Martin Luther.

1\) Johann Wulf von Cainpen, who is to be distinguished from Johann
Cainpanus from Maeseick (Maseyk) in the Liège diocese. See Köstlin, M.
Luther (3.), vol. II, 330 and p. 665 ad p. 330.

**1716**

Letters from the year 1531. no. 1857 to 1860.

**1717**

**No. 1857.**

(Wittenberg.) November 27, 1531.

**To Martin Görlitz at Brunswick.**

Luther urges him to work against Campanus and gives him hope for a call
to Saxony soon.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 142, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
251 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 320f. which includes *Cod. Jen*. B 24
n, fol. 180.

> To M. Martin Görlitz, Bishop of Brunswick.

. Grace and peace to Christ! One hears here, my dear Martin, that John
Campanus has crept in with you; if this is true, and I can do nothing
else, then I certainly regret the fate of your church very much. For I
believe that you know this child of Satan and adversary of the Son of
God, whom he blasphemes even more than Arius did. Therefore, I ask you
for the sake of Christ, that you work with the Senate, and wherever you
can, so that they may not allow such furies, who have not been called,
since without a calling even an angel should not be heard, and also
Gabriel only gave the Annunciation to Mary, since he was sent by God.
And if they are so careless as to hear any people who come without being
sent and called, it is not without danger for you to remain there. But
daily I am anxious to tear you away from there, even because of that
Zwinglian with you, who, as I hear, does enough for evil. Finally, I
hope that you will soon be a pastor in a town near the river Saale. For
they are beginning to want the preaching positions there to be visited.
^1)^ In the meantime, be well with your family and pray for me, and in
the meantime be patient and strong in Christ. On Monday after Catharine
\[Nov. 27\] Anno 1531. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1858.**

(Wittenberg.) December 16, 1531.

**To Hans Löser, hereditary marshal of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. V, 1302.

1\) Instead of *vaticari*, for which De Wette suggests *vacare,* we have
adopted *visitari.*

**No. 185S.**

Wittenberg. December 28, 1531.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

News from Switzerland.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 157, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
273 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 322.

Grace and peace! I believe, my dear Amsdorf, that life is beginning to
disgust you because of the infinite wickedness of men. The Zwinglians
got along with the foreign Swiss, 2) but under the most ignominious
conditions, except for the disgrace and defeat they suffered so
unhappily after losing the leader of their doctrine. But this is the end
of the glory they sought by blaspheming against the Lord\'s Supper. And
yet they do not repent, even though they have recanted almost everything
in the \[peace\] conditions and have justified the papists completely.
Yes, they have been forced to break off all alliances with foreign
princes, as with the landgrave 2c. \"It is said\" \[Phil. 3, 19.\],
\"Whose honor is put to shame.\"

Besides, I have nothing of news, only that one again hopes for a peace
treaty between the Emperor and our people. God do what is good, amen. I
recommend you this our Thomas, whom you know. I am overwhelmed with work
in writing and speaking, so that there is hardly enough time for the
third part. Christ be with you. On the day of the innocent children
\[Dec. 28\] Anno 1532. 3) Wittenberg.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1860.**

Without date 1531.

**To Justus Jonas.**

About a marriage affair. (According to Spalatin\'s inscription on the
original. Burkhardt, p. 201.)

The original is in Dessau. Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 234 and by De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 323. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1239.

2\) The peace was concluded on November 16 (De Wette).

3\) Luther reckons here, as often, the new year from Christmas.

**1718** Letters from 1531 and 1532. no. 1860 to 1864. **1719**

My dear Jonas! How? if you wrote to Spalatin that he himself should also
write to the prince and hand over these sad things that he has written
to us on a piece of paper or at least add them to my letter so that they
come into the hands of the prince. D. M. Luther.

**No. 1861.**

Without date 1531.

**To an unnamed prince.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1722.

**No. 1862.**

Without date 1531.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

Request for a poor student.

From the original in the Weimarisches Gesammtarchiv in De Wette, vol.
IV, p. 326 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 263.

> To the most illustrious, highborn Prince and Lord, Lord John, Duke of
> Saxony and Elector 2c, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen
> 2c, my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! I have entrusted the honorable, highly respected Doctor Brück,
Chancellor, and the Marshal Hans Dolzig with this Supplication of the
good journeyman Johann Memminger to present to E. C. F. G.. E. C. F. G.
now graciously wished to help and advise the poor journeyman, who,
almost skilled to the studio, can henceforth be useful to many, so that
he may abstain for the rest of his life, as E. C. F. G. will further
hear in his Supplication. E. C. F. G. will undoubtedly be merciful to
him. God, the Father of all grace and comfort, will mercifully look upon
E. C. F. G. and protect him from all evil through Jesus Christ, His Son,
amen.

E. C. F. G.

subservient

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1863.**

(Wittenberg.)January 3. January 1532.

**To Martin Görlitz in Braunschweig.**

Luther appoints Goerlitz to a pastorate in Saxony.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 244, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
255 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 329, which *Cod. Jen*. Bos. 24n, fol.
181.

> To the highly esteemed brother in the Lord, Mr. Martin Görlitz, the
> extremely faithful and sincere superintendent of the churches at
> Brunswick.

Grace and peace! I wrote to you before, my dear Martin, that we would be
anxious to call you. Therefore, I call you in the name of the Lord to
get away from there as soon as you can. For the parish at Kahla near
Jena (which you know) awaits you, which is now without a pastor, which,
if it should not please you, and it suits you, will be exchanged with
the one at Belgern or another. This briefly, but true. For I am \[very\]
busy. Perhaps Brunswick, which is not worthy of the pure word, will want
to emulate Mulhouse and Zurich, which God forbid, amen. D. Carlstadt has
become the successor of Zwingli in Zurich, whom they are now proclaiming
a martyr of Christ, so that they may fulfill their blasphemies to the
utmost, \"that \[it\] must overflow\". Fare well in Christ. January 3,
1532.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 1864.**

(Wittenberg.)January 3. January (I532). ^1)^

**To Caspar (Huberinus) in Augsburg.**

Luther warns against taking the sacrament or having other official acts
performed by the enthusiasts, that is, the Zwinglians in Augsburg.

From the *Biblioth. Brem., Class*. IV, 915, in Walch, Vol. XXI, 1017
(with wrong address and wrong year); in De Wette, Vol. I V, p. 330 and
in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 54, p. 266.

Grace and peace in Christ! Beware, beware, 2) my dear Kaspar, of the

1\) The year of writing results from the comparison with the following
letter. The addressee is to be sought in Augsburg, as can be seen from
this letter. Therefore, Walch\'s year 1527 as well as the recipient of
the letter, Caspar Schwenkfeld, is wrong.

2\) At De Wette both times: \"hüte\".

**1720**

Letters from the year 1532, No. 1864, 1865.

**1721**

I am afraid that Augsburg will also have its share.^1)^ that you are
idle in your office, as you yourselves indicate, so that you will not
share in their plagues. God has already punished twice: first under
Muenzer, now under Zwingli. 2) I am worried that Augsburg will also have
its share. If you cannot help it, then do as the Jews did, captured at
Babel, who also had to live without a temple, without worship, without
the rites of their Mosiah, only being satisfied with the Word for 70
years. For it is not yet to be expected that you should begin your own
in corners. 3) Endure such temptation, and in the meantime comfort
yourselves with reading and teaching of the Holy Word and desiring and
praying; as Daniel prayed at Babylon against Hierusalem, so also you,
desiring the Sacrament with sighing until God sees it. There is not such
a great lack of baptism; after all, under the papacy, one baptizes in
houses, therefore you can still baptize and pray there, as in the
church. In the same way, you can bless marriages in houses, as they are
otherwise trusted; and if it cannot be otherwise, and a council forbids
such baptizing, then I would take it from papists beforehand, with the
condition that we keep their baptism right, but not their faith and
doctrine in other matters. The enthusiasts have neither baptism nor
sacrament. So much now in haste, for I am overburdened. Hereby commanded
by God, Auren. 3 Jan. D. Mart. Luther.

**No. 1 865.**

(Wittenberg.)January 3. January 1532.

**To Wenceslaus Link in Nuremberg.**

In response to the rumor that there was secret discord among the
Nuremberg preachers, Luther exhorted vigilance, pointing to the warning
example of Zwingli\'s death. Last from Carlstadt.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 145, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
256 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 331.

1\) Here we have deleted \"their\", which is missing in an old copy in
Swabian dialect, which is probably made by Huberinus himself. It has
been communicated to Prof. Veesenmeyer De Wette.

2\) With this Luther points to Zwingli\'s death, who had fallen in the
battle of Cappel on October 11, 1531.

3\) Still in 1533 the same conditions were in Augsburg, as we can see
from Luther\'s letter to Hans Honold of July 21, 1533.

Grace and peace in the Lord Jesus Christ! I have not written to you for
a long time, my dear Wenceslaus, nor do you need me to write to you,
since I am very busy. But it is up to you, who have more leisure to
write to me more often. I hope that my thoughts will be wrong, which
some slight rumor has aroused in me, as if among you servants of the
word at the church in Nuremberg a secret discord is harbored: I could
hardly be told anything else that would be more distressing for me than
this evil. Therefore I also ask you, as I know and have tested your
sincere and straight mind, that you, as you do, help us to fight and
watch against these evil spirits \[Eph. 6:12\], who are not content to
rage in earthly things, but strive to hurl their fiery darts into
heavenly things as well and to disturb the kingdom of God, which we are.
If Osiander does not yet approve of our opinion of conditional baptism:
nevertheless; we want to carry him and not push him harder, just as he
will carry us and not make us bitter until Christ has untied this knot.
We see the judgment of God now for the second time; once on Münzer, now
on Zwingli. I have been a prophet in that I have said: God will not
suffer these raging and furious blasphemies, of which those were full,
in that they ridiculed our God, called us flesh-eaters and
blood-drinkers and bloody people (*cruentos*), and gave other
frightening names. \"This is what they wanted; look before Augsburg!\"

About Carlstadt you write nothing certain, and I am surprised that such
a story has remained hidden from us so long, then that it has come to us
so doubtfully that even today we cannot admit that we know something
certain. Philip says: If God will not seize Carlstadt with unlimited
(*absoluta*) power and wisdom, with ordinary (*ordinata)* He will not
seize him. So great is the skill in this monster to slip away, to
escape, to avoid the dangers, which, however, he himself brings about.
But he will be true who said \[Sir.3, 27. Vulg.\], \"He who loves danger
will perish in it.\"

**1722**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1865. 1866. 1867.

**1723**

Respectfully greet Lazarus Spengler and all of us. Be well in Christ
with your own, amen. January 3, 1532, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1866.**

(Wittenberg.) January 12, 1532.

**To the City Council of Torgau.**

Request for a scholarship for a student of theology.

From the original in Lingke\'s Luthers Geschäfte in Torgau, p. 88; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 332 with the wrong date: \"January 8,\" and likewise
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 267.

> To the honorable and wise mayor and council of Torgau, my favorable
> dear gentlemen and friends.

Honorable, wise, dear gentlemen! I have now asked several times for
Erasmus Krautheim that E. W. would let him have one of the scholarships,
but he has put himself off here and said that it should be granted to
him when he indicates to me that he has received a promise from an
honorable council on my intercession. Accordingly, my diligent request,
as before, is that E. W., as a good, fine person (who can still create
much benefit), grant him such a scholarship. For he has so far held on
to such hope, otherwise he might have gone to work as a craftsman; and I
must hold out hard that they do not all become craftsmen who are sent to
the preaching ministry. For I can see and experience how great the
shortage of preachers and pastors will be before three years pass.
Therefore E. W. also wanted to help in this as the pious Christians
promote, care for and do; for there is need, that knows God my Lord, to
whom I hereby command E. W., Amen. Friday after Epiphany. \[Jan. 12,
1532. D. Martinus Luther.

**No. 1867.**

**January 17. 1532.^1)^ To the Abbot Friedrich Pistorius in Nuremberg.**
Luther wishes him luck on his marriage and praises the value of
marriage.

From *Ericius*, p. 86 b at *Buddeus*, p. 44; at De Wette, vol. II, p.
614. German at Walch, vol. XXI, 947.

1\) In the editions, this letter is dated 1525, but in the addenda of De
Wette in the third edition, it is dated 1525.

> To the venerable man, distinguished by scholarship, Mr. Friedrich,
> Abbot of St. Aegidien in the famous Nuremberg, his dear brother in
> Christ. 2)

Grace and peace in Christ! I have postponed it. 3) My esteemed husband,
to wish you happiness in your marriage by letter, and that this was done
by me from reasonable causes, I believe you will easily accept, given
your sincere attitude, since I have to deal in so many ways with my
state of health, with the publication of books, with writing letters,
with trading things, with services to friends and many, countless such
things, yes, with clouds and storms of business. Among these, although
they are the closest, the domestic and ecclesiastical affairs are
admittedly the fewest and rarest, to say nothing of the drudgeries of
Satan and the enemies. Nevertheless, I have wished you happiness with
pleasure and kindly through prayers and applause, and now, finally, I
wish you happiness also through this letter and implore for you, not
only that this community, created by God and sanctified with blessings
in all things, may be ene easy for you, but also a constant mind and
faith of heart, namely that you always remain in the firm conviction
that this way of life is the first one that has pleased God above all,
then that it has continued to exist because He has preserved it, and
finally that it will be the highest one that He will glorify the most.
For what were kingdoms and dominions when Adam and the patriarchs lived
only as husband and wife? Then, how many and how great kingdoms have
been subjugated?

In the first volume it is said: \"This letter belongs to the year 1532,
because Abbot Friedrich married himself according to Nopitsch the 28th
of June 1532 with Anna, G. Schwarzens daughter. The date we set is
according to Seidemann at De Wette, vol. VI, p. 497, and also Burkhardt,
p. 78, does not object to it. But to us, if the wedding really took
place only in June, the month of January is very doubtful. .

2\) This superscription has De Wette after *J. Conrad Zeltner, Theatr.
vir. eruditt. etc.. (Norimb. 1720), p. 431,* while *Buddeus offers:
Venerabili Viro D. Fr. Johanni, ad S. Aegidium Abbati, Majori suo,
Norinbergensi*. Likewise Walch.

3\) According to this, this letter should be placed around July.

**1724** Letters from the year 1532.

No. 1867. 1868. 1869. **1725**

while the marriage state has always remained unharmed throughout the
world! Finally, how great monstrosities, wars and shameful deeds of the
kingdoms will God punish in that day, while He will glorify with eternal
crowns the exceedingly lowly works of the marriage state, which,
however, are the most useful and serve only for peace! And to which
perennial is the dominion over all things due, if not to the spouses?
although afterwards, since the wickedness of men urged it, the
authorities were necessarily forced to arrogate it to themselves to a
great extent, and now this dominion already serves more the wars, but
marriage is the simplest of all and a dominion of peace. Rejoice,
therefore, and give thanks to God, who has given you this way of life
and has transferred you, as it were, from the sea to the harbor, from
the world to paradise. It may be what Paul says \[1 Cor. 7:28\], that in
this state there is tribulation of the flesh, but there is at the same
time the comfort of the spirit, since Solomon says \[Proverbs 18:22\]:
\"He will receive 1) joy from the Lord.\" Further, what is the celibate
life, which all seek and admire more than marriage, but - not only
tribulation, but - a sea and a storm, yea, a hell of tribulations? So
let the world, caught in error, rage, and because it does not want to
bear a tribulation, let it love instead seas and storms of tribulations,
and what it loves, it will find. Christ keep 2) and keep us in a better
mind, that we may overcome the one tribulation, and not even feel one or
the other evil among so many goods that we possess in this arrangement
of life. These people are so drunk that they do not feel innumerable
evils of their state because of the one good of a little honor, like a
soldier who gives his life away, preferring a gold florin to the
salvation of body and soul. We, on the other hand, should be so drunk on
our goods that, when an evil occurs, we think it is something good.

1\) Instead of *hauriat* we read *hauriet* according to the Vulgate.

2\) Instead of *tenet* we read toning,

3\) Here we have added *malum.*

See where I am going! Do I seem drunk or sober to you? I delight in
praising God\'s works, and where I can, in many words. May the Lord
Jesus Christ bless you in spirit and in body, and may you remember me in
your prayers. I want your Friederichin to be dutifully greeted by you in
my name, but beware, not other than with Latin words, the rest she will
then already understand through her own perspicacity. Given on January
17, during the meal and in a hurry. Therefore, you will forgive the
wordy one, or perhaps the one who enjoys a meal (*coenato* that I say
so), but who is neither consumed nor drunk.

> Venerable Lord, your Martin Luther.

**No. 1868.**

Lübeck. January 24, 1532.

**Johann Bugenhagen to Luther.**

(Regest.)

He communicates his concerns about Luther\'s rumored indisposition and
his joy at the news of his well-being, as well as the reception of the
psalm, reports Zwingli\'s and Oecolampad\'s death, asks for immediate
news, and reports the sending of a Lübische message to Sweden,

In the Fortgesetzten Sammlung 1745, p. 468, A regest in Burkhardt\'s
Briefwechsel, p, 201, which we have reproduced here.

**No. 1869.**

(Wittenberg.) January 31, 1532.

**To the City Council of Herford.**

Luther asks that the sisters and those in the Bruderhaus in Herford not
be forced to give up their status and clothing.

The original is now said to be in the royal library in Berlin.
Handwritten in the Provincial Archives at Münster. Printed in the
Leipzig Supplement, p. 69, No. 116; in Walch, vol. XXI, 338; in De
Wette, vol. I V, p. 333 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 267.

> To the honorable and wise mayor and council of the city of Hervord in
> Westphalia, my favorable gentlemen and friends.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear sirs! It has come to me
how the sisters and those in the Bruderhaus nöchi

**1726** Letters from the year 1532. no. 1869 to 1872. **1727**

The people who want to leave their status and clothes and go according
to the opinion of the priest and preacher. Now you know without a doubt
that unnecessary renewals, especially in divine matters, are very
dangerous, because the lords and great ones are moved by them without
cause, for which peace and tranquility everything should and must serve.
Because the brothers and sisters (who first began the Gospel with you)
lead an honest life, and have an honest, disciplined congregation,
besides faithfully teaching and keeping the pure Word, my friendly
request is that Your Worship would not allow unrest and bitterness to
befall them for the sake of this matter, that they still wear spiritual
garments, and keep old praiseworthy customs, which are not against the
Gospel. For such monasteries and houses of the brethren please me
exceedingly. And if God wanted all monasteries to be like this, all
parish lords, cities and countries would be well helped and advised.
Please forgive me, E. W. will know how to keep this in a Christian and
respectable way, considering that they are neither harmful to the parish
priest, nor to the parish, but almost useful and better. Hereby
commanded by God. Date Wittenberg, *ultima Januarii anno* MDXXXII.

D. Martinus Luther.

*Mpp. aeger* \[ill\]. ^1)^

**No. 1870.**

Wittenberg. 31 Jannar 1532.

**To Jakob Montanus and Gerh. Wilskamp at Herford.**

Luther tells them that he has written to the council of Herford in their
matter.

Printed in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 257 and in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 334.

> Doctor Martin Luther, suffering from the head, wishes to the highly
> esteemed brothers Jakob Montanus of Speier and Gerhard of Xanten, the
> faithful and fair servants of the word at Herford, his brothers in the
> Lord

Grace and peace! I have received your and Gerhard\'s letters, and about
these

1\) Seckendorf*, Hist. Luth*. *lib.* Ill, sect. 6, § 15, p. 38, reports
that Luther had a violent attack of vertigo on January 22.

I have written to the council of your city about this matter and have
asked them to protect and defend your monastery against the disturbance
in which these screamers are putting you. For your way of life pleases
me extraordinarily, since you teach and live purely according to the
Gospel of Christ, and yet God would have wished that such monasteries
had existed or that there were still some of them today. I do not dare
to wish for much, but if all were like that, the Church would be all too
blissful in this life. Your clothes and other things, which have so far
been maintained in a praiseworthy manner, do not harm the Gospel;
indeed, they help the Gospel a great deal against the raging and wanton
and unbridled spirits, who today do nothing but destroy and have learned
to build nothing. Therefore, hold fast to your ways, and in this way of
life spread the gospel diligently (as you are doing). Be well and pray
for me. Given at Wittenberg, on the last day of January, Anno 1532,
Martin Luther.

Postscript. My wife and children greet you and all the sisters and thank
you for the gift sent. I would send the printed books, but there are no
carriers. In the meantime, I assume that everything has reached you.

**No. 1871.**

(Wittenberg.) Early 1532.

**To Eberhard von der Tannen, Amtmann zu Wartburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1664.

**No. 1872.**

Torgau. February 4, 1532.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

The Elector gives Luthern and his family the monastery in which he lives
as free property, free of taxes, but under the condition that if Luther
or his heirs sell it, the Elector has the right of first refusal.

From the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv according to Concept Aa, p.255, No.50,
printed by Burkhardt, p.202.

By the Grace of God, we Johans, Duke of Saxony and Elector, confess for
ourselves and our heirs, and declare against all men: After the
venerable and reverend, our dear devotee, Mr. Martin Luther, Doctor,
from son

**1728**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1872 to 1875.

**1729**

By the grace and providence of God Almighty, almost from the beginning
of our University in Wittenberg, in the time and government of the
Highborn Prince, our dear brother Duke Frederick, Elector, in felig
memory, and subsequently us, as the prospective 1) reigning Elector, at
the same our University with reading in the Holy Scriptures, preaching,
and preaching of the holy Gospel and the divine Word, as well as with
the arrangement of the Christian ceremonies in the churches through the
visitation in our lands and principalities, God the Almighty has now for
a long time sufficiently endeavored to praise and honor, also comfort
and salvation of the people, as he still does daily and without ceasing,
so that we are not unreasonably inclined to him with special graces: In
consideration of all this, and from our own motive, we have
unsolicitedly granted to the above-mentioned Doctor Martin Luther,
Katharina, his married wife, and their heirs, sons and daughters, the
new dwelling in our city of Wittenberg, which was previously called the
Black Monastery, in which Doctor Martinus has been accustomed for some
time and still, with his understanding and extent, together with the
garden and courtyard in front of it, has not excluded anything from it,
but to all intents and purposes he now owns, uses and holds the same
house, to a right free inheritance, and has gifted and graced them with
it. 2) To him, his wife and their heirs, sons and daughters, to bequeath
the above-mentioned dwelling, and to be gifted and pardoned with it, in
and by virtue of this letter, so that they now own, possess and use the
same dwelling as their own property and estate, and may act and act as
with their own free inheritance and property of their own liking and
will without our, our heirs\' and male entry and prevention, but Doctor
Martinus, his wife nor their heirs or devisees, sell or give the
dwelling in question to no one, they have then such, and if they would
be willing to sell it, have previously indicated to us or our heirs,
whether we or our heirs would like to bring such dwelling to us
ourselves for such payment or other reimbursement, if another would do
it for them, or grant it to the council of Wittenberg, as the occasion
may arise, so that it would be of use and convenience to the city, give
also to the many-named Doctor and his married housewives out of special

1\) Burkhardt: \"prospective\".

2\) This \"have\" is too much. The concipient has lost the construction.

We hereby grant them these liberties, that they shall be free of all
civic burdens and burdens in the said dwelling touched by our city of
Wittenberg during both their lifetimes, so that they may not do or
maintain any projectile or other duty, as the names may have, thereof,
and shall nevertheless be free and hereby permitted by us that they may
brew, malt, donate, keep cattle and engage in other civic activities
like other of our citizens and inhabitants of Wittenberg. Likewise,
their heirs and descendants shall also be permitted, completely without
hindrance, but in such a way that these heirs and descendants shall
annually and hereditarily pay 20 of our interest groschen 3) from the
indicated dwelling to the town hall of Wittenberg, and these heirs and
descendants shall 4) otherwise take care of all civic duties with guards
and other burdens, except that the dwelling in question shall not be
drawn into any land or princely taxes and annexes from but gracious and
movable causes, but that Doctor Martinus Luther, Katharina, his married
wife, and both their heirs of the same shall herewith be entirely free
and privileged, all faithfully and harmlessly. In witness whereof, with
our seal hereunto annexed, it is knowingly sealed and given at Torgau,
on the Sunday after our Lady\'s *Purification* Day \[February 4\], after
the birth of Christ our dear Lord 1532.

**No. 1873.**

(Wittenberg.) February 1532.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1810, no. 1199.

**No. 1874.**

(Wittenberg.) February 12, 1532.

**To the Elector Prince Johann Friedrich**

**to Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1807, no. 1198.

**No. 1875.**

Wittenberg. February 19, 1532.

**To Valentin Hausmann in Freiberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1752 - The words inserted there in the
second line of the text: \"(pastor in Zwickau)\" are to be deleted,
because Nicolaus Hausmann was already removed from his office there by
the Elector in August 1531. See Luther\'s letter to the clergy of
Zwickau of August 18, 1531.

3\) That is, about one guilder.

4\) Burkhardt: \"all\".

**1730**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1876. 1877.

**1731**

**No. 1876.**

> February 1532.

**To Veit Dietrich in Wittenberg.**

From the Electoral Court, Luther calls for intercession for the sick
Elector, on whom an operation had been performed. He complains of
indisposition, but is busy thinking about the preface to the prophets.

From Luther\'s handwritten original in the royal library at Munich, De
Wette, Vol. IV, p. 340. The letter is written extremely illegibly on a
half sheet used in haste, the inner page of which was ruled with the pen
for a completely different purpose.

> To the highly respectable gentleman and man, that is, to Veit
> Dietrich, who can become decan at any hour (*decanabilis*) in the
> Faculty of Liberal Arts of the University of Wittenberg, my extremely
> dear friend

My greetings! Your prayers seem to be slackening with the Prince\'s
illness, my dear Veit, 1) for Christ\'s sake continue to pray. There are
many who wish for his death, and D. Caspar 2) says that although he
brings this infernal fire to a halt by cutting off the big toe, that it
\[does not\] turn to the width of the upper foot,^3)^ nevertheless it
must still be cut in depth, and it was cut today with great agony, so
that the prince cried out: \"It truly presses me hard. It must certainly
be an evil thing, as you say.\" He does not know that the big toe and
part of the bone have been cut off, but he thinks that skin or flesh has
been cut away. If the fire were to penetrate further into the foot, it
would be over this head, and in a short time. \"It is certainly the
infernal fire\" and the breath of Satan himself. For D. Caspar assures
that

1\) De Wette brings as the reading of the original: *M. Phil.* and has
the note: \"L. addresses the letter in thought to Melanchthon (?).\" We
have assumed *mi Vite.*

2\) Lindemann.

3\) We recognize ourselves that this translation is not quite exact. For
those who are able to reproduce it better, we put the Latin text here:
*D. Gaspar dicit sistere se (?) quidem ignem istum infernalem praeciso
pollice majoris pedis in latitudinem vergendo, sed etc*.*.* We believe
to have hit the meaning.

through this disease, the limbs become ashes while alive.

I am going around with a preface to the prophets. But before breakfast,
I die daily from dizziness and plague of Satan, so that I almost despair
of living and returning to you. After breakfast I comfort either the
prince or others. \"The head doesn\'t want to do it anymore. Therefore
think, if I die, that you need your art and eloquence in the preface.\"
Here I cannot accomplish anything, at home I would perhaps be happier;
therefore I am thinking of returning with D. Brück if I can, although
the journey is suspicious to me. But \[tell both the\] astr\[ologist\]
and the prophesying mathematician\],^4)^ whom I have so often convicted
of error: I will convict him of error even more often. Farewell and
greet all friends.

D. Martin Luther, in a hurry, because the messenger was in a great
hurry.

**No. 1877.**

February 27, 1532.

**To his housewife.**

Luther writes from the Electoral Court about his intended return, about
the illness of the Elector, about the reward of his departing servant,
and so on.

In Walch, vol. XXIII, p. 35b; in Schütze, vol. I, p. 389 (the beginning
and the end); in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 141 f. and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 54, p. 275.

> My beloved housewife, Katharin Lutherin, in her own hand.

Greetings to God in Christ. My dearest Käthe! I hope that Doctor Brück
will get leave, as he has put me off, so I will come with him tomorrow
or the day after tomorrow. Pray God that he brings us home fresh and
healthy. I sleep very well, about 6 or 7 hours after each other, and
then two or three hours after that. It is the beer\'s fault, I think.
But I am sober, just like in Wittenberg. Doctor. Caspar says that our
gracious lord\'s foot does not eat any more. But no Dobitzsch suffers
such torture, nor any prisoner on the ladder in the tower of Hans

4\) We have tried to fill in the gaps like this: *Sed \[dicas tam\]
astr\[ologo\] quam ominoso Mathem\[atico\].*

**1732** Letters from 1532. no. 1877. 1878. 1879. **1733**

Stockmeister, as his churfürstl. Grace must suffer from the wound
physicians. His Princely Grace is as healthy as a fish. His Grace is as
healthy in the whole body as a little fish, but the devil has bitten and
stung his foot. Pray, keep praying! I hope God will hear us as we have
begun. For D. Caspar also believes that God must help here.

Because John 1) departed, necessity and honor demand that I let him come
from me honestly. For you know that he served faithfully and diligently,
and truly kept himself humble according to the gospel, and did and
suffered all things. Therefore, think how often we have given to bad
boys and ungrateful disciples, when all has been lost: so now attack
yourself here, and do not lack such a pious fellow, knowing that it is
well done and pleasing to God. I know well that there is little; but I
would gladly give him 10 florins, if I had them. But you shall not give
him less than 5 florins, because he is not clothed. What you can give
above that, I ask for. The common caste would like to give me something
in honor of such a servant, since I must keep my servants on my fare for
the service and benefit of their church, but as they wish. Do not miss
it, because there is a cup. Think where you can get it. God will give
differently; I know that. Hiemit GOOD commanded, Amen.

And tell the priest of Zwickau that he wants to let him like the hostel
and take care of it. When I come, I will tell you how Mühlfurt and I
were guests at the Rietesel, and Mühlfurt showed me much wisdom. But I
was not drunk after such a drink. Pußt mir den jungen Hansen von meinen
wegen, und heißet Häuschen, Lehnchen und Muhme Lehnen für den lieben
Fürsten und für mich beten. Although there is a fair in this town, I
cannot find anything to buy for the children. If I don\'t have anything
special, get me some supplies. Tuesday after *Reminisc*. \[27 Feb.\]
1532.

> D. Martinus Luther.

1\) Rischinann, from Braunschweig, inscribed May 7, 1527 (*Alb.* p.
129). In 1533, on Luther\'s recommendation, he became Conrector and
Diaconus in Husum. (Burkhardt, p. 204.)

**No. 1878.**

February 27, 1532.

**Letter of recommendation for his former**

**Servant.**

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 479; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. V, p. 484b; in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p.
960; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 580; in Walch, vol. XXI, 342;
in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 343; and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p.
276.

I D. Martin Luther, preacher at Wittenberg, ask, for Christ\'s sake,
that all those who love God\'s word, would favorably command this 2)
witness of the letter, Johannes Rischmann, who has now served me
faithfully, diligently and humbly for several years, and faithfully
promote him to the best, esteemed the Lord, for whose sake he has served
me. This will undoubtedly, as true as our gospel and Christ Himself is
true, be a pleasing, pleasant service to God. And if I know how to owe
it to anyone, I am always willing and ready. Hereby commanded to God.
Tuesday after Reminiscere \[27 Feb.\] Anno 1532. my own hand.

**No. 1879.**

(Wittenberg.) March 7, 1532.

**To Mrs. Dorothea Jörger at Tolleth.**

Luther responds to Mrs. Jörger\'s offer to invest 500 florins for poor
students of theology.

From Raupach, Evang. Oesterreich, I. Forts., p. 62 ff., according to the
original, which was in the possession of I. Ch. Lerche, Superint. zu
Neustadt an der Aisch; in Moseder in the appendix to his Creed, p. 74
ff.; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 344 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 277.

> To the noble, virtuous woman Dorothea Jörgerin, widow at Tollet, my
> favorable wives and good friend in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ. Noble, virtuous woman! I have received your
letter to me together with the Kütten-Latwerg, as well as my dear
Käthe\'s 4 Hungarian guilders in her letter, and we both thank you most
kindly. So I have also sent Ern Michel Stiefel his own, of which

2\) De Wette and the Erlanger: \"this one\".

**1734**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1879, 1880. 1881.

**1735**

I am expecting your return at any time. That your writing also reports
and desires, as I think best, the five hundred florins, which you intend
to invest in poor fellows who study the Holy Scriptures: I, together
with *Magistro Philippo and* all my good lords and friends, have
considered it best, because it is to be invested in such a needfully
useful work that it will be spent on interest, so that it may be useful
forever and to many. For one can help two people annually with such
interest, as long as it is noticed, 1) which we want to order the
University of Wittenberg to look after. Accordingly, I have diligently
written to Lasaro Spengler, Syndico at Nuremberg, that he wants to have
such florins inquired through loyal merchants (as he well knows how to
do) at Linz and taken to himself according to your handwriting, which I
have sent to him with my writing (to be sent again), and I have also
asked that he be helpful in this, so that it may be taken up and
prescribed by your council at Nuremberg, which would be the most
important thing; If not, that he sends it to me, and that it be placed
elsewhere. If you like this opinion, the matter would be bad. I will do
the best I can for myself, and I am glad that God has moved your hearts
to consider such a good work in Christ. Unfortunately, even in our
country, where God\'s word is preached abundantly to the point of
overflow, such grace seems little or nothing, but rather the
contradiction that they let their poor pastors starve: both those of
nobility, peasants and citizens, everyone is inclined to rob more than
to help. But perhaps the saying \[must come true\]: The nearer Rome, the
worse Christians, and that Matth. 12, 2) 42. Christ says: \"The queen
from Saba will appear on the last day and accuse this people, because
she is from the end of the world\" 2c. To the same our dear Lord Jesus
Christ I commend you and all yours into his abundant mercy, Amen.
Thursday after Oculi \[March 7\] 1532. D. Martin Luther.

1\) That is, as long as care is taken that it is well invested.

2\) In the issues . \"Matth. 11.\"

**No. 1 880.**

Wittenberg. March 18, 1532.

**To Hans von Taubenheim at Torgau.**

Luther recommends a young man to him as a preacher.

In Lingke\'s Luthers Gesch. u. And. in Torgau, p. 89; in De Wette, vol.
IV, p. 346 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 54, p. 278.

> To the noble, strict, Mr. Hansen von Taubenheim, our most gracious
> Rentmeister at Torgau.

Grace and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord, amen. Noble, austere,
favorable dear Lord! E. E. are my willing services before. You know that
for the preservation of Christian doctrine, persons are needed who
present it to the people and faithfully instruct them in it. You also
know that such people and honest Christian men have been at the
university for several years to learn what they want to teach others;
they must not only have studied commendably and lived honestly if they
have the hope of serving the church and school. Such is this Matthäus
Schrey, an honest fellow, a native of Niemeck, who spent several years
here in the studio at Wittenberg, and behaved well and commendably in
teaching and manners. Since now your noble gestrengen talked the other
day with D. Hieronymus (as he had been at Torgau) to ask me to propose
to her a quiet, pious, God-fearing man, to appoint him as a pastor and
to give him a salary: so do hereby to know that D. Jerome is doing
\'what he has been commanded to do, and I now pronounce what has been
asked of me through him. Hereby I command you into the hands of God
Almighty. Let me and the people be commanded to you. Date Wittenberg,
Monday after Judica \[March 18\] 1532.

Martin Luther, D.

**No. 1881.**

March 23, 1532.

**Elector John of Saxony to Luther.**

Excerpt from a letter. Luther\'s reply is the next letter.

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1802.

> **1736**

**No 1882.**

(Wittenberg.) March 28, 1532.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1802.

**No. 188 3**

(Wittenberg.) March 28, 1532.

**To the Chancellor Georg Vogler.**

Luther asks him to help put into action the margrave\'s favorable
sentiments against the Protestant preachers, and recommends to him in
particular M. Bernhard Ziegler.

In *Beyschlag, Sylloge variorum Opusc., Tom.I,*

*fasc. IV*, p.806; in Hausdorf, Leben Spenglers, p.188; in De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 348 and in the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 54, p. 280.

> To the honorable and prudent Georgen Vogler, Margravial Chancellor of
> Brandenburg, my favorable dear Lord and friend.

Grace and peace. Honorable, prudent, dear lord and friend! I have now
often received admonition from you, especially through Lasarum Spengler,
my good friend and lord, that I should write to my lord Margrave Georgen
for the poor pastors and preachers; and it has done me good that in it I
have felt your great diligence and favor toward the poor priests.
Accordingly, I have written to S. F. G. humbly and diligently. S. F. G.
answered me quite graciously and consolingly: that there should be no
lack of S. F. G. at all, where it can only be indicated, and the words
were put in such a way that I cannot doubt that S. F. G. is serious. So
now I ask you very kindly to comfort such poor servants of Christ, as
you have done so far, and especially to support M. Bernhardum Ziegler as
much as you can, since he is worth it, as you yourselves have
experienced and feel. For such people are not to be found like pebbles
in the street; and when they are gone, their like is sought in vain.
Hereby commanded by God. Date Wittenberg, on Green Thursday \[March 28\]
1532.

> E. E. willing
>
> D. Martinus Luther, now sick at head.

**1737**

**No. 1884.**

(Wittenberg.) Perhaps in April 1532.

**To Albrecht, Duke of Prussia.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1678.

**No. 1885.**

(Wittenberg.) 2. April 1532.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

About the filling of the position of Melchior Mirisch, about the illness
of the Elector and about a marriage case.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 150, in Schütze, vol. II,
p.259 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 355 f.

Grace, and peace! I have been silent for a long time, my dear Amsdorf,
but the illness of my head was the cause of it, which prevented me from
any occupation with writing, reading and teaching for more than a whole
month. As you recently wrote about getting a pastor to take the place of
Melchior Mirisch, and thinking of our Hausmann, I think of it this way:
that M. Georg, the deacon of our church, could not easily be moved to
change his position; what M. Hausmann\'s opinion is, I will find out. M.
Leonhard Beier 1) is also here, who has been dismissed from Guben, or
rather has left. One of these two seems to me to be most suitable for
you. I also believe that you know M. Leonhard. But because he is wanted
as a preacher at Zwickau, and here at Wittenberg, if Pommer does not
return, he will be appointed for a time as a deputy in his place, then
because Schneeberg wants to have M. Hausmann, after the contract is
concluded (for it has been agreed that Schneeberg will become ours, and
all articles are agreed between the princes, except that of the
so-called mixed fiefs, all of which is being worked on. When that is
established, everything is even, even with the approval of Duke George.
This I have heard from the Prince\'s own mouth, from D. Brück and
Riedtel with these my ears and diligently investigated): so I ask you,

1\) For De Wette: *Betzer*.

**1738** Letters from the year 1532. no. 1885. 1886. **1739**

to forgive a little, as much as it concerns, whether God wants to order
either the househusband or the Leonhard there. But don\'t you hear me
begging like this? Show us what M. Mirisch lived on.

Our prince, thanks be to God, is recovering nicely. Twice I visited him
and, being present in front of his bed, I interpreted what the Lord had
said and comforted him with interspersed speeches and stories. There was
a fear that his illness would become a cold burn (ssE iZnw) in the big
toe of the right foot, but it was met and prevented, thank God! and he
is getting better and better.

I believe that you have settled your marriage case with the closed
woman. For it is difficult to separate them, since one of the midwives
testifies that nothing is wrong with her, only the opening of the pubic
region is a little too deep, if everything else is in order. Perhaps
both of them do not know the manner of attendance. They may therefore
consult women who are experienced in this matter. If it were now found
to be closed, the verdict would be clear. Fare well in Christ. On
Tuesday in Easter \[April 2\] 1532.

Martin Luther.

**No. 1886.**

(Wittenberg.) April 5 and 13, 1532.

**To Georg Mohr, preacher at Borna.**

Two letters.

About Mohr\'s appointment to the pastorate in Zwickau.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 478; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. V, p. 485; in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p.
960; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XXII, p. 559; in Walch, vol. XXI, 342
f.; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 357 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54,
p. 290.

> A. To the worthy and well-learned Mr. Magister Georgio Mohr, preacher
> at Born, my favorable good friend.

Grace and peace in Christ. My dear Magister Georgi! I have received your
writing, in which you ask me whether you should

accept the call to the preaching ministry in Zwickau 1) 2c. This is my
answer, which I have to give to all others in the same matter, namely, I
have nothing to do with those of Zwickau, and neither their parish nor
preaching seat concerns me. If you want to accept it differently, do it
for yourselves, I will not prevent it. But that I should advise or
encourage it, no man shall be able to do that, whether God wills it. For
those at Zwickau shall not make a disgraceful cover of me, and our
gospel shall not be a juggler\'s game with my willing, as they have
tried and hoped to do so far.

What you do in this, do on your own level. Be it unto you, as unto
others, that ye complain not unto me. I will leave the people and things
idle; they know the causes best of all. They have now cooled their
little troubles; but what matter if Christ will not cool his little
troubles in them? I will gladly be at your beck and call.

Hereby commanded by God. And if you become preachers in Zwickau, God
help you, so that you do not have to be against me, and are not burdened
with other people\'s sins, amen. Date Friday in Easter \[April 5\] Anno
1532.

> D. Martinus Luther.

B .

Grace and peace. My dear Magister Georgi! I do not have the time to
write much to you now, and your messenger is also in a hurry; otherwise
I would have written for you to the council at Born. But I will do it
another time, as uninvited, and more conveniently.

Concerning the preaching office in Zwickau, I cannot advise you
otherwise than before. But if our most gracious Lord, the Elector, would
command you to accept the same, you may indicate the aforementioned
reasons, because S. C. F. G. will not force you; so I do not consider it
necessary that you join Torgau to N. 2c. Our Lord God will not forget
you. Hiemit GOtt befohlen 2c. Date Saturday after Quasimodogeniti
\[April 13\] Anno 1532. D. Martinus Luther.

1\) An old copy, which is bound into a memorial book of the town hall
archive at Zwickau, offers here: \"Zwickau\". Therefore, wherever the
editions offer \"N.\", we have put Zwickau in its place.

**1740** Letters from the year- 1532. no. 1887. 1888. 1889. **1741**

**No. 1887.**

Königsberg. April 6, 1532.

**Duke Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Answer to Luther\'s letter of August 24, 1531, thanking him for his
advice and for his efforts so far to find a learned preacher for Riga,
which he asks to continue. About his relationship to the Deutschmeister.
He asks Luther to interpret the Gospel of John 2c.

Detailed excerpt by I. Voigt. Mittheilung aus der Correspondenz des
Herzogs Albrecht mit Luther 2c. Königsberg 1841, p. 3, and a regest in
Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 175.

**No. 1888.**

Königsberg. April 12, 1532.

**Duke Albrecht of Prussia to Luther.**

(Regest.)

The duke asks Luthern to accept the son of his captain in Labiau, G. von
Bendorf, named Quirin, who is to study in Wittenberg, into his house in
return for remuneration.

Detailed excerpt in J. Voigt, op. cit., p. 4 and a regest in Kolde, p.
175.

**No. 1889.**

(Wittenberg.) April 1532.

**To the \"nine men\"^1)^ at Herford, ge**

**with Melanchthon.**

Luther warns them not to force the brothers to leave their community and
go to that of the city. They should also be left in their home, property
and administration, and not be deprived of their parish rights, which
would make them guilty of interfering with a foreign authority.

From the original in the Leipzig Supplement, p. 69, No. 117; in Walch,
vol. XXI, 340; in the Innocent News 1726, p. 893; in *Corp. Ref., vol.*
II, 580; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 358; and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 54, p. 291.

1\) Walch has as superscription: \"To the nine men or monastery lords of
Herford\", and gives to *Ad Novemviros,* which is found with him above
the inscription, the note: *Hi qui pauperum diaconi etiam salutabantur,
vulgo quoque* Kloster-Herren *vocabantur, occasione inde arrepta,
quoniam ipsis potestas erat facta, inquirendi in bona coenobiorum
eademque conscribendi*. \[These, who also had the title
\"Armenpfleger,\" were commonly called \"Klosterherren,\" in that mail
had taken the occasion (to call them so) from the fact that they had
been granted (by the council?) the power of

> To the honorable, wise nine men at the forefront.

Honorable, wise, favorable friends! We have received your writings and
have diligently read and considered them; we have also heard your
envoys, who have indicated at length the reasons for which you have
considered that they should not hold their own communion; they have also
indicated that it is not in the minds of the preachers and the city to
act so that they should leave their dwelling and *habitum.* Now, if you
could arrange the matter in a friendly manner, without coercion,
harassment or force, so that they would also want to go to your and the
entire city\'s *communion,* it would be fine and well done, and would
set an example for many others. As we have written to them, so far,
however, that you also encumber them in their dwelling, goods and
*administration, and* you have no right to err them; but where the
*friars* want to keep their own *communion,* and by friendly action do
not go to your *communion,* our concern is that you should not force or
compel them in any way to leave their *communion,* because they do not
keep it contrary to the Gospel. For it is public that they have parish
rights, as there are often many parishes in a city; nor does it follow
that every citizen should therefore set up a parish in his house, for no
one is permitted to do so; besides, there is a great difference between
a common and a public assembly, and between a household; for what a
citizen does in his house is called acting secretly. Further, know ye,
as the understanding

to inspect the goods of the monasteries and to write them down\]. De
Wette has as a caption: \"To the monastery lords of Herford\" and notes:
\"They had the administration of the monastery estates. Bretschneider
has as a superscription: *Hervordensibus* and to the \"nine men\" the
note: *Praefectis Monasterii* \[the officials of the monastery\]. These
headings and explanations are more or less inaccurate; the monastery or
abbey of Herford, although located in the city itself, was an imperial
dominion under the government of the abbess, who had a seat and a vote
in the imperial diets. The monastery of the Brothers of the Common Life
was also subject to her jurisdiction, and the city of Herford had no
authority over them, as can be seen from this and other letters.

2\) The envoys were M. Rudolf Möller, Rector of the school in Herford,
and Heinrich Potgeter (Burkhardt).

**1742** Letters from 1532. no. 1889. 1890. 1891. **1743**

We urge you not to reach into other people\'s heads, but since they are
not your subjects, you are not to force or coerce them. This is our
advice and request that you understand it most kindly from us; we also
ask that you consider that time itself will find advice. They are honest
old people, who should be spared, and as the wise, do not allow anyone
to do wrong to them, for God also has people among them, whom he takes
care of. We are willing to serve you kindly. Martin Luther.

Philip.

**No. 185 0.**

(Wittenberg.) April 22, 1532.

**To Gerhard Wilskamp and his confreres at Herford.**

Luther sends a copy of the previous letter, and essentially repeats what
was written there.

The original is in the royal library iy Berlin, whose variants
Burkhardt, p. 204, communicates. Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 185. 4.
printed in Innocent News 1726, p. 891; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 201; in
Schütze, vol. II, p. 262; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 359 f. and in *Corp.
Ref.,* vol. II, 581.

> To the highly admired men, Mr. Gerhard von Lauten, the father of the
> House of Brothers, and his comrades at Herford, his friends

Hail! Men of high esteem! We send you a copy of the letter we wrote to
the nine men (*Novembiros*), in which we absolutely admonish them from
violent attacks; we do not concede them any right over your goods or
bodies or order. We have also clearly indicated that you can maintain a
parish of your own, having both the doctrine of the Gospel and customs
consistent with the Gospel. Therefore, according to our advice or
opinion, no one will force you to change anything in your order; but
still we have added that we would write \[to you\] because of the
community. For example, it would be useful for you to use the fellowship
of the rest of the church, and if you did so, the whole church would
seem to be in harmony.

The matter seems to be settled. Perhaps you would also attract many
citizens, who are still averse to the gospel, to the gospel by your
example. Nor do we want you to change your clothes or leave your present
way of life. Therefore, you will have to judge whether you want to
follow the citizens in this matter. For we by no means think that you
should be forced, and we have clearly approved of your customs, as far
as we are able to judge from your booklet 1). Therefore, if you prefer
to keep your parish, we do not disapprove. About the clothing and the
possessions of the monastery, about your entire administration, we make
this statement: These things are entirely in your hands. For the city
has no dominion over you, and we will never be the instigators for
anyone to take possession of foreign things. But if, moreover, your
citizens should do anything in this matter, we ask that you answer in a
gentle manner. Be well. On the day after Jubilate Sunday \[April 22\]
1532.

Two gold florins, which you gave to the messenger as a gift for us, we
have returned to the messenger, so that he may deliver them to you
again. For we were not at liberty to accept them because of the talk of
ungodly people, but we did not despise your goodwill toward us. But we
did not want to give slanderers an opportunity to revile. Again,
farewell.

**No. 1891 .**

Wittenberg. April 22, 1532.

**To the abbess at Herford.**

Luther indicates to the abbess that he has written to the brothers that
the city should not interfere with foreign authority or use force.

The original is at the royal library in Berlin. Printed in the Altenburg
edition, vol. V, p. 1280; in the Leipzig, vol. XXII, p. 562; in Walch,
vol. XXI, 345 f.; in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 361; in the *Corp. Ref.,
vol.* II, 582 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 292 f. The
original is written by Melanchthon, but signed by Luther.

1\) This is the apologia that the brothers wrote and sent to Wittenberg
for censorship (De Wette).

**1744**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1891 to 1894.

**1745**

> To the reverend, noble and well-born Domina, Anna von Lymborch,
> Abbatess of the noble Abbey of Hervörden, our gracious Domina.

Grace and peace through our Lord Jesus Christ. Reverend, gracious
Domina! We have sent our concern to the worthy lords, the *Fratribus* of
Hervörden, in which we have written and advised with the utmost
diligence that the city should not encroach upon foreign sovereignty or
exercise violence. In addition, we have written that the *Fratres* may
have and keep their own parish; as you will hear from our writings
everywhere. However, we hereby ask that Your Lordship, as the authority
that is inclined to promote God\'s praise and honor, help to bring peace
on both sides. We are always willing to serve God. Datum Wittenberg
*postridie Dominicae Jubilate* \[April 22\] Anno 1532.

E. G. williger

> Martinus Luther.

**No. 1892 .**

(Wittenberg.) April 22, 1532.

**To N. Zink at Nuremberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2046. - The date there should read:
\"April 22, 1532\".

**No. 1893 .**

(Wittenberg.) April 30, 1532.

**To Margrave Joachim of Brandenburg.**

In response to Prince Joachim\'s inquiry about partaking of the Lord\'s
Supper, Luther answers that if one is convinced that both forms are
instituted by God, they must also be partaken of.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p. 1280; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XXII, p. 562; in Walch, vol. XXI, 344; in De Wette, vol.
IV, p. 363 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 295.

> To the illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Joachim, Margrave of
> Brandenburg, of Stettin, of Pomerania, of the Cassuben and Wenden
> Dukes, Burgrave of Nuremberg, and Prince of Rügen, my gracious lord.

Peace and mercy in Christ. Sublime, highborn prince, gracious lord! I
have received E. F. G.\'s credence through the carionem; thereupon I
have again indicated to him.

E. F. G. my discretion to report. But for the sake of the Sacrament in
one form 2c. I told him that if Father G. is conscience-minded about it
and certain that it is God\'s commandment and order, it is not
appropriate nor will he suffer that one would use one form of the
Sacrament to knowingly do so against God\'s commandment.

For it is just as much against God to knowingly take a form contrary to
his order as it is against him to knowingly rob, murder, or commit other
sins, as the author himself may well consider. So it is better to
abstain from the Sacrament altogether, and (where it cannot be
otherwise) to pretend to be clumsy, ill or otherwise infirm, than to do
contrary to conscience. Hereby commanded by God, Amen. Tuesday after
Georgii \[April 30\] Anno 1532.

E. F. G. williger

Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 189 4.**

Wittenberg. April 30, 1532.

**To the City Council of Soest.**

Luther suggests to the council some men suitable for the position of
superintendent.

The original, not written by Luther but signed by him, is in the Soest
City Archives. Printed in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 364 and in the Erlangen
edition, vol. 54, p. 296.

Grace of God and peace through our Lord Jesus Christ. Honorable,
respectable, wise, favorable friends! Since my most gracious lord, the
Elector of Saxony, has sent your writing to me, and has ordered that a
learned and pious man be appointed to you as superintendent, it is my
advice that you request one of the prelates at Bremen, Jacobum
Prepositum, or Johannen Zelst, who, as I have heard, desire to leave
Bremen; they are certainly moral and learned men, and have had to suffer
much in their administration. I have also spoken to one here who wants
to come to you, named Johannes de Brune of Ghent, whom I also consider
capable of this office. But since he does not want to accept this
difficult office for a number of reasons, my concern is that you first
ask the prelate for his permission.

**1746** Letters from the year 1532. no. 1894 to 1899. **1747**

dicants one from Bremen. But if none of them will come to you, and you
seek me out again, I will deal with the said Johanne de Brune, so that
he will come to you. I also ask and admonish you, as those who desire
and honor the holy gospel, to be careful that impure and seditious
teachings (Lahr) against the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
against baptism 2c. do not creep in among you. I have also written to
the aforementioned preachers in Bremen, if perhaps you would like to
request one,^1)^ that they will let themselves be heard with a good
answer. Dat. Wittenberg, on the evening of Philippi and Jacobi \[April
30\] anno 1532. *Doctor Martin Luther*

> *manu propria.*

**No. 1895 .**

(Wittenberg.) Perhaps in April 1532.

**Concerns of spiritual goods.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1829, no. 1204.

**No. 1 896.**

(Wittenberg.) Early May 1532.

**Concerns about the Act of Peace at Schweinfurt.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVI, 1826, No. 1203. - There, instead of:
\"Nuremberg\", which we have placed after Walch, \"Schweinfurt\" is to
be read in the heading, because the next following concern refers to
this.

**No. 1 897.**

(Wittenberg.) May 1532.

**Concerns about the peace treaty at Schweinfurt, together with
Bugenhagen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1819, no. 1201.

**No. 189 8.**

Wittenberg. May 20, 1532.

**To Spalatin.**

Luther wished him luck for the blessing he had bestowed through his
sermons during the convention at Schweinfurt. Bugenhagen, who wrote the
letter, reports about Lübeck.

1\) De Wette: \"want\".

Printed by *Buddeus*, p. 234 and by De Wette, vol. IV, p.374. German by
Walch, vol. XXI, 1240. The original, written by Bugenhagen and signed by
Luther, is found in *Cod. Seidel. at the* Dresden library.

> To the man and gentleman to be highly honored in Christ, Magister
> Georg Spalatin, the very worthy bishop of the church at Altenburg, his
> lord and beloved brother.

Grace and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ forever
and ever! I wish you happiness, dearest Spalatin, on your happy return
in Christ, and wish with the brothers that you may often go out like
this to invest the money of the Lord in usury. For we have heard that
you have not sown the word of Christ there without fruit; thanks be to
Christ, who gives everything abundantly, and more than we dare hope or
ask. In the meantime, I am taking a vacation, since God so wills it. But
if it again pleases His goodness, He will restore me to health, and
cause me to accomplish what He has given for the salvation of His
Church; this you may also ask. My (*dominus mea*) Lord \[Käthe\] greets
you, and Philip, and I as the third, that is Pomeranus, who wrote this
letter. With my Lübeckers, Christ has directed through my ministry all
that you like to hear about our gospel. May the Lord be with you and
with your wife and with your long desired offspring and with your
household for eternity. From Wittenberg, 1532, on Pentecost Monday \[May
20\]. Yours, Martin Luther.

**No. 1899.**

(Wittenberg.) May 1532.

**Concerns about a future religious peace, jointly with Jonas,
Bugenhagen, Cruciger, and Melanchthon.**

The original is in the Weimar Archives, Reg. H, fol. 65, No. 17.
Handwritten in *Cod. Goth*. 452, p. 209. Printed in *Corp. Ref*, vol.
II, 592 and in De Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 132 f. It is written by
Melanchthon for the Elector, as can be seen from Luther\'s marginal
gloss.

2\) Instead of *per te* at De Wette we read with *Buddeus*: *te.*

**1748**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1899.

**1749**

In the case that one would deal with a decency or external and secular
peace in the German nation, it is to be considered well that one will
look for much *condition* and entanglements to hem in this part,
depending on the Confession, and to prevent the doctrine. Now we cannot
cover all their intrigues. However, it can be assumed from the above
actions that they will seek these three things, namely, that we will not
send preachers to other dominions or promote the doctrine in such places
in any way. This article is against God, for, as Paul says, the gospel
shall not be bound. This is one of the most noble services, to spread
and promote Christian doctrine and right services where one can,
especially with such measures, with preaching and sending preachers,
without forcibly taking precedence. And this does not require any
disputation at all, this article cannot be accepted.

On the other hand, they may seek to prevent anyone from accepting mail
into the covenant. Although making covenants for such Christian help is
divine and right (for every ruler, even without a covenant, owes and is
obligated to help the other faithfully in such a case, as is easily
explained and proven, and 1 John 3:16.^1)^ is written: \"By this love is
known: as Christ gave his life for us, so we also ought to give our
lives for the brethren\"). But we see that so much unfaithfulness is
involved in covenants that we cannot expect much help or comfort from
them. Therefore, each one sees what he owes for himself. A pious
Christian gentleman cannot undertake to help another in such a matter.
This is spoken of his own and private help. This does not concern the
covenants, for he cannot comfort anything from foreign, unfaithful
covenant partners. Therefore, if the others want to take the covenant
and thus forget love and do not help others, a pious and faithful
covenanter cannot force them to do so, and is therefore excused, if he
also tolerates *invitations,* that others are not accepted, for how can
he force the others to provide help?

1\) In the editions: \"John 3.\"

Therefore, we know nothing else about this article, except that in this
case the relatives are diligently reminded that they owe help. But if
they will not help in earnest, what is the point of promising much
comfort, and no protection follows after that. Christ knew well the
unfaithfulness of the world, therefore he said of preaching, and wants
us to command the danger to God. He does not let his church perish, says
nothing about covenants and the loyalty of great kings and princes. 2)
So we may also command our danger to God, but we should nevertheless
admonish the rulers, remind them and point out to them that they are
obliged to protect pious Christians, as the Psalm says: \"Blessed is he
who takes care of the wretched. 3) If people from foreign dominions go
to cities or countries where the holy gospel is preached, the
authorities there are obliged to protect them against unjust violence.

Thirdly, the Chamber Court is not to agree in any way that they should
have the power to process against the present or others, who would
accept the Christian doctrine in the future, because of the doctrine or
other 4) matters concerning the church order with doctrine or goods. For
this is public, that the Court of Appeal is a completely secular court,
and has nothing to judge about doctrine and church appointment.
Moreover, it is public that they are most vehemently opposed to us.

Wherever they want to seek restitution, our concern is that the lords
are obliged to bring the church goods into proper use, to provide their
parishes, schools and hospital properly. They should do this and keep to
it. However, if they want to give it to the pope or otherwise kill it
without benefit, we cannot prevent that. Nevertheless, we want to

2i In this regard, Luther himself noted in the margin (in Latin): \"That
is, he does not promise that they will be faithful as He is, but he
promises that he will stand by them when they have kept the covenants
they have entered into, as he has done in the whole law.\"

3\) Luther\'s marginal note (again in Latin): It is something else to
say, \"Let the kings do it.

The first part is uncertain, of which Philip speaks; the other part is
certain, of which Philip does not speak.

4\) In the editions: \"other\".

**1750**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1899 to 1903.

**1751**

God\'s grace says what is right. That is all we can do.

The Church must experience great unfaithfulness especially the last
time, as Daniel says: \"Many will be treacherous to them.\" God help us!

It is also mentioned that it could happen that one would speak of the
form of a concilii. Although we do not doubt that Pope and King cannot
or will not suffer a free concilium, and therefore will never be able to
compare themselves to any form, it would nevertheless be good for us to
consider this, and we want to think about this matter further and have
it reported to Your Lordship.

First of all, Popes, kings and princes must agree that the judges are
sworn to judge freely according to God\'s Word and their own Christian
conscience, and not according to human statutes and school opinions, nor
to look at official authority or presumed power or custom. It will be
necessary to consider whether to include in God\'s Word the custom of
the first Christian churches in the time of the apostles, or how to
consider this.

Item, one would like to put the articles to speak of it, as namely of
the confession. This would eliminate the need to include the four old
confessions in the oath.

Item, of choice of the persons by both part approval.

> *Martinus Luther D.*
>
> *Justus Jonas D.*
>
> *Johannes Pomeranus D. Caspar Creutziger D.*

*Philip Melanchthon*.

**No. 1900 .**

(Königsberg.) May 31, 1532.

**Johann Apel, Prussian chancellor, to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Apel reports about the good condition of the ecclesiastical conditions
in Prussia, which are only harmed by the Sacramentarians. He praises the
prince, who is perhaps only too good.

From the original at the Hamburg City Library in the Wolff Collection,
I, 53, in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 175.

**No. 1901 .**

Soest. Beginning of June 1532.

**The Council of Soest to Luther.**

(Regest.)

Since the two clergymen in Bremen have turned down the job, the council
asks for Joh. Brune.

The original concept is in the city archives of Soest. A regest of the
same in Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 178.

**No. 1902.**

**To Franz Koler.**

(Fragment.)

Complaint about Duke George. Perhaps only an oral statement.

From the *Cod. Goth*. 402, fol. 374 in Kolde, p. 178.

It is said that a mad dog does not live for more than 9 days, so our
Lord God lets Duke George be mad for 9 years and longer. He is nothing
other than a mad dog. Well, I would like to see this in him before my
end, that he would be up against us, and his citizens would not go with
him against us, so that he would have to see that they care more about
our Lord God than about him. ^1)^ -

**No. 1903 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 13, 1532.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Of Luther\'s and Amsdorf\'s state of health; of the religious peace to
be established at Nuremberg; and of Carlstadt\'s journey to Friesland.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 148, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
263 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 375.

Grace and peace in Christ! That I have not written to you, my dear
Amsdorf,

1\) In *Cod. Goth. it* is noted: This he said to Franz Koler in 1532,
June 8, who, together with other exiles, was ordered by Duke George
either to sell their goods or to stand before the bishop on 3 Sundays,
dressed in white cloths, in church and to recant; and after that they
were to be absolved. They wrote, however, that they would rather let
their goods go than Christ, and would rather plunge the body into a
short lack than the soul into eternal torment.

**1752**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1903. 1904.

**1753**

> My head\'s condition was to blame for this, which is gradually
> improving through your prayers; for I despaired of the natural powers.
> I hear that you too are ill, and I do not like to hear it. May Christ
> also restore you and keep you for a long time.
>
> I do not know what I can hope from the peace that is to be established
> between the Emperor and us at Nuremberg. Our people have written on
> their journey that the Turk, who has been completely dead up to now,
> is advancing against Germany with a terrifying and innumerable army in
> order to attack Ferdinand and Carl at the same time and devour both
> brothers. The pope is in France, and he, together with the king of
> France, denounces the emperor, and they refuse help against the Turk.
> Behold the monstrosities of this time! This is the money that the
> popes have collected for so many years against the Turks through
> indulgences. It is said that the emperor is pressuring the princes for
> the promised troops against the Turks. For this reason, the Diet may
> soon be dissolved and the peace negotiations broken off. It is said
> that Carlstadt has traveled again to Friesland and is looking for a
> hiding place, since he can have no other position in Switzerland than
> to engage in agricultural work; he soon became tired of this
> agricultural work in our country. This is what we have in the way of
> news. May the Lord do what is good in His eyes; I commend you to His
> grace, Amen. June 13

Anno 1532.

Martin Luther.

**No. 190 4.**

Wittenberg. June 17, 1532.

To the City Council of Soest.

After the two preachers in Bremen recommended by Luther to the council
of Soest had refused the appointment, the council wrote again to Luther
in the beginning of January (regest in Kolde\'s *Analecta,* p. 178) and
asked for Johann de Brun, to whom Luther had drawn their attention in
your letter of April 30. Now Luther reports that he had managed to get
him to agree, and recommends him warmly. He warns against the false
teacher Johann Campensis.

From the original in the city archives at Soest in De Wette, vol. IV, p.
376 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 307.

> To the honorable and wise, mayors and councillors of the city of
> Sofft, my kind

stigen friends.

Grace and peace through our Lord Jesus Christ. Honorable, wise,
favorable lords and friends! After you have shown such diligence to
order your churches well and Christianly, I have also gladly served you
in this, to the praise of God, and have had a special joy in the fact
that you take up this Christian cause so seriously; may our Lord Christ
grant grace to this. And at your request, I have acted with Mr. Johanne
de Brun, so that he will come to you and let himself be used, where you
want to command him the office of preacher or superintendent 1). For I
have considered this John to be especially capable for such an office,
because of his honest life and conduct, as well as his doctrine; for he
is well taught and practiced in Christian matters before others, has
also preached and governed churches before, and has fought hard against
unrighteous doctrine and seditious sects, such as Anabaptists and the
like, who blaspheme the Sacrament, revile authority and government; And
from this I hope that your church will be well appointed and provided
for by him with God\'s grace; I also hope that he will help to bring
peace and unity with the utmost diligence, and prevent 2) unchristian
doctrine from breaking in among you, as he himself knows that a preacher
is obligated to do all this; so I have also earnestly admonished him to
do so. But I also asked you to keep him friendly and to care for and
protect him faithfully. For I see that our poor preachers are treated
badly and unkindly in many places; for this reason many more skilled
people flee from the ministry. I want you to know that preachers have a
high and difficult office, which we, to the praise of God and to our own
blessedness, owe to honor, to maintain and to handle. Therefore, let
this pious man, Johannem de Brun, who has offered to come to you, be
faithfully commanded to you.

I also hear that there is one among you, called Campensis, who is
causing a lot of trouble. Now, I am told that the same one has

1\) \"Snperattendentur\" put by us instead of: \"Superattendent\".

2\) \"not\" put by us instead of: \"never\". In the original probably
\"nit\" will be found.

**1754**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1904 to 1908.

**1755**

Campensis at Brunswig has been evil in doctrine and life: therefore be
warned, and prevent that the said Campensis does not cause sectarianism
or sedition in your city. May God graciously preserve you and grant you
His grace and peace. Dat. Witeberg, Monday after *Viti* \[June 17\] anno
1532.

> *Doctor Martinus Luther.*

**No. 190 5.**

(Wittenberg.) June 24, 1532.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Luther recommends a preacher appointed to Magdeburg. From the Turkish
War; from the Nuremberg negotiations; from Eck\'s expulsion from
Bavaria.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 151, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
264 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 377.

Grace and peace! I commend to you, best Amsdorf, Mr. Lucas, appointed
pastor of your Knights of St. John. I have instructed him that in any
matter, if counsel should be needed, he will rely on your guidance and
reputation. Christ be with you, amen.

We seem to have finally become too certain about the arrival of the
Turk. God take care of us! although I fear a strong scourge for our
ingratitude. Apart from that, I know nothing of news, except that ours
are expected back from Nuremberg, completely undone, and after having
spent effort, work, time and money in vain. Fate oppresses the pope and
his kingdom by the angry and unforgiving wrath of God. \"Well, well!\"
their blood be upon their heads, \"we have done enough.\" I believe that
you have heard that D. Eck was expelled from Ingolstadt and its
territory by the princes of Bavaria, and he lost the parish and
everything very suddenly. So they write from Nuremberg. They are in
doubt and assume (*ariolantur*) as the cause that he was favorable to
the Bishop of Passau, the third Duke of Bavaria, Ernst, who desires a
part of the paternal inheritance. Fare well in Christ. Finally, through
the prayers, I am freed from the dizziness and the sickness of the
headache, thanks be to God! Amen. On the day of St. John the Baptist
\[June 24\] 1532.

Your Martin Luther.

> **No. 1906 .**

(Wittenberg.) June 24, 1532.

**To Valentin Hausmann.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1753.

**No. 190 7.**

Torgau. June 28, 1532.

**Churfürst Johann to Luther, Bugenhagen, and Melanchthon.\"**

The Elector sends the news of Duke Jo . hann Friedrich from Nuremberg
about the negotiations with Mainz and Palatinate, and asks for their
opinion.

The original concept is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. H*, fol.
65, No. 17. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 205.

Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear devotees and faithful!
The Reverend Prince, our friendly dear son, Duke John Frederick, has now
written to us from Nuremberg, among other things, about the action there
in matters of faith, as you will find enclosed. We send you herewith
what has been done during the time that our son was in Nuremberg by the
two Electors of Mainz and Palatinate with his beloved and other of our
kinsmen, and it is therefore our gracious request that you immediately
review and consider all of this with diligence and report your concerns
to us, along with the resending of the same lists of many actions, to
this messenger of ours, in which you show us favor. Date Torgau, Friday
after Johannis Baptistä \[June 28\] Anno 1532.

> **No. 190 8.**

(Wittenberg.) (June 29, 1532.) 2)

**Concerns for Elector John of Saxony, jointly with Jonas.**

Ueber die Artikel des Nürnberger Religionsfriedens.

The original is in the Weimarisches Gesammtarchiv, H 64.16. The same has
the inscription on the back:

1\) Burkhardt has this superscription. But Luther and Jonas dismissed
the concern, as can be seen from the following number.

2\) De Wette, who did not know the previous letter, dates it: \"In
Junius\"; the Erlangen edition: \"in Julius\". This concern reached the
hands of the Elector on June 30 (Burkhardt. p. 205, note 2i. Therefore,
the date we set according to Burkhardt cannot be doubtful, since this
expert opinion was sent at the same time as the letters following
Heiden.

1532\. no. 1908. 1909. **1757**

**1756** Letters from the year

\"Bedenken von den entlichen Mitteln.\" According to the original,
reported by De Wette, vol. I V, p. 380 and in the Erlangen edition, vol.
54, p. 310; in both, no further locations are given. However, this
writing is also found in the Eisleben edition, vol. II, p. 311; in the
Altenburg edition, vol. V, p. 1025; in the Leipzig edition, vol. XX, p.
375; in Walch, vol. XXI, 175- and in the Erlangen edition (as a
duplicate, where, according to Walch, the locations are printed), vol.
65, p. 222.

We have diligently read and considered all the writings sent to us
against one another, and especially the final remedies and the counter
writings. As much as we can understand from it, after we have also
previously examined the Schweinford Act, we know of no article to
dispute except the third, which states: \"that Saxony and its fellow
citizens and the other states of the empire shall not be a party to the
other subjects\" 2c. For if this article is to be understood in such a
way that an ecclesiastical person or other person who goes to a place of
this part without the permission of their sovereignty is not to be
accepted and protected, it would be especially burdensome for the poor
people who come to us from foreign dominions; in addition, it would be
very dangerous for the sovereignty of this part. However, if the Emperor
is serious about making peace, we take care that the measure in this
article is easily maintained, as it is set by our part of Schweinfurt.

From the first article, from these words: \"and others, as will happen
in the future\" 2c. - we have previously indicated our intention, 1)
that these words are not to be disputed, or that peace is to be rejected
for this reason, if this annex is not granted; we also do not yet know
how to change our opinion. For how can we force the emperor to secure
his people to our liking? We cannot force him to secure us, but it is a
mercy from the sovereign.

Item, it is certain that we will not obtain this attachment. For how
could it be hoped that Duke George would suffer, if Leipzig accepted our
teaching, that he would have to secure it?

Knowing then that \[it\] is a vain thing, and hinders peace and much
good, and that we are not guilty of contending: we know not how to
advise otherwise, but that peace may be kept on account of this article.

1\) St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1826.

do not want to reject. And whether some may have written or advised
differently, as we have heard, we let them answer for their opinion. It
may also be that some people do not have the breath for peace.

The other pieces, as of the word Zwinglisch, of the Concilio 2c. - are
*pugnae verborum*, as any understanding person can well accept.

Item, which is to be held against the Zwinglian outside of the article
of the sacrament, we mean, that has its measure: they are secured, if
they hold and accept our confession in this.

Item, from the *Jurisdictio* we see completely for a Cavillation, that
against it is indicated, so the *Jurisdictio* should stand as now and.
Because we are now and for this reason challenged, it follows that we
would henceforth also be challenged for this reason 2c.: this is a
sophistry. For in the means it is clearly expressed that the litigation
at the covenant and Rotweil 2c. should have been resolved on that
account.

Preaching in the camp is not as difficult as it seems. If the text of
the Gospel is preached, then it will not go off exactly; one will be
allowed to say a saying of Paul and an explanation from Scripture, which
is not inappropriate to the text of the Gospel according to Christian
understanding.

In sum, as much as we understand, the finite means are well to suffer
and accept, where the point of acceptance of strangers 2c. would be
somewhat declared; as we then hold that the same point has not great
*disputatio.* We may nevertheless also consider what kind of driving is
involved, if peace is offered to us, and we do not want to accept it. We
just see to it that we do not tempt God, also it is easy to assume that
something else is behind it. For the *Cavillationes* are so sought after
that one can easily notice that other things are meant.

> Martinus Luther, D. Justus Jonas.

**No. 1909 .**

Wittenberg. June 29, 1532.

**To the Elector John of Saxony.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1812, no. I199d.

**1758** Letters from the year 153.2. no. 1910. 1911. **1759**

**No. 19 10.**

Wittenberg. June 29, 1532.

**To the Duke Johann Friedrich of Saxony.**

On the Nuremberg Peace Negotiations.

The original is in the Weimar Archives, *Reg. H*, p. 66. Printed in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 384 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 315.

> To the most illustrious prince and lord, Lord John Frederick, Duke of
> Saxony, Landgrave in Thuringia and Margrave of Meissen, my gracious

Mr.

G. and F. in Christo, and my poor prayer. Sublime, highborn prince,
gracious lord! I have seen all the trades, gn. I have seen them all, and
I am led to believe (as the cavillations in several places indicate)
that there are those who are not in earnest for peace. Although I now
know, as I have also heard verbally from E. F. G., that E. F. G. have
all the seriousness and diligence for peace without this, I still ask,
for the sake of abundance and loyal concern, that E. F. G. will not be
moved by such pointed punctilians 1) but will continue as they have
begun; for God greets us and it is time for us to thank Him, as the
Scripture of St. Paul \[2 Cor. 6, 2\] says: \"Do not accept the time of
grace and the day of salvation in vain. I fear that if we let such an
occasion go to establish peace, it will never again seem so good to us.
For this is what the saying says: the *occasio* is full of hair in the
front of the head, but bald in the back, and stands on a ball 2c.; as
the papists have well experienced, since they did not want to give way
at Augsburg. Christ, our Lord and Savior, strengthen E. F. G. with His
Spirit and grace, Amen. At Wittenberg, on St. Peter\'s and Paul\'s Day
\[June 29\] 1532.

E. F. G.

subservient

M. L.

1\) *Cavillatores*. In the original: \"Punklein setzer\". De Wette,
because he did not understand it, changed \"setzer\" to \"sogar\", which
the Erlanger reprinted.

**No. 1911.**

(Wittenberg.) 1. July 1532.

**To the preachers at Erfurt, Aegidius, Andreas and Petrus.**

Luther warns against Georg Wicel. (Compare the letter of 18 October 1531
to Justus Menius.)

Handwritten in Aurifaber, Vol. Ill, p. 157. Printed in Schütze, Vol. II,
p. 266 and in De Wette, Vol. IV, p. 385.

> To the highly venerable men and gentlemen, Aegidius, Andrew and Peter,
> 2) the faithful servants of the Word of God at Erfurt, his brothers in
> the Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ! A certain rumor has come to us, worthy men,
that Georg Wicel (*Wiselium*) is applying for a position there in
Erfurt, 3) or at least is looking for a place to pour out his poison,
which he had to consume in himself while he was with us. It is an old,
quite satanic hatred against us, by whose service he himself received
life, and in our bosom this serpent was nourished, until, having
deceived the prince with his lies, he went away to spread the slobber of
his hatred, which had long been gathered, elsewhere against us. Perhaps
also our Lang, to whom I wrote before about him, has indicated something
to you; certainly Jonas,^4)^ as I believe, has painted this monster for
you. Believe these and me. I write this to you as faithful servants of
Christ, whether you might be able to persuade your authorities and all
good people not to allow this pernicious poisonous snake (*viperae*).
Believe me, if you have ever believed that Luther taught something true
about Christ, that he is an apostle of Satan, who, as an obstetrician,
lets us see that Campanus, 5) and more un-

2\) Aegidius is Mechler; Peter is Bamberger.

3\) He sought the Hebrew professorship, which he hoped to obtain so
surely that he already wrote the inaugural address, which he later
published in Leipzig in 1534. (De Wette.)

4\) Aurifaber reads: *Jovem*; De Wette offers: *Jenam*. According to
Seidemann, we have assumed *Jonam in* De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 494, note 3,
and Burkhardt, p. 206.

5\) De Wette has here as text: *qui nobis cras Campanum Mauro
obstetricante ostendet.* In contrast, *Wideburg,* p. XIV, no. XII reads:
*qui nobis Campanum illum obstetricans ostendit*. We have adopted the
latter reading. (Cf. De Wette: Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 494, note 3.) See
also no. 1525.

**1760**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 19II to 1914.

He is glowing with the desire to give birth to the devil and is ready to
do so. For he is inflamed with the desire for vengeance, because we have
not approved of his devils and devilesses. Receive this as from one who
faithfully warns, and know that henceforth it will be your fault if this
beast ignites a kind of conflagration in you while you are tardy or
negligent. Let Christ kindle and guide your spirit to his glory and to
the shame of Satan, as he has done and is doing to you. To Him alone be
the glory, amen. On the first day of July, Anno 1532 . Martin Luther.

**No. 1912.**

Nuremberg. 16.0 July 1532.

**The Nuremberg Council and the Councils of Margrave George to Luther,
Jonas, Melanchthon, and Bugenhagen.**

(Regest.)

They send the agreed draft of a church order together with the proposed
amendments by Brenz with the request for review.

From the letterbook of the Nuremberg council in the district archive at
Nuremberg printed by Kolde, *Analecta,* p. 179.

**No. 1913 .**

(Wittenberg.) July 27, 1532.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

About a dispute of the preacher Simon Hafritz with the Magdeburgers.
About a complaint about Amsdorf and Fritzhans.

Ans Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 152, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
267 and in De Wette, vol. I V, p. 386.

Mercy and peace! I have seen the letter of Hafritz, my dear Amsdorf, and
what shall I say? he breathes vengeance against you Magdeburgers. I have
given the man the advice, since he would be called as a preacher, and
danger there would be whose the administration of the sacrament, he
should for the time being refrain from it and let the pastor after his
own fashion.

1\) This day of the month, which is missing in the original concept,
results from a letter of Spengler to Veit Dietrich of this date, in
which he asks him to help that the visitation order sent here \"be
completed as soon as possible\".

**1761**

He let him administer the same, but he himself was content with all the
teaching. This advice, which was necessary for his person (*privato*) in
the papist community, he turns into a right and a public law. Of course,
I have also taught that parishes should not be mixed together, and
people should not move from one parish to another, if everything is the
same. For what can be more righteous? But I did not approve of it, if in
one parish the sacrament is denied, not to desire it in a foreign one or
not to pass it. I will write to this fury at another time, for now be
satisfied with this little. I am too overwhelmed just by writing full of
letters.

Behold, there is another complaint about you and Fritzhans, that you
have put a certain Bartscherer under the spell. I don\'t want to agree
with either 2) part. I beg you, answer what the matter is. He purifies
himself extraordinarily and complains that he, who asks for forgiveness
and promises everything, is denied mercy. If it is possible, overcome
evil with good through your patience, so that peace may be preserved,
lest a conflagration arise from a spark in this Babylon. Fare well in
Christ. I think the best of you, that is certain. I have written to M.
Lucas that he may be the mediator. May the grace of God be with you. On
the Saturday after Magdalene \[July 27\] 1532.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 191 4.**

Wittenberg. August 1, 1532.

**To the margravial governors and councillors, mayor and council of
Nuremberg, together with the theologians from outside.**

Concerns about the church order to be established in Ansbach and
Nuremberg.

From the Ansbach Archives in Reinhard\'s Beiträgen, vol. I, p. 150; in
De Wette, vol. IV. p. 387 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 316.

2\) Instead of *utri* we have assumed *neutri* and deleted the question
mark at the end of the sentence.

**1762** Letters from the year 1532. no. 1914. **1763**

> To the noble, honorable and strict, honorable and wise margravial
> governors and councilors, mayors and council of the city of Nuremberg,
> our favorable lords and friends.

Grace and peace of God in Christ. Noble, honorable, strict, honorable
and wise, especially favorable lords and friends! We have sent over the
church order and the order of the visitation, which is to be unanimously
and uniformly adopted and established in the lands and principality of
the noble, highborn prince and lord, Mr. George, Margrave of
Brandenburg, and also in your lordship and territories of Nuremberg, In
order to avoid inequality in doctrine and also in some external
ceremonies, we have diligently read them everywhere and, as far as
possible at present, have found that they do not, in sum, contradict the
divine word and agree with our order of visitation; we are therefore
pleased with them. However, in some articles, which you have also partly
mentioned, such as the ban, how it is to be used and carried out, and
some other things, you will hear our reservations in the enclosed
writings. You will know how to consider and consider these things in a
Christian way, according to opportunity and necessity, so that the pure
doctrine and sermon are preserved and Christian ceremonies can still be
performed without abuse, for the sake of unity and good order. For
although the course of time is so swift everywhere now, that the church
ordinances cannot be drawn up and ordered so quickly everywhere
according to necessity, nevertheless, in order to preserve pure
doctrine, Christian outward discipline and conduct, and to prevent a
great deal of incorrectness, one must improve on them daily, until the
Almighty grants more peace and unity in both church and world regimes.
And with what we can serve you in such Christian works and the like, we
want to do this to the best of our ability. Date Witteberg, *prima
Augusti anno* 1532.

> D. Martinus Luther. Justus Jonas.
>
> Joannes Bugenhagius Pomeranus. Philippus Melanchthon.

[Vöm Bann]{.underline}.

\(1\) We have erected no other ban at this time, except that those who
practice public vices and do not abstain from them shall not be admitted
to the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ; and this can be
maintained by the fact that no one shall pass the holy sacrament among
us unless he has first been interrogated by a priest or deacon. Nor can
we see how another ban should be erected at this time, for there are
many things that require *cognizance* beforehand. Now we cannot see how
the *cognitio is to* be ordered and arranged at this time; so the
secular authorities do not want to have anything to do with this
*cognitio.* Therefore, let it remain that those who lie and remain in
public vices are not given the holy sacrament. And although the world is
now so raw and wild that it does not hurry to the sacraments and
churches, so that this may not be considered a punishment, if someone
excommunicates himself, let it go, if the worldly authorities allow
public vices. But nevertheless, the preachers should punish such pagan
behavior and life in all seriousness in their sermons by telling of
divine urging,^1)^ and thereby admonish the *potostates* to ward off
such pagan behavior. .

If the discipline were to be established again with the preceding
interrogation before the *cognitio*, as would be very useful and good,
then one could easily come to establish a discipline and punishment, to
keep the parents to drive their child and household to the sacrament and
churches, to prevent the young people from falling into such pagan
contempt of the sacraments and all divine things.

If a public ban should be imposed, the secular authorities must
nevertheless keep an order with the avoidance of the banished person;
otherwise, the public ban should be a serious example: this would give
birth to much injustice at this time, especially in large cities and
regencies. But this ban of ours, in which the sacrament is privately
forbidden, misleads the

1\) In the editions: \"Wedding ceremony\".

**1764** Letters from the year

. No. 1914. 1915. **1765**

A Christian may nevertheless deal with such an exile as a pagan, and
have other civil fellowship, but that he show himself against him and
others, that he does not approve, nor let him like the ungodly and
criminal doctrine or life of the exile.

*De sicca missa.*

\(2\) Concerning the Mass, which is to be celebrated without the
Sacrament, we very well accept Brentii\'s objection, and also hold that
this spectacle should not be performed with the *sicca missa.* For what
else would this be but a public strong confirmation of the papal private
masses, by which the people would be stimulated to keep much more of the
papal private mass and to run to it, than before that time. For if
people were accustomed to keep something of this *sicca missa*, they
would hold the private papal mass much higher and more sacred, since it
is publicly known that the private papal mass is an abomination and
unrighteous worship.

3 We mean that the Sacrament is to be kept in the *Ciborio,* and that
while it is still the way 1) to keep and lock it, it is to be abolished;
for *sacramentum et verdum* should be with each other. Thus it is known
that this sacrament is instituted for the use, and not for the purpose
of arranging a special service with the piece of the sacrament outside
of the use and the word.

In the 57th leaf, about secular authorities who abuse their office, it
says: whoever keeps himself in power with his authority, so that he must
be feared if he does right, is not a ruler in the sight of God 2c. This
*paragraph* we mean that it would be better to omit it, to avoid trouble
and burdensome *disputatio.* For even though the Holy Scriptures and
secular law teach how one should behave against unjust potestat, mala
*potestas* nevertheless remains *potestas*, as every reasonable person
knows; for if *mala potestas* should not be *potestas* before God, then
subjects would be exempt from all duty 2c. And even if one wants to draw
these words with a clasp and interpretation to a reasonable meaning,
then it is still

1\) \"Weife\" set by us instead of: \"Weih\'\" in De Wette and \"Weih\"
in the Erlanger.

It is better to avoid such *disputation by* omitting this *paragraph,*
which is not necessary here.

On the 60th leaf the saying *Actorum* 13 \[v. 38\] is interpreted:
Christ has given up the law in the parts that do not justify. These
words thus read, as if a piece of the law, which piece makes just, as
also our opponent teaches that we are just *propter moralia opera*.
Since we now teach, and the truth is, that we certainly please God, and
it is by mercy alone, not by reason of our works or virtues, that they
are called what they will, if we trust in such mercy as promised in
Christ, we consider that the same *paragraphus is* also to be omitted.

Paul also speaks *universally* in Hebrew, that everything in the Law
could not make us righteous; there are also *moralia* included; why
would one want to make a *particularem* out of it?

This order of visitation also seems as if it were not set by one, not
even at one time, and is often corrected, and some pieces are often
repeated, as of the confession. If it were left to someone other than
Mr. Osiander, he might bring it into a different order 2c.

Doctor Martinus Luther.

Justus Jonas, D.

> Joannes Bugenhagius Pomeranus. Philippus Melanchthon.

**No. 1915.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. August 1532.

**To Margrave Joachim of Brandenburg.**

Luther wishes the prince luck in his campaign against the Turks and, at
his request, gives him good lessons.

Printed in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p. 1280; in the Leipzig
edition, vol. XXII, p. 562; in Walch, vol. XXI, 348 f; in De Wette, vol.
IV, p. 391 (after a simultaneous copy with the handwritten corrections
of the Ansbach chancellor, Georg Vogler) and in the Erlangen edition,
vol. 54, p. 320.

Grace and peace in Christ, our Lord and Savior, Amen! We have received
E. F. G.\'s writing, and heard, most noble, highborn prince, most
gracious lord, how E. F. G. personally, as a centurion

**1766** Letters from the year 1532. - No\] 1915. **1767**

of the Saxon district against the troublesome tyrant, the Turk, and wish
to write E. F. G. our prayer and Christian report. F. G. to write our
prayer and Christian report.

We have heartily listened to E. F. G.\'s Christian heart and nobility in
such a matter; we also do not want to let E. F. G. keep company with our
*Pater noster* as best we can. For we owe it to ourselves to confess
that, since we cannot nor should not do so in body, we should do so in
spirit, with our earnest prayer, to go into the field with our dear
Emperor Carola and his followers, and to help fight under his ensign
against Satan and his members. May God the Lord grant that now is the
time for Michael, the prince of God\'s people, to arise, as Daniel
prophesies on the 12th, Amen. I also wish above all things, and beseech
God through Jesus Christ Almighty, that He first grant to the pious
Emperor and to all princes, and to all who are now to fight against the
Turk, a joyful heart that relies comfortingly on His help, and
graciously guard them that they may not, like the Turk, rely on their
power and strength, for such reliance would be harmful; but that they
may sing with David: \"I will not rely on my sword\"; and again, \"Lord,
you are the one who gives victory to kings\"; and again, \"They rely on
horses and chariots, but we remember the name of the Lord our God,\" and
many other sayings in the Psalter. Thus David, when he smote Goliath,
said, \"Thou comest to me in defiance of thy sword and spear, but I come
against thee in the name of the LORD,\" 1 Sam. 17:45. Thus it is said
that the Turkish emperor in the exodus swore upon his sword. So it is
said that the Turkish emperor in the Auszuge swore on his sword, which
is his god. Now help Christ that such an idol may become a mockery for
the sake of such outrageous hope and presumption, amen.

Secondly, I ask that our people not rely on the fact that the Turk is so
completely unjust and God\'s enemy, and that we are innocent and
righteous against the Turk, for such presumption is also pernicious; but
that we fight with fear against God and with faithfulness to His mere
goodness. For we also are unjust before God, have shed much innocent
blood, and have persecuted, despised and disobeyed God\'s word: but that
we

We do not have to look at how righteous or unrighteous the Turk or we
are. For the wicked devil is also God\'s enemy, and does us vile wrong
and violence as those who are innocent against him; yet we must not defy
him with our innocence and presumption of right, but fight against him
with all fear and humility, by God\'s help alone. So did David also,
against Goliath, who was not proud of his right, but fought by the help
of God, saying: \"You have blasphemed the God in whom I trust. So we
must pray that God will not avenge us, after innocence, but will avenge
and sanctify His name on the Turk, the great blasphemer, and in the
meantime graciously forget our sin.

Thirdly, I wish and ask that in such a dispute our people do not seek
honor, glory, land, goods, etc., but only the honor of God and His name,
and the protection and peace of the poor Christians and subjects. For
God alone wants and should have the honor: we, as the unworthy and
sinners, are worthy of shame and dishonor, even death, as F. F. G. knows
all this better than I can write. But because E. F. G. so earnestly
desires a spiritual report, I have given this brief opinion to E. F. G.
for his service, and have no doubt that E. F. G. will also give others
such a report. I do not doubt that others will also imagine such a
thing, so that the dispute may be conducted in such a pure opinion, that
the devil should be too weak for ours with all his angels, and that the
Turk should feel another man, neither of which has happened so far,
since defiance has been opposed to defiance, and both parts have fought
without God, which has always been more harmful to God\'s people than to
the enemies. So now let E. F. G. go in the name of God, and let the same
God send his angel Michael to guide E. F. G., and help you all to
conquer happily, and to come home again with God\'s praise and glory,
amen, amen. Our *Pater noster* shall follow and go along, and (if God
wills) wait there in the field for E. F. G., and let himself be found.
This E. F. G. wants to accept as a gracious favor, given in haste.
Hereby commanded by God, Amen. August 3, 1532.

E. F. G.

> willing
>
> Doctor Martinus Luther.

**1768\>** Letters from 1532. no. 1916. 1917. **17HH**

**No. 1 916**

August 7, 1532.

**To the City Council of Reval.**

(Regest.)

Recommendation of H. Grynau, who was appointed as schoolmaster.

According to the original in the Räthsarchiv at Reval, communicated by
O. Waltz in the Zeitschrift für Kirchengeschichte, II, 135. The above
regest in Kolde, p. 181.

**No. 1917 .**

Torgau. Beginning of August 1532. 1)

**Prince Joham to Luther, Jonas, Melanchthon and Pauli at Wittenberg.**

The Elector orders them, because of the cloudy conditions of the clergy,
to give their concerns in writing, at what time and by which persons the
visitation is to be carried out, but to take D. Brück\'s concerns into
account.

The concept with corrections is found in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv,
*Reg. Ji,* fol. 64 A. 7, 1529. 62. Printed by Burkhardt, p. 206.

By the Grace of God John. Our greeting before. Venerable, reverend, dear
devotees, councilors and faithful! We graciously inform you that for
some time we have received complaints from the pastors who are in our
lands and principalities, and that they still daily request us to inform
them of the hardships they face and the other hardships and shortages
they must endure, namely, that they are despised, injured, beaten and
imprisoned in part, and in part they are not able to cope with what is
prescribed for their entertainment; In some cases they have no provision
at all, in others their parish and other goods are stolen and taken
away, and they are furloughed for no particular reason and without any
prior knowledge, and so on. Thus, against this, it has been indicated
that the priests are criminal in their doctrine and life, as some have
been publicly accused and thus found, to the extent that they often
apply for an allowance and more of their income. And whether we are
always

1\) This letter cannot be placed in the year 1529, to which the older
registry of the Weimar Archives transfers it, because the visitation was
still in progress at that time in August and at that time its completion
was desired by the Elector. It is found in the archive

*Reg. Ji*, fol. 93 a. B 6.4. a letter to D. Brück, dated Aug. 12, which
has quite the same train of thought, so we have assumed the above time
determination according to Burkhardt.

have commanded and still do, to take into due punishment those who have
rebelled against the priests in such a manner with vexations (sic) and
abuses, or have beaten them to injustice and burdened them with
imprisonment or otherwise, likewise, so that they, the priests, may have
their necessary care, and not to take or steal anything from them or
from their parish goods, or, if such happens, to grant and give it to
them again, not to dismiss them without constant causes and prior
knowledge, and to apply other due dispositions as occasion arises: so we
nevertheless find that it wants to be little regarded, nor lived to the
same. Since this causes us no little consternation and also weighs on
our consciences, and we have graciously granted, upon the petition
(offer) made by the appointed committee of the commonwealth, that the
visitation be ordered again, as we are inclined to do without it; so
that our permission may be complied with, so that the pastor may avoid
such and such further complaints as we do not doubt, and otherwise these
things may be passed by God\'s help through proper ways and order, so
that as much as possible, arousal may be prevented 2) and the holy
Gospel may not be reviled by the opponents: Accordingly, it is our
gracious request that you inform us of your concerns, including when, at
what time, and by whom, at your discretion, the visitation is to be
ordered and carried out in each district of our lands, and that you
overlook our previous instruction, which you will undoubtedly still have
with you, whether it is to be changed, reduced or increased in one or
more articles and in what form, and in particular also consider whether,
how and in what form the *uniones* and amalgamation of some parishes,
where this might occur, are to be carried out and should be done, and
also give us this information separately; We then want to show ourselves
to be aware of it, and in all of this do our pleasing opinion. Date at
Torgau.

Note. We also graciously request that in all of this, and on the basis
of the current state of your mind, 3) you also listen to the concerns of
our esteemed councilor and dear faithful, Gregorian Bridges, Doctor, and
further conclude with him. Date uts.

Nota: D. Bridges to write.

2\) In Burkhardt with wrong interpunction: \"ordenung uf das ergernus,
souil muglich verhütet\" 2c.

3\) Burkhardt: \"bedenkenus\", probably a misprint instead of:
\"bedenkenus\".

**1770** Letters from 1532. Ra. 1S18. 1919. 1920. **1771**

**No. 191 8.**

Wittenberg. August 19, 1532.

**To an unnamed person.**

Luther tries to strengthen him in his conviction of the Gospel and
recommends Christoph Strobel to him.

Printed in the Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 479; in the Jena
edition (1566), vol. V, p. 506 b; in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p.
985; in the Leimiger, vol. XXII, p. 559; in Walch, vol. XXI, 347; in De
Wette, vol. IV, p. 394 and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 323.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, dear good friend! He
Christoffel Strobel 1) has shown me how God has blessed you with His
spiritual blessing and graciously called you to the knowledge of His Son
JEsu Christ, and has asked me for this writing to you, so that your
heart may be admonished and strengthened to remain firm in the grace of
Christ that has begun.

Since I have allowed myself to be persuaded that such a writing of mine
should please you, I have gladly done so, and I pray to God, the Father
of all gifts and strength, that He may graciously confirm and strengthen
you in the work He has begun through His Holy Spirit, so that Satan may
not weaken you by any trickery or force, nor make you weary in leaving
God\'s Word and Kingdom.

So you see for yourselves that now is a dangerous time. Many are
deceived by the spirits of the wicked; many also fall away, and become
weary and cold of the grace of God, so that, deceived by Satan with
cunning, they let themselves think that they are full, can now do
everything, and have no need, and thus become lazy and ungrateful, soon
after becoming worse than before.

Therefore it is necessary for us to watch and to be diligent that we
remain in the fervor of faith and increase daily. May you and all of us
be helped by the right and only Helper, our dear Lord Christ, amen.
Command also into your love the good poor Christoffel Strobel, where he
is in dire need. For this is done to Christ himself, Matth. 25. in
Wittenberg, Monday after *Assumpt. Marie* \[Aug. 19\] Anno 1532. D.
Martin Luther.

1\) Christoph Strobel was first at Mutzschen (between Oschatz and
Grimma) in the teaching post, came from there to Freiberg as Duke
Heinrich\'s court preacher and became in 1539 Archidiaconus in Oschatz,
where he died at the beginning of the following year. (De
Wette-Seidemann, vol. VI, p. 630, note 4.)

**No. 1919.**

Wittenberg. August 19, 1532.

**To an unnamed person. ^2)^**

Quite the same content with the previous letter.

In the same locations as the previous letter.

Grace and peace in Christ. Honorable, wise, good friend! He Christoffel
Strobel, along with Mr. Ricolao Hausmann, has shown me how God has not
only blessed you temporally, but, which is much better, has also gifted
you spiritually with love and air for truth and knowledge; which I have
heard with joy, and I pray to God that He will strengthen you in such
grace and keep you until His future. For now, unfortunately, it has
become a perilous time because of the evil spirits and false teachers,
who creep about everywhere, seeking to deceive someone. So Satan himself
does not celebrate with evil poisonous thoughts, by which he wants to
weaken or overthrow our faith; and our reason is blind to itself, and
always resists faith, because it does not respect God\'s word and
kingdom, but rather hates it, so that our cause must exist solely and
exclusively in God\'s power and strength.

Now I must write briefly, because we are distressed about the pious
prince\'s departure from this pitiful valley, as is only right. I hereby
command you grace in Christ, our Lord and Savior, and kindly ask you to
let poor Christoffel Strobel be in your command, where you can be
helpful to him; that Christ, as done to Himself, will certainly receive
this, and I will also thank Him for it, as shown to me. At Wittenberg,
Monday after *Assumpt. Marie* \[Aug. 19\] Anno 1532. D. Martin Luther.

**No. 1920 .**

Wittenberg. August 27, 1532.

**To Martin Lodinger at Gastein.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2220.

2\) De Wette notes: According to the editions, the same one to whom the
previous letter is written; but it is indisputably another one, because
one does not understand how Luther should write the same thing to the
same one on one day; only he was also in contact with Chr. Strobel, and
lived in the same place.

3\) The Elector Johann died on Aug. 16 at Schweinitz; Luther preached
the funeral sermon on Aug. 18,

**1772**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1921. 1922. 1923.

**1773**

**No. 1921.**

Wittenberg. August 31, 1532.

**Bett Dietrich to Justus Menius.**

Dietrich sends a letter from Luther, requesting Menius to continue
working on the writing he has begun against Wieel. News about Luther\'s
work and his state of health.

The original is in *Cod. Seidel Berol*. No. 17. Printed by Kolde, p.
181.

> To Justus Menius, servant of the word in Eisenach, his master and
> brother, to be highly esteemed in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! So that you may realize, my dear Menius, how
gladly I am at your beck and call in every kind of favor, if you only
indicate in what I can do this, I am now sending you the letter of our
father Luther, which you asked me for on the evening on which I led you
together with M. Georg 1) to the inn. Just as I have kept all that I
promised at that time firmly in my memory, so I again wish that you also
continue with the book that was begun against the man Wicel, 2) because
you also promised this at that time. I do not know why Jonas postpones
the publication of his work 3). He seems to me to be thinking a bit too
carefully about the errors of this enthusiastic man. But that does not
prevent your work from being added, so that both the church may see a
richer testimony about his opinion and the harsh mouths of his opponents
may be shut. Wittenberg now brings forth nothing new except the
Summaries, which I hope will go out by next Michaelmas, together with
the sermon of Christ on the mountain, which Cruciger recorded, 4) and
the funeral sermons, which the Doctor delivered here at the Prince\'s
funeral. 5) I have recorded the former, and the

1\) Rörer.

2\) This book has not been published (Kolde).

3\) *Contra tres pagellas Agrie. Phagi. . . Viteb. George Rhaw* 1532.

4\) From this passage, a more precise time determination results for the
publication of the Sermon on the Mount (St. Louis edition, vol. VII, 346
ff.), namely: \"Um Michaelis 1532\", and a correction of Aurifaber\'s
statement in the Eisleben edition, vol. II, p. 145, that these sermons
were copied by Veit Dietrich, Georg Rörer, Anton Lauterbach and Philipp
Fabricius. Veit Dietrich says here: *quem \[sermonem in monte\]
[Crucigerus]{.underline} ex*

*cepit*.

5\) Two sermons on 1 Thess. 4, 13-18. St. Louis edition, vol. XII, 2072.

others, I hope, Cruciger will add. Herewith I bid you farewell, dear
man, and forgive my temerity that I, as the first, have wanted to be
burdensome to your love by my letter. Luther is well together with his
whole family, but he has instructed me to greet your love 6) reverently.
Wittenberg, 1532, August 31.

> Most devoted to your love (*T. h. dd.*) Veit Diethrich of Nuremberg.

**No. 1922.**

(Wittenberg.) September 7, 1532.

**To Johann Riedtesel, Electoral Chamberlain.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1724. - The superscription in the
editions reads: \"An einen von Adel\" (\"To one of nobility\"), but is
to be replaced by the above according to the Innocent News 1706, p. 766.
(Burkhardt, p. 208.)

**No. 1923.**

(Wittenberg.) September 10, 1682.

**To the City Council of Kamenz.**

About the filling of a parish position in Kamenz.

Handwritten in *Cod. Jen*. B 24, b, fol. 247. Printed in the Wittenberg
edition (1569), vol. IX, p. 478b; in the Jena edition (1566), vol. V, p.
508; in the Altenburg edition, vol. V, p. 984; in the Leipzig edition,
vol. XXII, p. 560; in Walch, vol. XXI, 352; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 398
and in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 326.

Grace and peace. Respectable, careful, dear lords and friends! I have
received your letter, in which you indicate how, for lack of a preacher,
you have named him Simon Haferitz, who complains about coming to you
without my permission. Now I know well, said Simon H. also knows well,
that I do not intend to be a new priest, to appoint all parishes and
preachers\' chairs, 2c., although I consider it my duty to prove counsel
and help to those who need me. Therefore, this time I do not know how to
advise Simon H. to leave his service in Salza, where the good people
need him; and I do not want to burden my conscience that he should leave
the people in Salza under my name. But if he will do it on his
conscience and dare to do so, I will let it happen.

6\) *h. t. == humanitatem tuam*.

**1774**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1923. 1924.

**1775**

And because you nevertheless need a pre

If Simon H. will not or cannot come, let me know; I hope to find one who
is also pious and learned. Although it is true that there is a great
lack of people who should be something special. That is to blame: one
holds oneself everywhere in such a way that \[it\] probably would be
better to lie. Also, no one sends young people to school, so that our
Lord God may see to it and send workers into His harvest where we are
worthy. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Tuesday after *Nativitatis Mariae*
\[Sept. 10\] Anno 1532. D. Martin Luther.

**No. 19 S4.**

tMittenbera iMaybe some time before

(LUinenverg.) the 14 Sept. 1532.

**To Johann, Georg and Joachick, Princes of Anhalt.**

Luther testifies to them his joy at the Reformation introduced in their
lands.

The original is at Dessau. Printed in Litterarischen Wochenblatt, II,
305; in Schütze, Vol. II, p. 275; in *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 305; in De
Wette, Vol. I V, p. 399 and (after the original) in Lindner,
Mittheilungen, II, No. 1, p. 1.

> To the most illustrious and esteemed princes, Messrs. Johann, Georg
> and Joachim von Anhalt, Counts of Ascanien, Lords of Bernburg,
> brothers who are extremely close in body and spirit, his most gracious
> lords.

\"Grace and peace in Christ! I have heard, most illustrious and worthy
princes, that at last, since the spirit of Christ has so cooperated, in
your lands the ungodly abuses in religion have been abandoned, and the
use of Christian communion has begun happily, although this has not
happened without great danger, as we know, since great princes have
advised the antagonism, even threatening it above. I, at least, who am
nothing, but wish to be Christ\'s, and in general to be partaker of
those who fear him, I joyfully give thanks to God and to the Lord, who
has given such great strength of spirit, and what is more, unanimous
strength to three brethren, namely to such brethren who, placed in a
high place, have had many prayers.

I am not afraid of others, private people, whose faith and constancy, as
it may be with me, have not so many and so great dangers and causes to
fear. But Christ is the well-known weak King, and yet truly and
eternally the almighty King, whose works these are; so he does, lives,
speaks, both in himself and in his members. And when he seems to be
ruined, he rises 1) like the morning star, as he says to Paul: \"My
power is mighty in the weak\"; therefore, when he is weakened, he is all
the stronger. This is his way of living, acting, ruling. \"Nothing will
be different there.\" Although our princes seemed to have been
completely devoured and ruined by the last Diet of Augsburg, they have
been made more alive and liberated by this very fact, so much so that
they have learned that the Emperor\'s mind has also been changed, and
they can see and rejoice that the hopes and efforts of the Roman Pontiff
have become a mockery. Most of all, therefore, most illustrious princes,
he who has begun his work in his hearts 2) will accomplish it; for thus
the beginnings of all things that are God\'s are weak, as the fruits are
insurmountable. The roots of all trees are in the beginning thin
threads, or rather milk, or something coagulated, and yet they bring
forth these beams and trunks, from which the so great, heavy masses of
houses, ships and works are built. Of our own origin it is said in the
Book of Job \[Cap. 10, 10.\] that it is a curdling of milk, and yet from
this curdled milk at last become the mightiest kings on earth, who (as
Paul says) will also be the judges of the angels in that day for which
we wait. Thus the whole created nature begins in a weak way and reaches
the completion in power. In contrast, that which men begin begins in
power. Moab certainly had greater hope than power, as the prophet says;
but Christ has greater power than hope. \"Be of good cheer,\" he says,
\"I have overcome the world.\" And

1\) Instead of *oriatur* will be read *orietur* or oritur.

2\) in *cordibus suis* == in the hearts that are attached to Him.

**1776**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1924. 1925. 1926.

**1777**

again, \"I live, and you also shall live.\" This same Lord keep,
preserve, and strengthen your hearts, not only according to your blood,
but also according to the Spirit most closely united, for His glory and
the salvation of many people, amen. 1532.

E. F. G. most devoted

Martin Luther.

**No. 1925.**

Wittenberg. September 14, 1532.

**To Johann and Joachim, Princes of Anhalt.**

Luther recommends Nicolaus Hausmann to them as a preacher.

From *Sculteti Annal. evang. Decad*. II, p. 373, at

Walch, vol. XXI, 1241; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 400 f. and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 327 and ibiä. Vol. 56, p. 187, according
to the original in the Anhaltisches Gesammtarchiv.

> To the noble, well-born princes and lords, Mr. Johanns and Joachim,
> brothers, princes of Anhalt, counts of Ascanien and lords of Bernburg,
> my gracious lords.

Grace and peace in Christ. Serene, benevolent princes, gracious lords!
Here comes the pious man, Magister Nicolaus Hausmann, to try the
preaching ministry with E. F. G.: I humbly command him to E. F. G.. He
is a faithful man of good heart and morals, who teaches and loves God\'s
word in a fine, quiet and disciplined way. May Christ our Lord bestow
his rich blessing on him, so that he may bear much fruit, amen. And I
have no doubt that E. F. G. will know how to deal with him graciously.
Hiemit GOtt commanded. And what my poor prayer is able to do, may E. F.
G. always be grateful beforehand. Date Wittenberg, *Exaltationis Crusis*
\[Sept. 14\] 1532.

E. F. G. williger

Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 1926.**

(Wittenberg.) September 19, 1532.

**To Andreas Osiander.**

Luther exhorts Osiander, who is weary of Nuremberg, to patience and
perseverance.

From the von Imhoff collection in Nuremberg in Schütze, vol. II, p. 268;
in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 292 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 401.

Grace and peace in Christ! My dear Andrew: *Te ne cede malis, sed contra
auden*

*tior ito* 1) \[Do not give way to evils, stand against them boldly\].
Thus I reply, though ill, to your letter, in which you indicate that you
are tired of this Nineveh, which I too (if God would not have Christ do
the same) look upon with disgust. But the day has twelve hours, and our
eyes cannot see the future. God tempts us in this way. But, even if
everything turns out badly, this condition of people cannot last for
three years. Everything is coming to a head so much that it forces a
change in this state of affairs, either for the worse or for the better.
If for the worse, then we would accomplish nothing by fleeing; if for
the better, we would accomplish everything by staying. I see indeed,
when peace will be, how also learned men will be dear, and, as Isaiah
says Cap. 13, 12: \"dearer than gold\". Preachers are wanted daily, and
they are not available. Even you, if your ninivites do not want to, will
be forced and called to where they do not think, and they will seek the
utmost of your finger in your place and not find it.

*O socii*, *-*

> *\[O\] passi graviora: dabit Deus his quoque finem*.

*Durate, et vosmet rebus serveat secundis* 2) \[O you comrades, - - you
have suffered more severely, God will soon put an end to this as well.
Just wait and save yourselves for happy times\]. \"So it cannot
remain.\" The evil customs will give birth to good laws. \"It is a
transition, said the fox; the bird must molt once, and then it will get
beautiful feathers again.

Take this as written by me in a sincere and faithful spirit, because I
am also very often tormented by your thoughts, and in turn comfort
myself as I comfort you. Greetings to all of us. I did not want to write
more, nor could I, so bad is my head. Christ be with you

1\) *Virg. Aen. lib.*VI, v. 95.

2\) *Virg. Aen. lib*. I, v. 199 and v. 207.

**1778** Letters from the year 1532. no. 1926. 1927. 1928. **1779**

and all yours, my brother in Christ, and pray for me. May I now be alive
or dead, let our preaching ministry be besought thee. Thursday after
Lamberti \[Sept. 19\] 1532.

> Your Martin Luther.

**No. 192 7.**

(Wittenberg.) September 25, 1532.

**To Johann, Prince of Anhalt.**

Intercession for the provost\'s widow at Wörlitz, that the prince may
preserve her inheritance.

From the original at the Brieger Gymnafial-Bibliothek in the theol.
Annalen, July and Aug. 1823, p. 260. In De Wette, vol. IV, p. 402 and in
the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 54, p. 328.

> To the illustrious, well-born Prince and Lord, Lord Johann, Prince of
> Anhalt, Count of Ascanien, Lord of Bernburg, my gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ. Serene Prince, gracious Lord! 1) I am asked
to write for the widow of the provost of Wörlitz, blessed, against E. F.
G. and ask that E. F. G. will graciously help her and preserve what he
has agreed upon and given her before his end, as she has and presents a
letter sealed by the Schoppen of Wörlitz, but is now challenged by his
friends, who intend to drive her away. Because such property, which 2)
at the time of the ecclesiastical law could not have died out to the
friends without special testament, but would have fallen to the Officiis
2c., and 3) he wanted to cover his poor children with it, so my poor
request, E. F. G. wanted to keep the said widow and children with such
left property, also considered that he has finally married them, as he
himself confessed to me, when I was with E. F. G. at Wörlitz, and I gave
him the advice, he should invite a table full of neighbors to the^4)^
children and reveal such marriage. If he has now done so, good; if not,
then according to his confession, such a secret marriage is not to be
condemned, because he has confessed it before me and my companions.

1\) \"This word is missing, whether in the original?\" (De Wette.) 2) So
conjicirt by us instead of the contradictory: \"drive, because it is
good for them that\" 2c.

3\) There is a punctum before \"And\" in the editions.

4\) \"the\" put by us instead of: \"the\".

E. F. G. will know how to graciously stand firm against the poor
orphans. Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. Mid-March after St. Matthew\'s ftö.
Sept.\] 1532.

> E. F. G. williger Martinus Luther, v.

**No. 192 8.**

Wittenberg. September 28, 1532.

**To Frederick, King of Denmark.**

Luther uses himself for the imprisoned king Christiern.

From the original, which is in the Royal Danish Archives, in Leipz.
Suppl., No. 119, p. 70; in Walch, vol. XXI, 353; in the Danish Library,
4th St., p. 154; in Schumachers Gelehrter Männer Briefe alt die Könige
in Dänemark, 2nd Th., p. 257; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 403 and in the
Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 329.

> To the most magnanimous, most noble Prince and Lord, Frederick, King
> of Denmark, Sweden, and Duke of Holstein 2c., my most gracious Lord.

Grace and peace in Christ our Lord, who died for our sins and rose from
the dead for our lives. Most shining, most powerful King, most gracious
Lord! Let us take hold of and see how God is the right and gracious
judge, because Our Lady would have liked to have peace with her cousin,
King Christ 2c., have always liked to be at peace with their cousin,
King Christian, and have always given them a glorious victory; and
although I know that King Christian will recognize this in the best
possible way, and know how to thank God, and will also use this (given)
victory against the cousins of King Christian in a Christian and humble
manner in the fear of God, I am nevertheless moved by the misery, or
rather the mourning of my good Lord King Christian, and also by the
concern that King Christian might be attacked by some people against the
imprisoned King Christian. might be incited by some people against the
captured man and be prevented from God\'s fear: for which reason, with
this humble and (I hope) useless writing, I have taken upon myself to
humbly ask and admonish HM the King to have mercy on their captured
cousin, according to the example of Christ, who also died for us, his
enemies, but we must not die for enemies, but only be merciful to them.
For where E. K. M. Cousin is not to be trusted, but to be treated as an
enemy, we are to be merciful to them.

**1780**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1928 to 1932.

**1781**

E. K. M. would be imprisoned, there is no doubt that K. M. would still
be cousinly towards him: how much more will K. M. do this now, because
he has left everything and (as I hear) has surrendered as a prodigal son
to K. M., as his father. Since this is a great humility, and we still
need mercy before God, K.K.M. will undoubtedly do a noble sacrifice and
glorious service, where she will also show fatherly mercy and fatherly
faithfulness to the poor captive man, and finally, at the deathbed, such
work will be a great comfort to K.K.M., and a special joy in heaven, as
well as a great glory and honor on earth. For it is a great work, done
in great things and great people, great person, that it must shine
gloriously both here on earth as an excellent example to all the world,
and there in heaven for the joy of all saints and angels, also for the
pleasure and delight of the divine majesty. So, my most gracious Lord,
let E. Let this work be a fruit of faith, a glorious sacrifice of
thanksgiving to God, a comfort and refreshment to the prisoner, and a
joy and delight to us all: then, at long last, Christ Himself and all
those who have advised him to do so, will happily give thanks and
confess how deeply sorry Christ Himself would be if they had done
otherwise. May Christ, our Lord and Helper, give His rich Spirit to E.
K. M. in this and in everything to do His divine good pleasure, Amen.
Please accept my presumptuous writing, for this is what God Himself
calls us to do, and to care for one another. At Wittenberg, *Vigilia
Michaelis* \[Sept. 28\] 1532.

Your Royal Majesty willing D.

Martinus Luther.

**No. 1929 .**

(Wittenberg.) 4. October 1532.

**To the people of Leipzig who are oppressed for the sake of the
Gospel.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1932, where the following improvements
should be made: Col. 1932, line 4 has a new paragraph to begin with the
words \"grace and peace\"; line 10 instead of: \"your gracious lord\"
read: \"Duke George\"; line 3 v. u. read: \"because\" instead of:
\"like\"; line 2 v. u. delete: \"because\". Col. 1933, line 8 delete:
\"euch\"; line 4 v. u. delete: \"und\".

**No. 1930 .**

Wittenberg. October 9, 1532.

**To the Counts of Schlick in Jáchymov.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 1686.

**No. 1931.**

**(Wittenberg.) October 17, 1832.**

**To the Elector Johann Friedrich.**

See St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 8 16.

**No. 1932 .**

(Wittenberg.) October 18, 1532.

**To the Elector Johann Friedrich.**

Luther asks for a scholarship for the sons of Hans von Kanitz to
continue their studies.

The original is in the Weimarsche Gesammtarchiv, *Reg. Mm*, fol. 45. 4.
Printed by Burkhardt, p. 209.

Grace and peace in Christ. Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious
Lord! The first Supplication, which I have humbly made to E. C. F. G.,
is the one I made for the Paceum 1) orally at Wittenberg. Now I come
with the other one (because I want to count them, so that I don\'t make
too much). I am now talking about the Christian Supplication, and is to
E. C. F. G. my humble request, after the two boys, Hans von Kanitz\'
sons, 2) blessed, have studied almost well at school in Torgau, and have
turned out well, 3) and their mother can no longer keep them there
because of poverty, and it would always be a pity that such fine boys
should come from the studio, because one is allowed people; so I still
know well that my most gracious lord, blessed 2c., has, at my request,
had a gracious promise made to these boys that they will be graced with
an expectation of a prebend. Accordingly, I ask once again, E. C. F. G.
wanted both of you to praise God.

1\) On this Supplication M. Pacäus received the Diaconate at Leisnig,
but was so badly provided for by this position with his wife and six
small children that Luther again asked the Elector for him on March 9,
1533.

2\) The sons of Hans von Kanitz, Wolf and Ulrich, received by deed,
datirt Weimar, Monday in the Easter holidays 1533, for three years
annually 20 Fl. from a prebend at Altenburg.

3\) We would like to assume: \"and are most excellently well-done\".

**1782** Letters from the year 1532. no. 1932 to 1936. **1783**

and for the good of the country, graciously provide such fine boys with
an expectancy on which it pleases E. C. F. G.. For their father is also
well to blame for and deserves E. C. F. G., and yet all are pious
people, father, mother and children. E. C. F. G. will, as my faith
holds, be graciously found in this. Christ, our Lord, help and
strengthen us to lead to the blessed regiment and then to eternal life,
amen. On the day of St. Luke (Oct. 18) 1532.

E. C. F. G.

> subservient Martinus Luther, D.

**No. 1933.**

(Wittenberg.) Perhaps in October 1532.

**Concerns from sequestration.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVI, 1833, no. 1205.

No. 1934 .

(Wittenberg.) 2. November 1532.

**To Nicolaus von Amsdorf.**

Luther asks him to warn Otto von Pack not to enter Duke George\'s
territory. The first part of the book is about Luther\'s work and his
wife\'s state of health.

From Aurifaber\'s unprinted collection, p. 154, in Schütze, vol. II, p.
269 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 411.

Grace and peace in Christ! Mrs. Pack, my dear Amsdorf, is worried for
her husband Doctor Otto Pack, because there is a rumor in Leipzig that
he has been seen in the duchy of Duke 1) Georg, and she fears that he
might be captured. I comforted the very good woman as much as I could,
suspecting other things 2c. Therefore, she asked me to ask you that, if
you perhaps find him in Magdeburg, you may diligently exhort him to
refrain from traveling, especially in the duchy of Duke George, since
extraordinary reenactments are being prepared against him: this you will
do according to your love.

There is no news. For what is said of captured ships of the Turks,

1\) In the text: *Domini*, probably wrong resolution of \"D.\", instead
of: *Ducis*. ,

would be cheerful news if it were true. I am now completely at work on
the translation of the Sirach. I hope to be freed from this arduous work
(*pistrino*, treadmill) within three weeks. My Käthe is ill with fever
and insomnia, and at the same time close to childbirth. I commend her to
your prayers, also me and all mine. Our Christ be with you, Auren.
November 2, 1532.

Your Martin Luther.

**No 1935.**

(Wittenberg.) 3. November 1532.

**To Laurentius Zoch, Chancellor of Magdeburg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2036.

**No. 1936 .**

(Wittenberg.) November 6, 1532.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann, preacher in Dessau.**

Luther sends him a letter, wishes him luck for his employment in Dessau,
thanks him for a piece of game sent to him, and reports about the
renewed visitation and sequestration.

The original is in Dessau. Handwritten in Aurifaber\'s unprinted
collection, p. 154. Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 270 (from the
Hanische Sammlung at Kiel); by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 204 and by De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 413. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1400.

> To the worthy man in the Lord, M. Nicolaus Hausmann, the faithful
> servant of the Word in Dessau, his superior in Christ.

Grace and peace in Christ! I have had this letter before my eyes for a
long time, dear man, so that it could be sent to you always and at any
hour, since Aurelius always answered that neither he nor M. George had a
certain messenger, until it was so defiled by spilled ink in my absence.
You will forgive me innocent, because I did not remove it from my sight
out of care and in the hope of transmitting it to you\....

By the way, I thank our Lord Christ, who keeps you there unharmed and
with the princes in grace; to whom you have given your life in my name.

**1784**

Letters from the year 1532. no. 1936 to 1941.

**1785**

You want to give thanks, not so much because of the boar given, but
because of the grace and favor towards the word of God and, what is
strange, also towards my humble self, 1) which shines among such great
heroes. You will therefore command me first of all to God, then also to
your very good princes through your petitions.

Justus Jonas, Philippus and Pomeranus and Cruciger will also dine with
me, as you have requested, who are invited to this wild pig to celebrate
the birthday of St. Martin, Martin the son 2) and Martin the father. Oh,
that you were there too!

There is no news, except that the visitation will be renewed by order of
the prince; Justus Jonas is one of the visitators. Furthermore, the
sequestration is proceeding very strictly, and I fear that it may be too
strict. \"Our dear Lord God make it all good, amen. On the 6th day of
November 1532.

> Your Martin Luther, D.

**No. 193 7.**

Wörlitz. November 24, 1532.

**To Nicolaus Hausmann in Dessau.**

Short letter, written during a visit to Wörlitz.

The original is in Dessau. Handwritten by Aurifaber, vol. Ill; p. 155.
Printed by Schütze, vol. II, p. 272; by *Strobel-Ranner, p.* 206 and ber
De Wette, vol. IV, p.414. German by Walch, vol. XXI, 1402.

> To his in Christ exceedingly dear Mr. Nicolaus Hausmann, his brother
> and God\'s faithful servant.

Hail in Christ our Lord! We have found your letter, but not you, which
we had hoped for,^3)^ , my dear householder, therefore we answer by
letter, but briefly, because only, prevented by the conversations, we
are leaving now, so that we cannot write in more detail. The worthy
princes will tell you everything. For they have welcomed us in the most
friendly and delicious way. Other

1\) Walch reads: *utilitatem* instead of: *vilitatem* and translates:
\"against my advantage\".

2\) He was born on November 9, 1531.

3\) Walch: \"but not as desolate as I had hoped\".

at another time. Now we hurriedly board the carriage. Farewell, my
dearest brother in Christ. From Wörlitz, on the Sunday after Elizabeth
\[Nov. 24\] 1532.

Your Martin Luther.

**No. 193 8.**

Wittenberg. November 27, 1532.

**To Jonas von Stockhausen, Captain at Nordhausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1748.

**No. 1939 .**

Wittenberg. November 27, 1532.

**To the wife of Stockhausen.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1752.

**No. 19 40.**

Soest. Towards the end of November 1532.

**The Council of Soest to Luther.**

(Regest.)

They thank Joh. Brune for his appointment as superintendent and wish to
be instructed in the matter of Joh. von Campen, against whose activities
Luther had warned.

Mitgetheilt von Legerlotz in the Monatsschrift für die Geschichte
Rheinlands und Westphalens, II, p. 386. A regest in Kolde, *Analecta,*
p. 182.

**No. 19 41.**

(Wittenberg.) December 6, 1532.

**To Johann von Riedtesel.**

About a matter at court that was annoying for Riedtesel.

Printed in the Eisleben edition, vol. II, p. 315; in the Altenburg, vol.
V, p. 1030; in the Leipzig, vol. XXII, p. 561; in the Innocent News
1706, p.671; in Walch, vol. XXI, 357; in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 418 and
in the Erlangen edition, vol. 54, p. 341 f.

> To the strict and honorable Johann Riedtesel, Elector of Saxony
> Chamberlain and to the new market, my gracious and dear godfather.

Grace and peace in Christ. Dear Lord and Godfather! I have,

4\) The letter has the date: \"*Dat. ut s*.\". According to Legerlotz,
the preceding letter in the Copialbuch was dated after Catharinen \[Nov.
25\]. Kolde puts it \"beginning Dec.\"

**1786** Letters from 1532. no. 1941. 1942. 1943. **1787**

I did not learn anything about your condition after my writing to you,
and you have become so secret to me that I cannot inquire how you are
doing, and yet would like to know. For I always worry that Junker
Neidhard will be dangerous to you, as your last writing indicates, and
that such disloyalty to the world might hurt you. However, I am very
confident that my most gracious Lord will graciously keep Himself
against you and will not do what your false friends might grant or
instigate. Christ our Lord will be with you, and because you now learn
what the world is, you will henceforth be all the more faithful, and
also learn with us Christians that it is better to serve Christ than the
world.

My Käthe and your godfather send you friendly greetings and wish you all
the best. We are all, praise God, quite fresh and healthy. Your
godfather wants to become an active man, he is reaching out and wants to
have his little mind. Give my regards to your dear Ribbe and all yours.
Hiemit GOtt befehlt, Amen. 1532 *the 6th of Lucii* \[6th Dec.\]. ^1)^

E. G. willing to serve

> D. Mart. Luther.

**No. 19 42.**

Wittenberg. December 7, 1532.

**To Laurentius Zoch.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2036.

**No. 19 43.**

(Wittenberg.) December 12, 1532.

**To Eberhard Brisger, pastor in Altenburg.**

Luther consoles him because of his father\'s death and his mother\'s
unkindness.

Handwritten in Cod. Goth. 185. 4. and in Aurifaber, vol. Ill, p. 255.
Printed in Schütze, vol. II, p. 271 and in De Wette, vol. IV, p. 421.

1\) In this time determination we have followed De Wette, who takes the
given date as: \"Friday after Lucius.\" Others take the 8th *Lucii*,
which is the 3rd Dec. Seidemann at De Wette, vol. VI, p. 575, note 1,
conjicirt: *the* 6th *Luciae*, Friday Luciä, the 13th of December.
Burkhardt remarks that the date is quite uncertain, \"despite VI, 575\".

Grace and peace in the Lord! That I write to you less often, my dear
Eberhard, is forced upon me not only by the amount of other things to be
written and their frequency, but also because you are at peace and do
not need my writing. But since you now show me the sorrow of your soul
because of the death of your father and the unkindness of your mother
and the deprivation of your inheritance, you must again compare with Job
the good you have received with the misfortunes that have befallen you.
Nor are you in such a position, nor is it your will, that without Christ
you would rather have the favor of the father and the mother than in and
with Christ the hatred of the mother. You will command those people to
the judgment of God and sing with the Psalm and with Joseph \[Gen. 41,
51. f.\]: The Lord has made me forget my father and my father\'s house
in a foreign land. Then, what 2) do you know with what end your father
has departed, or what God has done to him? Furthermore, your mother
still has twelve hours, and who knows where the gospel will come in a
short time, since the papists are crying out that even the emperor has
become a Lutheran, because he does not want to rage to increase their
godlessness. Even if everything turns out differently, you can still
wish yourself luck that you are snatched like a stick from the fire and
like an earlobe from the jaws of the wolf. Lot had to leave his own wife
in Sodom, and David lost his beloved Absalom; also Christ the synagogue,
and Paul the children of Israel, his brothers 2c. Therefore, you are not
the only one to suffer great evil; others have suffered and are
suffering even worse. It must also come true in some \[Matth. 10, 35.\]:
\"I have come to raise up the Son against the Father.\" And you have
many such things to comfort you. For us the One Christ is enough when we
have lost everything. May the Lord be with you and with all yours.
December 12, Anno 1532.

Your Martin Luther, D.

2\) Instead of *quod,* we read *quid* and took the sentence as an
interrogative sentence.

**1788** Letters from 1532. no. 1944. 1945. 1946. **1789**

**No. 19 44.**

(Wittenberg.) December 15, 1532.

**To Gerhard Wilskamp at Herford.**

Luther expresses his joy that peace has been restored in Herford. News.

From *Cod. chart.* 185.4. at Gotha in De Wette, Vol. I V, p. 422.

Grace and peace in Christ! I am glad, my dear Gerhard, that the unrest
that Satan began to stir up has been quelled among you. Thanks be to
Christ, who may preserve and increase the peace 1). I have gratefully
received your small gift, although it would not have been necessary to
spread your little bit of poverty (*vestram tenuitatem*) over me as
well. I will see to it that the letter is given to your relative Andreas
as soon as possible.

There is no news except what I believe you already know, namely that the
Turk has retreated after losing several thousands and that Austria has
been plagued with fire and plunder. With us a comet is seen in the east
in the early morning. But we do not have to be afraid of the signs of
heaven, of which only the heathen have to be afraid. Let us pray for one
another that we may be saved. Christ be with you. Greet all of us in
love. On the Saturday after St. Lucy\'s \[15 Dec.\] 1532.

**No. 19 45.**

(Wittenberg.) December 21, 1532.

**To Caspar Cruciger.**

Luther sends a return gift for a gift received.

From the very damaged original in the Wolfenbüttel library at De Wette,
vol. IV, p. 422.

> His Caspar Creuciger, the philosopher and theologian. 2)

Grace and peace! Yesterday, your Elisabeth brought my mistress a golden
gift for the Mass present, my dear Caspar, what

1\) \"the rest\" set by us, for *eam,* which Luther wrote, probably in
great haste.

2\) This superscription seems to be by a later hand. (De Wette.)

and as a token of gratitude 3) I again send your mistress this gift of
the Mass, which, although unlike yours, is sent out of a not dissimilar
will and desire, and I beg and command that you will not despise it.
*Sed*

*poterit e collo pensili - - expendere*. ^4)^

Be well with all your own. On Saturday, the day of St. Thomas the
Apostle \[Dec. 21\], 1532. Martin Luther.

**No. 19 46.**

(Wittenberg.) December 21, 1532.

**To the City Council of Soest.**

Luther warns again about Joh. Campensis.

From the original in the city archives at Soest in De Wette, Vol. IV, p.
423 and in the Erlangen edition, Vol. 54, p. 344, according to an
erroneous copy communicated by the preacher Rollmann. Also in Grote\'s
Jahrbuch I, p. 170 and in the Soester Wochenblatt 1826, No. 41. A
facsimile is in the Geh. Haus-Archiv in Berlin. We have used the good
variants of Grote\'s given by Burkhardt p. 210.

> To the honorable and wise, mayor and council of the city of Soist, my
> favorable lords and good friends.

Grace and peace in Christ! Honorable, wise, dear lords and friends! Next
I wrote to you 5) (although by M. Philipp\'s hand, because I could not
write with my own handwriting due to the dizziness of my head and the
weakness of my spirit) and faithfully commanded you your advisor, Johann
Brun, 2c., and also diligently warned you against the harmful man
Johannes Campensis 2c. Now I hear that the same devil-apostle should
still be with you now and cause misfortune: is therefore my heartfelt
and Christianly faithful advice, want to be diligent that you get rid of
the man. There must be no complaint nor referral, for his actions are
public, as he joined in the raving with Melchior Kürschner 6) (called
Hofmann) in Flensburg.

3\) Here, De Wette has incorrectly placed a punctum.

4\) We were not able to translate this incomplete sentence.

5\) The letter of June 17.

6\) De Wette offers: \"Knesner\"; Grote reads: \"Kersner\", but the
original will probably read \"Kursner\".

**1790** Letters from 1532. no. 1946 to 1950. **1791**

and to sow his seed in Lübeck and Brunswik. I ask you to warn all of
yours against him in time, so that the spark does not become a fire; for
there is nothing good in it, and the devil is certainly a guest of your
city in it. We do our part, and hereby warn you and your city. Christ
our Lord, who hath put into your hearts the air and love of his pure
word, strengthen and keep you therein, until ye be perfected, Amen. To
*Sanct Thomas Apostoli* 1) Day 1532. *D. Martin Luther*,

with a borrowed hand.

**No. 19 47.**

(Wittenberg.) December 21, 1532.

**To the City Council of Münster.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XVII, 2047.

**No. 19 48.**

Wittenberg. December 23, 1532.

**To Bernhard Rothmann, preacher in Münster.**

Luther warns him to beware of the doctrine of the Zwinglians, who have
invaded Westphalia, and exhorts him to remain firm and constant in the
pure doctrine of the Gospel and also to fortify the people in it.

In *Seelen, Philocalia epist.,* p. 1; in *Strobel-Ranner*, p. 206 and in
De Wette, vol. IV, p. 426.

> To the highly esteemed brother in Christ, Bernhard Röthmann, the
> faithful and wise servant of the Lord 2) at Münster in Westphalia.

Grace and peace in Christ! To me, who am exceedingly busy, my dear
Bernard, my concern has forced this letter, which I have received
through a certain rumor, namely, that in Westphalia there are some
sacramentaries running around, who are trying to creep into the cities
that have only recently been won for the Gospel. Therefore I have
exhorted you and asked that you not only guard against them, but also
fortify the church or the people against them. For such confidence we
have

1\) This was read out by Grote in

2\) Instead of *Domino* we have assumed *Domini.*

to you in the Lord, that as you began to rejoice the angels in heaven
and on earth by converting the city of Munster, so you will continue to
perform this same sacrifice for God, and will not be blamed, as much as
can be done through you, that this joy, which has been granted to us
through you, may be turned into sadness, but rather that it may be
increased and endure forever.

For you see that Zwingli and his many comrades were punished for his
teachings with a terrible example, if they could be moved by it. So also
Münzer perished, Hetzer and others, in that God has shown by these
tremendous manifestations (*monstris*) of His wrath how much He hates
these godless spirits, even though they, like the Jews and the
Philistines, despise such things and praise those people as I do not
know what kind of martyrs. Christ, then, who began the great work in you
and through you, will also complete it and build you up in the pure and
unadulterated opinion of the Word, safe and unharmed from all defilement
of the spirit of those people, amen. This I have written sincerely and
in good faith; you will also receive it sincerely and kindly. For I do
not want you to doubt that you are loved and honored by us. Given at
Wittenberg, on the second day before the birth of Christ, 1532, yours,
Martin Luther.

**No. 19 49.**

(Wittenberg.) No date 1632.

**To Johann Bugenhagen, pastor in Wittenberg.**

See St. Louis edition, vol. XI V, 324.

**No. 1950 .**

(Wittenberg.) No date 1532.

**Concerns, jointly with Jonas and Melanchthon, how Protestant noblemen
should behave toward Catholic feudal lords.**

See St. Louis edition. The caption there: \"von der Gegenwehr\" is to be
corrected according to the one given here.
