---
title: John, Acts + 1.Cor 7 & 15
description: Interpretations of the Evangelist St. John, chapters 7-20, the 15th and 16th chapters of the Acts of the Apostles, and the 7th and 15th chapters of the First Epistle to the Corinthians. Luther's shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians.
---

This page is under construction and what you see and read is the first step or the beginning of a process to get the best responsive websites for mobile phones and devices, which until now (2024) has not been created yet with Lutheran writings and books.

The main reason to publication of step one (or version 0.1.0) is the search functionality that can be used to searching for words or phrases (to find where Luther was writing it and reference to it).

## The Gospel of John, Acts etc.

**Dr. Martin Luther\'s**

**Complete Writings.**

published by

**Dr. Joh. Georg Walch.**

**Eighth volume.**

**New Testament Interpretation.**

(Continued.)

**New revised stereotype edition.**

> **St. Louis, Mo.**
>
> CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

**1892.**

Dr. Martin Luther\'s

**New Testament Interpretation.**

(Continued.)

Interpretations

about the

The first chapter of the Acts of the Apostles and the seventh and
fifteenth chapters of the First Epistle to the Corinthians. Luther\'s
shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians.

**Newly published on behalf of the Ministry of the German Evangelical
Lutheran Synod**

**of Missouri, Ohio and other States.**

**St. Louis, Mo.**

CONCORDIA PUBLISHING HOUSE.

1892\.

**\
Foreword.**

This volume contains the continuation of Luther\'s expositions on the
New Testament, from the 7th chapter of the Gospel of St. John to the
Epistle to the Galatians, the shorter exposition of which has been
brought into this volume.

In contrast, we have had to assign Luther\'s detailed explanation of the
Epistle to the Galatians, which in Walch\'s old edition is in the eighth
volume, to the ninth volume in order to give it the necessary strength.
This change was made necessary by the following circumstance: Walch
included in an appendix to the ninth volume the \"very first exegetical
work of Luther on the Psalms of David\" according to the Wolfenbüttel
manuscript. Recently, however, another manuscript of Luther\'s has been
found in Dresden, 1) which forms an integral part of these lectures on
the Psalter. What is contained in both manuscripts must therefore be
united into a whole, as the Weimar edition of the Psalter has already
done.

1\) This writing was discovered in 1874 by Dr. Schnorr von Carolsfeld,
and published in 1876 by Seidemann under the title: \"vr. Martin
Luther\'s First and Oldest Lecture on the Psalms from the Years
1513-1516.\"

The ninth volume of our edition contains the same material as the third
and fourth volumes of our edition, both of which have been combined
under the title: Dictata super Psalterium. There is no room for it in
our ninth volume, since this alone makes up an entire volume. Therefore,
there was nothing left to do but to take the mentioned piece, which does
not belong to the interpretations of the New Testament anyway, out of
the ninth volume, and to save this whole writing for a supplementary
volume, while filling the resulting gap (over a thousand colums) by the
great explanation of the Epistle to the Galatians. In order to fill this
volume again, we have added Luther\'s marginal glosses on the Bible of
the Old and New Testaments in an appendix. That they belong to the
interpretations of the Old and New Testaments, and are therefore also
appropriately placed in this section (Walch brings them in the 21st
volume), requires no proof. The most suitable place for them, however,
would be at the end of the 9th volume.

VI Foreword.

If we had placed them there, however, a tearing apart of the great
explanation of the letter to the Galatians (which we wanted to avoid)
would have been unavoidable.- The marginal glosses have been freed from
many, in part very gross, errors.

About the interpretation of the 6th, 7th and 8th chapters of St. John,
the necessary has already been said in the seventh volume, and the
chronological overview of these sermons has been continued there
(according to the table of contents) until the end of the 8th chapter.
Although the location of the sermons has been indicated according to the
page number of Walch\'s old edition, each sermon can be found in our
edition without difficulty, because the relevant page number of the old
edition is indicated in the upper margin of each page.

It is not necessary to enumerate here the writings contained in this
volume, since these can be seen from the table of contents; also, there
is no need for a further introduction, since the remarkable has been
communicated in the first note to each writing. We have only one thing
to add here. In the note to the short explanation of Joh. 6, 37. (Col.
258) it is not mentioned that this interpretation is also found in the
collections of letters, namely in Aurifaber, Vol. I, col. 142b.;
Löscher, Ref.-Acten, Vol. Ill, p. 959; De Wette, Vol. I, p. 224;
Erlanger Briefwechsel, Vol. I, p. 414. 12, February 1519 results from
the accompanying letter Lu

In the Jena edition, this interpretation has the last place among the
writings from the year 1518, and the first words are missing in it,
which are found in Aurifaber and give the interpretation the epistolary
form: Gratia et pax in Christo, mi Spalatine; so also in this volume
according to the Jena edition.

In the interpretation of the 17th chapter of John, we have compared not
only the German editions, but also the Latin translation of Vincentius
Obsopoeus contained in the Latin Wittenberg edition, through which we
have been able to improve the text several times, and to determine
fluctuating readings. The same has happened with the interpretation of
the 7th and the 15th chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians. In
the first note to the latter scripture, we believe we have cleared up a
dark point in the history of the Reformation. Compare \"Lehre und
Wehre,\" Jahrg. 36, p. 248 ff.

The shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians is presented
in a new translation. This was necessary because the translation by
Vincentius Heidnecker, 1) which can be found in the previous editions,
is not only outdated and

1\) Förstemann has expressed the assumption (Weimarsche Ausg., Bd. II,
437) that Heidnecker means the well-known Latin Vincentius Obsopöus,
schoolmaster in Ansbach, but this does not seem credible to us due to
the nature of the translation. Compare Luther\'s favorable testimony
about him in the letter of April 25, 1526, De Wette, Vol. VI, p. 77.

Foreword. VII

incomprehensible, but also wrong in many cases. All those sections that
contain linguistic explanations, especially from Greek and Hebrew, are
omitted by Heidnecker, e.g. in the first chapter at the end of § 36 and
at the beginning of § 39; likewise at the beginning of § 43; a large
section of § 69 and § 70; in the second chapter in § 9, § 16, § 22, § 28
and § 31; in the third chapter in § 26 2c. What we have called § 33 in
the first chapter is entirely missing. The same omissions are also in
Walch. Of the translation of the first redaction, which Walch had
promised (in the preface to the 9th volume, p. 7b) to deliver alongside
that of the second redaction, almost all of the longer sections are
missing in his edition, e.g., Cap. 2, § 65, § 88; Cap. 3, § 7, § 14, §
24 and others.

We leave here some samples from Heidnecker\'s translation. The Latin is
listed according to the Erlangen edition, Heidnecker\'s translation
according to the 9th volume of Walch\'s old edition.

Gal. III, 142: Nam in Christum credentibus omnia munda, indifferentia,
licita sunt, quaecunque vel praecipiuntur vel prohibentur externis
ceremoniis corporalibusque justitiis, nisi quantum sua sponte aut pro
caritate sese eis subjicere velint, that is: For for those who believe
in Christ, everything that is either commanded or forbidden in external
ceremonies and bodily righteousness is purely, a middle thing,
permitted, unless someone freely

willingly or for the sake of love wants to submit to the same. -
Heidnecker translates (Vol. 9, 15, § 3): \"Since in Christ all things
are pure to the faithful, and without distinction proper, they are
commanded or forbidden, 1) with outward ceremonies and bodily
righteousnesses. Tit. 1, 15. Unless one would submit to them of his own
free will, or out of love.\"

Gal. III, 152: nam hi \[sc. mores\] soli offendunt superbos, et
haereticos non^2)^ faciunt, that is: because at the same (annoying life)
only the hopeful get annoyed, but it does not make heretics. -
Heidnecker translates (Vol. 9, 27): \"for such churches alone vex and
make heretics.\"

Gal. Ill, 176: sine querela, that is: blameless. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9,
53): \"without accusation\".

Gal. Ill, 187: qui Mariam Jacobi fere alteram Mariam solet appellare,
that is: who commonly calls Maria Jacobi \"the other Maria\". -
Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 65): \"who commonly cares to call Mariam Jacobi.\"

Gal. III, 257: unde surdi fiant christiani that is: how deaf people can
become Christians. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 143): \"whence, however, do
Christians become deaf?\"

1\) Who wants to sign the good?

2\) uou is missing in the Weimar edition and in the Erlanger edition, we
have inserted it after the Jena edition. Also in the edition which
Heidnecker used, it will not have been there. But this does not excuse
that he referred M to seolssias.

VIII Foreword.

Gal. III, 277: Sed ad apostolum. That is: But let us return to the
apostle. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 164): \"And how did he \[Jerome) also
understand the apostle.\"

Gal. III, 279 : est ipsum testamentum, est res, quae testatur, etc..
That is, there is the will itself, there is a thing that is decided
2c. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 166): \"In every will there must be three
things: \... the will itself, that is the thing, which is appointed to
one by the testator.\" Because he regards res, quae testatur as a closer
explanation of testamentum, he loses here one of the four things that
belong to the will, mentioned again immediately afterwards in § 64.

Gal. III, 291: jam irritare promittentis bonitatem videtur, that is:
then one sees that it \[the law\] makes the goodness of the promisor
futile. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 178): \"so it is regarded as irritating
the goodness of God, who made the promise.\"

Gal. III, 295 : massam perditionis et maledictionis, that is: (the whole
human race be) a lost and accursed multitude.-Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 183):
\"a matter of eternal corruption and malediction.\"

Gal. III, 312: Sareptana Sidonis mulie, that is: the wife of Sarepta in
Sidon. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 204): \"Sareptana, the wife of Sidonis.\"

Gal. III, 352: communi termino terrae, that is: by common lan.

desgrenze.- Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 243): \"with the same aim of the
earth.\"

Gal. III, 375: Sic enim Dii vocantur, vocantur veraces, justi, sancti,
quae solius Dei sunt, cujus participatione et adhaesione tales sunt,
that is: For in such a way they are called gods, they are called true,
just, holy, which is God\'s alone; by the fact that they have a part in
him and are attached to him, they are of such a nature. - Heidnecker
(Vol. 9, 273): \"So also the gods are called true, righteous, holy,
which alone are of God, and from the participation and attachment they
are such.\"

Gal. III, 386: non mutabitis, that is: you will not be fickle. -
Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 284): \"ye shall not be changed.\"

Gal. III, 401: Nihil est ergo, quod queraris, that is: So you have no
reason to complain. - Heidnecker (Vol. 9, 289): \"So now this is a vain
and useless question, if you ask.\"

Is it not to be wondered at that such an exceedingly bad translation has
been able to make the rounds through all the collections of Luther\'s
writings, and that to this day no attempt has been made to replace it
with a better one?

We consider it superfluous to praise the writings contained in this
volume in particular, since it is generally known that they are among
the most important and most delicious of Luther\'s intellectual
products.

Foreword. IX

belong. He himself, who almost always spoke disparagingly of his
writings, still says years later (for he had preached on them in 1537
and 1538; the statement was made in December 1542) about his
interpretation of the 14th, 15th and 16th chapters of St. John: \"After
the holy Bible, this shall be my most valuable and dearest book. (Cf.
Mathesius, Luther\'s Life, St. Louis Edition, p. 199.)

As an addition to this volume, we offer the honored reader a collection
of more than seven hundred and eighty proverbs from Luther\'s writings.

Now may God in His mercy grant that these salutary writings of Luther
may also be read diligently, so that His blessing will not fail to come
to pass, both temporally and eternally, because we are thereby built up
on the one and only foundation of all blessedness, our Lord Jesus
Christ. Amen.

St. Louis, on the day of the Reformation Feast, 1892.

**A. F. Hoppe.**

**\
**

**Content**

**of the**

**The eighth part of Luther\'s complete writings.**

**Doctor Martin Luther\'s Interpretation of the New Testament.**

(Continued.)

> **III Interpretations on John the Evangelist.** (Continuation.) Column

G. Luther\'s Interpretation of the 6th, 7th and 8th Chapters

St. John\'s. Nov. 5, 1530 to March 9, 1532.

(Continued.) 1

H. Luther\'s Sermon on Joh. 6, 29. 1537 (?) 254

I. Short explanation of the words Joh. 6, 37-40.

February 12 1519 258

K. Luther\'s Interpretation of the 14th, 15th and 16th Capi

tels St. Johannis, preached in 1537 and 1538\.... 264

L. Luther\'s interpretation of the 17th chapter of St. Johan

nis, preached in 1528 and 1529; printed in 1530\.... 744

M. Luther\'s Interpretation of the 18th, 19th, and a Part

of the 20th chapter of Johannis, preached in 1528 (?).

1529 844

**IV. Interpretations about the Acts of the Apostles.**

Two sermons on the 15th and 16th chapters of the Acts of the Apostles.
1524 998

**V. Interpretations on the first epistle to the Corinthians.** Column

A. Luther\'s Interpretation of the Seventh Chapter of the First Epistle
to the Corinthians. August 1523\... 1026

B. Luther\'s Interpretation of the Fifteenth Chapter of the First
Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians, Preached in 1533, Published in
1534 1084

C. Four sermons by Luther on 1 Cor. 15, 35-57. 1544 and 1545 1272

**VI Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians.**

A. Luther\'s shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians.
1519 and 1523 1352

**Appendix.**

A. Luther\'s Marginal Glosses on the Bible Old and New Testament. 1545
1664

B. Collection of Proverbs from Luther\'s Writings 1888

**\
D. Martin Luther\'s Interpretation of the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth
Chapters of St. John,**

preached at Wittenberg from November 5, 1530 to March 9, 1532.

**(Continued.)**

**The seventh chapter of John.**

**The first sermon.**

Saturday after Ascensionis Domini \[20 May 1531\]. 1)

**V. 1. After this Jesus went about Galilee, for he would not go about
Judea, because the Jews sought his life.**

This chapter does not have much preaching, teaching or words of the Lord
Christ, but it is a chapter that describes some history and stories of
how the Lord Christ fared in his preaching. 2) We will therefore speak
of it recently and not spend a long time on it, as we did in the sixth
chapter. Therefore, we will speak of it recently and not spend so much
time on it as we did in the sixth chapter. But St. John mixes it up, so
that he partly describes the sermons he preached, and after that the
histories, how it happened to him, when he preached the sermon of the
sixth chapter, about his flesh and blood, at Capernaum, namely, that
Jesus stayed in Galilee, went now and then into the villages, preached,
but avoided the Jewish country with great diligence, and did not want to
wander in Judea, for the reason that the Jews wanted his life.

2 For in Judea sat the right hand men, the rulers and prelates, his
worst enemies and adversaries; but Galilee was over against the
Gentiles, because Herod had authority, but the Jews of that country had
no authority; as with us there are some countries where the bishops have
no authority, as here at

1\) In the original in the margin, but there \"after\" is missing.

2\) the history \-\-- what has happened, the factum.

Wittenberg, where the angry nobles are not allowed to do anything to us,
even if they would like to. So the Lord Christ is also in the land of
Herod, since Herod is lord and king, and the priests and elders of
Jerusalem were not rulers over him, as they were in Judea. And the
evangelist indicates the reason that he shunned the Jewish country
primarily because the Jews pursued him.

3\) Now this is written of our Lord Christ\'s life, how it happened to
him, and is not reported in vain, but as an example to us. Nevertheless
you see that the Lord Christ avoids his danger, and does not presume 3)
lest he tempt God. For where I have not been challenged, there I shall
not give myself; as some foolish fools, my adversaries, also say to me,
Why do you not go to Rome, to the bishop of Mainz, to Dresden, or to
Leipzig? Yes, you are afraid! But it is not because of fear. If I had
God\'s command to preach there, I would have a good conscience, and
would do it and preach there confidently; but because I do not have
God\'s command to preach there, it is not because of fear, but it is
called not trying God \[Deut. 6:16\].

4 The Anabaptists also teach that one should sell everything, leave
wife, child, house and farm, and even not have wives, as the monks have
also prescribed;

3\) In the original: measurable.

[2 Erl. 4S, 10S-I07. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
22I4-WIS. 3]{.underline}

and the desperate boys and peelers deprive the people of everything they
have. Now it is true that for Christ\'s sake we must put aside life,
limb, possessions, honor, stocking, stick, wife and child, and all that
we have, for the Lord Christ said Matthew 10:37: \"He who loves his wife
and child, his field and his body, more than he loves me, is not worthy
of me. Item, Christ says \[Matth. 19, 21.\]: \"Go, and sell all, and
follow me.\" It is all true; we all know these sayings well, And know
them well, that for Christ\'s sake we should lay all on the line. But
this is not what Christ said: \"Run straight away from your wife and
leave her on the begging pole. But he sets it in the case, that is, if
it comes to this, whether thou love me more, or thy wife, body or life.
Non est comparationem, sed oppositum ponere. He does not say, \"Put
yourself wantonly in danger, run away from your wife, or leave your own.
No; but when it comes to the point that the tyrants want to punish you
and drive you out for the sake of the gospel, or that they want to force
you 1) to take a form of the Lord\'s Supper, then be bold and prove that
you are a man, that you say: No, bishop, prince, priest, devil, you
shall not be able to do this. If he says, \"I will take your neck, wife
and child,\" you say, \"You can take that.

\(5\) Christ the Lord says, It shall come to pass, that these things
shall befall you: for whosoever shall rather have his wife, and his
body, and his goods, and his life, than me, it is determined that he is
not worthy of me. But whosoever shall take it, and leave it, shall
receive it again a hundredfold; and as long as he liveth here on earth
he shall have enough: but if it be ever taken away from him, he shall
have remission of sins, item, the Holy Ghost, and be a child of God, and
heir of eternal life. So it should be understood when Christ says to
love him more than anything else. But if there be no need, let every man
abide in his place, in his estate, and in his profession; and let him
not depart from his own, but let him abide together, every man where he
belongeth. But if it should come to pass that one must leave his
profession or station, or Christ

1\) Erlanger: me.

Deny, all, before I deny Christ, I say that I will let go my neck, also
house, yard 2c.

\(6\) This I say against the Anabaptists, who willingly make their own
suffering and leave everything, and then boast that they are martyrs,
seeking their own glory. But do not consider your own suffering; neither
you nor anyone else is commanded to put himself in danger of life and
limb. God has therefore given so many creatures, and made so many ways
and means, that he may help thee; he maketh fields to be planted, that
thou mayest not suffer hunger; he giveth also so much wool, that thou
mayest not suffer cold; he giveth also so much wood and stones, all
manner of thunderstorms 2) and gifts, that thou mayest care for thyself
and thy body, and maintain them, and be in health. Item, he has given
you inheritance, wife, child, house and farm, money and everything, so
that you and your wife should stay with each other.

\(7\) So the first thing is to take care of the body; this is God\'s
will. So he has given you a husband or wife, saying, \"What God has
joined together, let not man put asunder\" \[Matt. 19:6\]; let it remain
so. But if God separates you, who has given you the wife or the husband,
it is right. This happens when you are to leave either GOD or His word;
there you can say, if this intervenes: I will stay with you, my God, and
leave the other, and say: Dear Lord GOD, you bound me before to house,
farm, servant, maid, wife, child, body and life, but now you divorce me;
for the sake of your word I must leave my possessions, otherwise I would
gladly stay with them. God himself separates. He says: You shall love me
more than anything else; otherwise you shall not harm the body, nor
injure it, but preserve it and take care of it and wait for it, as God
has ordered, so that you may remain healthy. He has given you two eyes,
which you shall not pluck out or injure, nor two legs, which you shall
not cut off, but if they become sick and unhealthy, use medicine and
heal them; but if it comes to this, that you are struck by tyrants\'
deaths and

2\) Thunderstorm \-- weather.

[4 Erl. 48, 1V7-109. Sermon on John 7:1-8. \" W. VII, 2216-2219.
5]{.underline}

If you suffer persecution from others, stand by and let God take care of
it.

8 St. Augustine had much to do with the Donatists of old, who were also
such companions and seducers that they asked, and called it the great
Hansa, that they should be killed, that they might become martyrs, and
if no one else wanted to lay a hand on them, they threw themselves off
the bridges, or fell from houses, broke their necks, and relied on this
saying: \"He who loves his life but me is not worthy of me. There was a
great deal of murdering and such murderers in their own bodies. They
condemned the worldly regiments, which one should leave standing and
remain, and also help to maintain and promote, so that one might have
protection for the body and remain with wife and child.

\(9\) But leaving house, farm and goods is done in two ways. First, that
I do it willingly for myself, and put it out of my mind, making my own
devotion to it; that is the devil\'s teaching. Secondly, that I have to
suffer it, and it happens to me without my thanks. I do not choose and
seek it, but another forces me to it; it is not my doing and my doing,
but I must suffer, and what I then suffer, that another does to me, and
forces me from what is mine. Whether I would like to stay with my
wife, 1) house and farm, if he does not want to leave me with them, then
I must let it go, suffer it. I have brought this on myself to no avail.

\(10\) Therefore the monks are almost as good as the Donatists; although
they do not strangle themselves in this way, they are also the devil\'s
servants, for they say: If you want to be perfect, go and sell
everything, leave father and mother, wife and child, the bridegroom
leave his bride, and run away to the monastery; then you lead a
Christian state and life. This is not the Holy Spirit, so you are
called, but it is the devil on your cops. Therefore always with him into
the hellish fire. For God does not drive you away from your father and
mother, husband and wife; he wants you to stay with them; you choose
such things.

1\) In the Eislebenschm edition: \"Leibe\".

yourself, that you run away from your own. If you are forced by another
with the sword or by force from your parents, wife and children, house
and farm, that you would not like to do it, then you have God\'s word,
then you can say: Before I would deny the word of God and let Christ go,
I would rather go into misery, or be buried ten cubits deep in the
earth, or have four plates shaved and ten caps put on in the monastery,
for the sake of the Lord Christ and his word, then it would be a
\[right\] opinion; that would have been his monks.

11 Thus the martyrs were driven out of the cities by the Romans, driven
into the islands or into the forests and wildernesses, had to suffer
hunger and sorrow, leave father and mother and lurk in the forests,
become hermits; not that they did it intentionally, but they had to
suffer it for God\'s sake. That is why it is vile doctrines of the devil
to choose monasticism out of one\'s own devotion and power, and not to
do so for the sake of God and His word. But when it comes to the point
that there are tyrants who want to force us to do against God, or to
leave Christ and his gospel, then say: Here is the saying \[Matth. 10,
37. f.\]; I suffer it and leave my house and farm; I would rather stay
with it, because I love my father, my wife and child, but Christ much
better. If then I should leave one thing, I will leave all that, and
keep only Christ; for then there remaineth unto me the best and the
most, even Christ and his word.

\(12\) Then thou shalt not do it, but another shall do it, and so thou
art the sufferer; otherwise thy devotion and thy suffering shall be mire
where thou doest it. Choose not a divorce, nor a monastery, nor any
other new thing; but if the authorities take thee, and drive thee from
thy goods, suffer it, if it come to thee without thy fault. In former
times, in the papacy, the servants and maids left their masters\'
service, the women left their husbands\' obedience and housekeeping and
went on pilgrimages, became monks and nuns; these were true Donatists.
The Anabaptists are raising it again. But beware and learn,

[6Erl . 48, 109-IIS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2218-2222. 7]{.underline}

how you should talk to them, whether they are to be converted; for they
run away out of their own devotion; or that the mouth of blasphemy might
be cast at them, if they would confirm their devotion and holiness by
this argument.

13 Christ could have gone to Judea, as it happened soon after that he
went up again. But he remained in Galilee, and did not want to put
himself in danger and tempt God until he had to do so, and it was due to
his divine office. When he was forced to do so, he did so; but first he
took the matter into consideration, saying, \"I will not go into Judea,
for they would have killed me. And is Christ in this himself an example,
that without profession and office I should not go into a prince\'s
country, putting myself out of my own devotion into temptation and
danger, 1) knowing that a prince and lord will slay me. No, I do not
have to put myself in danger. But if I must go in, or if I am in, then
let me be bold and suffer, and let my neck be broken. That does not mean
to do it of one\'s own choice. There is a bridge over the Elbe, so you
must not wade through it, lest you drown. But if someone forces you to
wade through the water, dare to do so and say, \"I do not like to do it,
but I must do it and cannot avoid it. So Christ does here also. He does
not want to dare it out of his own devotion, forwardness or courage, and
in vain prove an unnecessary miraculous sign in that he is to go into
the Jewish land.

**V. 2: Now the feast of the Jews was near, the feast of the
tabernacles.**

14 This is the other history or story. We have dealt with the first, how
he went into Galilee and stayed there, and did not want to tempt God.
Now comes the other story of what he encountered when the Jews were
celebrating the Feast of Tabernacles, which was held in the month of
wine or autumn, when they were commanded by God to leave their houses
and towns on the fifteenth day of that month and to live in the fields
for eight days,

1\) Erlanger: set.

were not allowed to sleep, eat and drink at home in heaps, but had to
fetch may from the woods and make huts and live under them. God
commanded them to do this in remembrance of their departure or exodus
from Egypt, when they wandered for forty years in the wilderness, on the
road, and never came under a roof, never ate a morsel of bread, nor
drank in houses.

\(15\) God wanted to keep this miraculous sign with the Jewish people,
so that they would not forget this good deed; but we can see in
ourselves how they have kept it. For it is common that we soon forget
good deeds or good things, but we always remember evil, when someone
does us harm; we do not soon forget anger and evil. So we do not
remember today the goodness and kindness of God, which we have in the
Gospel, if we should be forgotten, as it would have happened to us under
the papacy. The Lord Christ well saw this forgetfulness and contempt of
God\'s goods, and therefore gave the sacrament of the Lord\'s Supper in
remembrance, and there instituted his body and blood to remind us how he
had redeemed us from sins, death, the devil and hell. In the same way,
the Jews were commanded to keep the Feast of Tabernacles for eight days,
so that they might speak of this miraculous work of God, preach and give
thanks to God for it, and remember the forty years they had been in the
wilderness.

16 Such remembrance was necessary and useful, just as all our sacraments
are Eucharistic, so that one not only remembers the good deeds of God
and does not forget them; God was also concerned with them so that they
did not fall into idolatry, but remained with the God who had led them
out of Egypt and did not accept a foreign god. But the prophets indicate
how they did it, just as we have done with the mass. In the sacrament of
the Lord\'s Supper, one should preach and not forget the Lord Christ,
because the Lord\'s Supper was instituted for the sake of preaching, so
that no other Christ should be worshipped; but this did not happen.
Christ has instituted his memorial there, and the preaching of the
Lord\'s Supper.

8 **Eri. 4S, l!2-114. Sermon on John 7:1-8. W. VII, 2S22-LLSS.** 9

But they have nevertheless so perverted the Mass, and put the preaching
of the Gospel under the pew, and have sought out and practiced
indulgences, fables, fairy tales, and other nonsense, that nothing but
the name of the Mass has remained. If the mass were properly restored,
there would be no need, for it would keep us with Christ the Savior and
the main article of the justification of faith in Christ, that we
believe in him alone and seek help from him, and adhere to the death of
Christ; thus his memory and testimony would be kept right, and we would
not fall into idolatry, which otherwise has gone out over it. For no
more harmful abusus or abomination has ever been on earth than the mass,
and the last day must destroy it itself.

\(17\) This you must know about the feast: They were strictly commanded
that every man come to Jerusalem three times a year, at Easter, at
Pentecost, and at the feast of tabernacles, at the festum
tabernaculorum. These feasts lasted fifteen days, so that they had to
stay together in Jerusalem. Since Christ does not want to go up to
Judea, the time comes when he must go up, as a man, to this feast;
before he did not want to go up, since he did not have to, so that he
would not tempt our Lord God; but since he had to, he went up freely,
more boldly than he had ever been before, and nothing happened to him
anywhere; the poisonous, evil worms were not allowed to harm him.

**Then his brethren said unto him, Arise thou from thence, and go into
Judea, that thy disciples also may see the works that thou doest. He who
wants to be free in the plan does nothing secretly. If thou doest these
things, manifest thyself before the world. For even his brethren
believed not on him.**

\(18\) It is as if his poisonous brethren spoke these things out of
bitter gall, as if they thought him a fool, and would gladly betray him
to the unrighteous people, the Pharisees. They are poisonous, evil
worms; they want to say, \"You do many miracles and preach many things,
but if you were bold, you would go into Judea. Just as they said to me,
\"If I were bold, I would go to Dresden or Halle and preach there.

and let me hear. So these are also such defiant, scornful boys, letting
such words run, which indicate, as if they consider all his sermons and
miraculous signs to be nothing, and even despise him.

19 And yet the text calls them all \"brethren\" who follow him, not his
next of kin. For the Holy Scripture says that all the Israelite people
were brothers among themselves; one called another his brother, and one
woman called another woman her sister; as is still the custom among us
Germans in some places, especially in Saxony. Rather, they were called
brothers who were cousins, mothers, wives and other blood friends; as
these were the blood friends of the Lord Christ, perhaps his cousins and
ohm of his mother. They should believe in him the most, love him more
than others, and listen to him more diligently, considering that he was
their flesh and blood, and so closely related to them that he could not
have been closer to them as friends and relatives than if they had been
his bodily brothers. Therefore they should have clung to him for the
sake of blood friendship. But they are so scornful of him here, and say
to him: \"Defiance, arise, go up into the Jewish country, let yourself
be seen in Jerusalem, you will have many listeners there; you have been
preaching in Galilee until now, now you will get many disciples among
the Jews, just let yourself be seen. But the sow teaches the cook here.

**V. 4. They speak: He who wants to be free on the plan does nothing
secretly.**

20 Thus it must be that God, who is to be the Master of the whole world,
must become the disciple of the whole world. There has never been a
sermon or teaching in the world that has had so much mastery as the very
word of God; all fools must cling to it and want to become knights;
there is no one who would not let himself think that he could master
God\'s word, and that he must oppose it, and that he is wiser than our
Lord God. Now, if one dreams a little, it is called spirit, spirit! they
can do it all, everyone wants to be God\'s master, and he must be
everyone\'s disciple.

[10 Erl. 4S, 114-117. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2225-2227. 11]{.underline}

be. So it is here also; they say: \"Who wants to be on the plan\" 2c. As
if to say, \"Are you creeping with your miracles into a corner of
Capernaum or Galilee and want to be a prophet? If it were right with
you, you would go up to Judea, where there are also people who have
teeth in their mouths and know and understand something. You want to be
seen much in Galilee alone, and do many signs in the corner there, but
do it also in Jerusalem. It is foolishness and fool\'s work with you,
they say. Christ must suffer and hear this with his teaching and divine
miracles.

\(21\) This is an example, by which we see how the gospel must also
offend, that our blood friends, sisters, brothers, mothers and
brothers-in-law, and other closest friends, should be hostile to us, and
also consider us to be vain knaves, and should set themselves against us
in the most pointed manner, so that they cannot reproach and ridicule us
pointedly enough. For those who want to be most like the gospel and do
the best they can, let them consider it a laughingstock and say, \"You
crawl into corners, shy away from the light, fear and do not want to
suffer anything, do not want to come forward with the teaching.

22 Now Christ does not mean that I would presumptuously have my neck cut
off; that would be tempting God; it would be presumption and the
devil\'s boldness to want to fly before one\'s wings grow. Therefore it
is nothing if they cry out, \"Oh, shun the light!\" You must answer that
Christ did not want to do it either; he did not want to do it in Judea
before he was required to do it. Yes, if one is required, appear, and
then be confident; as we have often done.

23 Alfo the gospel is still regarded by our nearest friends, as Christ
the faithful teacher was in Capernaum before the eyes of his disciples;
though he perform miracles, yet is he blasphemed and reviled for it; his
disciples turn not to it, they think him a knave, not bold in his
doctrine, and say that he dealeth in hypocrisy and hypocrisy, that he
may be safe from the Pharisees, saying, \"Reveal thyself to the world.\"
They are defiant words, they are not so pious as.

Those other fools, Luc. 9, 46, 1) who would have liked to have honor
from him and gain power through him. These here are peelers and
deceivers, thought nothing of it, thought that if there was something
behind it, you would go to the light, and stand out, and reveal yourself
to the world.

**V. 6. Then Jesus said to them: My time is not yet here, but your time
is always here.**

024 So the Lord Christ answered them, saying not that he would remain in
Galilee, and not go up to Jerusalem, or that he would shun the light;
but saying, I will go up to Jerusalem yet, I may yet come into the
light, and stand before the world; but ye shall not tune me the time,
neither shall the sow teach the cook. When my time comes, I will do it
well; but because you now think that I am afraid, therefore, for the
sake of your pointed, loose, frivolous words, you should not bring me to
that point that I should be presumptuous, I will meet the time well; and
still interpret it as you will, call it stupidity or fear 2c., I do not
care.

**My time is not here, but your time is everywhere.**

025 This is another blunder which he giveth them, that he may pay them
again. As if he should say: You are fine fellows, you have gracious high
priests, they do you no harm, you defy their power and favor, that they
have a large following and covenant, Annas, Caiphas, Herod, Pilate and
others, it all depends on each other; but if you were to lead my word
and sermon, you would leave it well alone, and not be so bold, you must
not worry about any danger now. Similarly, the fools, the adversaries,
also say to me, and want to cite me before the emperor: I will dispute
with you on the fire. But they do not want to go to us; there, with
their own, where there is no danger, they are evil and brave heroes; we
shall come to them. First they throw you into the tower, and then they
want to argue with you, if they have dealt with you according to all
their defiance, their own iniquity, and their own bravery; yes, that is
a fine thing.

1\) In the original Luc. 4. which, however, does not fit.

[12 **Erl. 4s, irr-ii9. Sermon on John 7:1-8. W. vn, 2227-Wso.**
13]{.underline}

That is where they would like to lure us. But Christ says under their
noses: \"I am as bold as you are; when my time comes, you will know it;
but you will never dare, even if your time has come. You are desperate
boys, and would gladly sacrifice me to the flesh bank, that I might be
subdued, or fall away from God; what do you boast about, because they do
you no harm? Ye are hypocrites with them, and ye have well wrought; come
ye when ye will, and ye shall be dear children, good godparents to the
Pharisees, chief priests, and scribes; for they have known them, and
loved them. It is no wonder; why should they be hated? for they speak
what they like to hear.

**V. 7 The world cannot hate you, but it hates me, for I testify of it
that its works are evil.**

\(26\) If I spoke what pleased the world, I would be their good friend;
so would I go to Rome, to Halle, to the bishop of Magdeburg, if I spoke
what the papists liked to hear. But they hate me,\" says Christ \[John
15:18\], \"therefore I will not go there, for I am called. For I do that
which ye will not do; I bear witness of them that their works are evil.
You follow me in this! Defiance, my dear nobles. Yes, not for a long
time; they leave the world well satisfied, for they are the children of
the world. In spite of the fact that they told the pope a word he does
not like to hear, namely, that he is a rogue; they still decorate and
cover his roguery. Should he not love them? But do as I do, and tell him
only one word, and you will see how bold you are. Tell the Bishop of
Mainz and Duke George only one word, namely that they deny and persecute
God\'s word. But you keep silent and smoke the pipe. Because you are
silent about the truth and speak against it and do what the world wants,
shouldn\'t it be good for you? You are good at shouting and banging, one
mischievous man with another, one crow does not scratch out another\'s
eye; so it should be a cold winter that one wolf eats another. Go ahead,
testify that the works of the world are evil, and be so meager, preach
the truth, see then how bold you are.

are. This is what I do. I do not hypocritize anyone, I tell Annas,
Caiphas and the other chief priests and Pharisees that they are enemies
of God, and act and live falsely against God\'s word and God\'s
commandment, and I do not like their life and nature. This is not
pleasing to them, so they want to kill me.

27 If I wanted to court D. If I wanted to court the pope and pretend to
Martin Luther, I hoped to obtain a bishopric and great wealth as easily
as they do; but because I do not want that, they are all enemies to me.
How can the world hate those, since it has its good glow and everything
from them? As long as you keep silent about the truth and do not punish
anyone, the pope and the world can tolerate you; if you only resist the
truth and blaspheme it, you are well off and will be held in good stead.
But if you want to punish, then all friendship is over. Thus it shall be
said: Mr. Annas, you teach rightly, you are pious people, but Jesus is a
knave, he deceives people with his preaching. Oh, if one loves and
praises one, Annas and Caiphas cannot help it; he must go away and love
those who reproach and blaspheme Christ, for he sees well that Jesus
wants to make him unhappy with his teaching, that Annas does not teach
rightly. So does the pope. If I speak against him, and call him the
Antichrist, he does not love me, but he seeks my life and limb. So that
blacksmiths, jokers, and snotty bastards, 1) along with other of our
adversaries, praise him, he gives them praises and domes for it. For it
shall be so. But the world does not hate you; but it must hate me, for I
do not hypocritize it, but tell it the truth.

\(28\) This is an example for us to learn, that we do not turn away from
it and get angry if the world gives us insulting words, blasphemes,
desecrates, hates, and exerts its will on us, because we tell it the
truth; on the other hand, praises and loves those who pretend to you for
the sake of lies. It does good,

1\) Blacksmith is Faber von Costnitz (St. Louis edition, vol. X VIII,
1736. Tischreden, cap. 38, §§. 12. 15. vol. XXII, 937. 940. 943.). On
Witzel, see Tischreden, cap. 28, § 16-19. vol. XXII, 943 ff. Rotzlöffel
is Cochläus. Tischreden, Cap. 28, U 1. 2. 7. vol. XXII, 936 and 938.
vol. XIX, Introduction, p. 30b.

[14 Erl. \"s, 119-iLi. Interpretations on the evangelist John. W. vn,
2230-22\"\". 15]{.underline}

when the pope gives such goods to a boy, and it frightens one very much
when other God-fearing people are deprived of theirs, and they still
have to be persecuted and live in exile; it is annoying. But the Lord
Christ says: \"The world cannot hate you, for you are boys and its sons,
it must give you money, goods and honor enough, because you are peelers,
as the bishops are, are in cahoots with them. So one of them says: \"If
you do not have enough for one pen or prebend, you shall have two or
three more; yes, you take ten or twenty incomes, and even lie yourselves
to death. But I, because I speak the truth, must be a Jesus who has
neither house nor farm. But let Hannam and Caipham, and the like of
them, pass through; they will soon find their host.

**For their works are evil.**

\(29\) The works he calls evil are not only gross sins, such as
disobeying the authorities, robbing, stealing, fornicating, but also the
most holy works they have done, which he punishes here as an ungodly
being. As if I say to the pope that he is a knave, that he has corrupted
and entangled the goods of the church with harlots and knaves, I do not
hurt him, he can bear it that I punish such gross vices and sins; and
the princes can also bear it that they are punished in this way. But if
I say that their best life in the priesthood is hypocrisy and sin, when
they have taught the people to trust in the mass, monastic doctrine, and
their good works, to build monasteries, to go on pilgrimage, which is
most profitable for them, then they become angry, want to become
nonsensical, and cannot bear that this should be punished for evil and
wickedness, which they otherwise considered to be the very best.

30 So Christ punishes Matth. 5, v. 20 and Cap. 23, 13. ff. the
Pharisees, that they preferred the sacrifices to the works of love and
the silver to the altar; item, if they denied food and drink to the
parents, it would not be a sin, if it was only given as a sacrifice. All
these things were called by them delicious works, which they taught.
**When** he punished these human statutes, they became angry with him,
and could not

suffer. Just as if I say to the pope, \"You have broken the Ten
Commandments and sinned evilly with your shameful life,\" he will take
no notice and suffer it. But if I say, Monks and nuns and other clergy
are of the devil, and their best life is sin, that bites and vexes them;
for I testify of their works that they are evil, that their wisdom, art,
and excellent good works, that they may lead men to heaven, are of no
account; that is vexatious.

\(31\) This is how the Lord Christ answers, that ye have well said, ye
cannot deserve evil as I do: for ye hypocrites bear witness that their
works are right and good, and suffer them to please you; ye protect and
defend them in their ungodly things, therefore it is no wonder that they
love you: but because I bear witness that their works are evil, it is no
wonder that they hate me. Yea, he saith unto them in addition:

**V. 8 Go ye up to this feast; I will not yet go up to this feast: for
my time is not yet fulfilled.**

\(32\) He does not deny that he does not want to go up, for he has
decided that he will go up, but he does not want to go up at this time,
but he will go up when obedience urges him to go up, but he does not
want to go up because of their suggestion or because of human advice. We
are not to do it either, precisely because they say so. This is the
cause of this saying, \"My time is not yet fulfilled.\" He says clearly
that he will go to Jerusalem, but he will wait until his day and hour
come, so that he may go by command, and be sure that he will do it with
God and his word, and that nothing will be done out of human boasting,
reputation and approval, but out of divine calling. But these go up
before the feast, and are pious, holy, delicious people; but he is not,
but comes after, as follows:

**The other sermon.**

Saturday after Pentecost \[June 3, 1531\]. 1).

**V. 9, 10: And when he had said these things unto them, he abode in
Galilee. But when his brothers were**

1\) In the original margin.

[16 **Erl. 1\", uu-iri. Sermon on John 7:9-16. W. vn. sW-ssss.**
17]{.underline}

**When he went up, he also went up to the feast, not openly, but
secretly.**

33\) It seems as if he went to Jerusalem without his disciples, alone,
and completely secretly, that he appeared there before they were aware
of him; or \[before they were\] 1) aware of him, he came sneaking 2c.

\(34\) Next we heard how the Lord Christ quarreled with his disciples
and brethren about the feast of tabernacles, because they said, why
would he not also go up to Jerusalem, and manifest himself there to the
world with his miracles; but he met them with this answer. He did not
have to go up when they wanted, and stayed a while in Galilee; but when
his brothers had gone up, he also went up to the feast, not openly, but
secretly.

**V. 11. 12. Then the Jews sought him at the feast, saying: Where is he?
And there was a great murmur of him among the people. Some said: He is
pious. Others said: No, but he deceives the people 2c.**

35 In this text the example is presented to us that Christ often poses
weakly, as if he were fleeing, and gives space and room to his
adversaries, so that they may be proud and boast as if they had won. So
here also he does not pose boldly, goes up secretly after them, and lets
them throb, defy, laugh, boast. He is nevertheless obedient to the law,
and goes up fearfully at once, feigning weakness. By this we are to
learn, though our adversaries roar, rage, and rage, and we are weak and
fugitive, that we nevertheless are undaunted and undaunted. For thus our
Lord God finally overcomes 2) the devil and casts him under Himself;
just as Christ here also presents Himself as weak. As God Himself tells
St. Paul in 2 Cor. 12, 9, when he endured much and great struggle and
cried out to God: \"Be content with my grace, my power is strong in your
weakness; it wants to work in your weakness. If we are not weak

1\) Inserted by us.

2\) eventually\--finally.

Christ does not need his strength in us. If it were our strength and
power by which we resist our adversaries, we would have the glory, and
not Christ. But from experience we learn that we are not the ones who
have helped ourselves, but God must do it; thus God comes to glory in
our weakness. Therefore, when the adversaries strive and defy us, but we
are weak, His power is shown to be strong in our weakness.

For this reason, Christ is also seen here as weak and creeps up to
Jerusalem as if he were afraid of them. But he is not so afraid that he
would leave the commandment and the word of God in abeyance because of
their defiance and fear, but he keeps the commandment of God that he
preach the gospel, goes up and preaches. And even if he is so timid
about it, he still goes out by the power of God. Since they had defied
him before, they were not allowed to do anything to him and remained
silent. But he goes up weak and silent, and returns home with glory or
power; but they go up with a triumph, and come down weak.

With this the Lord Christ comforts us, that we know that it is not
otherwise with us, but that we are sometimes weak, our enemies and
adversaries, on the other hand, become strong and glorious thrones^3)^ ;
but still Christ leads it out. It wants to be so that we are stupid and
fearful, and yet what we weak preachers teach must happen. It must go
through, even if all the devils would work together and try to prevent
it. God is so minded that He delights in strengthening the weak and
making the strong weak. For he is called Creator, who makes everything
out of nothing; in turn, can make nothing out of everything. Therefore,
even if our adversaries are everything and we are nothing, he leads us
as a creator who makes everything out of nothing; but those who want to
be everything, and are holy, wise, learned and wise, must be destroyed
as if they were not; he can make the fearful into joyful people, and the
strong into weak.

3\) Thraso, a boastful officer in Terence.

[18 Erl. 48, 124-12V. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
22W-2238. 19]{.underline}

make despondent sissies out of iron eaters; as St. Paul says Rom. 4, 17:
Ea, quae non sunt, vocat, ut sint. But there is an art to it, that
Christians learn it; for this purpose these examples are described, that
we may learn to recognize the grace of our Lord God, that this is His
way. It happened to Christ himself in his own person in such a way that
he was weak, stupid and fleeting, he also felt the trembling and
throbbing of his heart; nevertheless it continues, he penetrates and
overcomes everything.

**V. 11. 12. Then the Jews sought him at the feast, saying: Where is he?
And there was a great murmur of him among the people.**

38\) They are defiant, fierce, sure and joyful words; they speak
mockingly and scornfully, they want to say: I mean yes. Defiance, that
he may come to the feast. They do not say, \"Where is the prophet?\" so
that they give him an honest name; but scornfully, \"Where is he?\" As
if they wanted to say: The proud Bachant, he will probably stay outside,
let him come here, he is evil. So contemptuously they can speak of the
man that they almost don\'t want to call him, speak: Why must he remain
outside? He has sensed and noticed that the Jews are likely to sit down
against him and shut him up, that is why he is ready to be afraid of our
words; what will happen if they attack him once, that the blows will
follow afterwards? I mean, he should then keep quiet, he will then
probably stay at home.

39 At Augsburg, at the Imperial Diet of 1530, the papists also boasted
and rejoiced as if they were quite sure that they had the game in their
hands. For they pretended: Oh, if only the emperor comes to Germany, he
will teach the Lutherans mores; of this they were also certain, as the
fiddler has it by the handle. So they also say of Christ, \"He is not
bold to come to Jerusalem and be obedient to our Lord God; the city is
closed to him, the preaching ministry is laid aside, he will become a
prankster, and will not carry out his preaching ministry; everything
will be destroyed and fly away with him. Where are you now, who praise
him so? Where is he? Vanished, dispersed, over all mountains; he is not
yet attacked or condemned, and

yet fears a mere name, or suspicion of the Pharisees, or a basin where
the sun shines in.

40 Nevertheless in his defiance he comes not only to Jerusalem, but he
also appears; not alone, but in the midst of the Jews\' feast. This is a
great defiance against their defiance. Otherwise he should have run away
from Jerusalem and the whole Jewish land because of the great defiance
his adversaries had; but he is joyful, and appears at God\'s command as
an obedient one; he should be before nothing at all, and since they
boast greatly, he is already there, and appears freely. Thus our Lord
God sets the fools at work, and brings all their courage to naught and
to shame. The Thrasons should have been ashamed when he came and stood
there and preached before their eyes, but they did not care, even though
they were ashamed of him a thousand times over. Therefore, when at the
feast and at that time there was a great murmuring and shouting from
him, and they said, \"Where is he?\" he lets the shouting go all over,
and makes them think it is as if he were fleeting; and yet he is so near
them.

This is called God\'s weakness, since God\'s strength can finally be
seen in human weakness. And beware of God; when he presents himself
weak, it is to your strength. God\'s weakness is in defiance, but he
laughs and mocks at it. He lets his children and preachers act as if
they could not open their mouths; but in the oppression and defiance of
the mighty men he is not far behind, he hears it and laughs at them that
they pretend to be so defiant, and lets his strength be seen, as it says
in the text.

**V. 14. The next day at the feast Jesus went up to the temple and
taught.**

42\) He went up secretly, which made them proud; but he is obedient to
God, and fears nothing from their defiance, and goes not alone to
Jerusalem, but enters into the midst of the temple, into the place where
the priests and Pharisees, his worst enemies, ruled, when they had their
own power in the same church. And so he enters the game, putting aside
all stupidity, asking nothing of it.

[20 **Erl. 4S, ISS-IW. Sermon On John 7:9-16. W. VII, 2WS-224I.**
21]{.underline}

even if they did not like it. He does not look at the spiritual or
secular state and government, whether they want to allow it or not, so
he steps up with all joy into the spiritual power and government, lifts
up and preaches; he does not say: Squire Annas or Caiphas, I want to
preach, but for himself he submits to the preaching ministry. He must
have had a heart to stand before them; those who before had boasted much
of his fear and stupidity, and had defied him, must now stand before
him, and hear him speak and preach.

St. John describes this as a consolation, that no one should turn to it,
nor hold to it, when God is weak, and the world boasts and throbs
greatly; you must be used to it. Item, whether the Christians, but
especially the preachers, are often weak and stupid, and against it
their adversaries, the great, mighty Hansen, sharpen and threaten. It is
not new, and it does not happen to us alone, but it happened to all
prophets and apostles that they stood weakly against their tyrants, but
in weakness they were strongest; yes, it happened to the Lord Christ
himself, who is the Lord of all prophets and apostles. So he presents
himself weakly, as if he wanted to leave the preaching ministry and not
be obedient to God, and as if he was very frightened, but in the same
weakness he passed right through.

**Some said: He is pious.**

\(44\) It is terrible to hear that although there were some people who
considered him to be pious, they were not allowed to do so; but the
greater part considered him to be a deceiver and an evil-doer, not a
right but a false preacher. This is the highest disgrace and the
greatest evil; one cannot reproach and revile one more highly than to
call him a deceiver who blasphemes and defiles God by taking away God\'s
honor and robbing people not of their body or their goods, but of their
soul. For this reason, no one can be scolded more severely than when it
is said to him under his eyes, \"You are not a murderer of the body, but
a robber of the soul; the desecration does the greatest harm.

45 Christ therefore went out against the terror and fear of the Jews,
and did not look upon the fear; he was as weak as he would have been.
But the pious men kept silence; the other wicked men had occasion and
room to pretend to Caipha and the other chief priests. And the wicked
have the word alone; the pious over there are not allowed to open their
mouths, even if they murmur secretly. St. John describes all this to
show how great the fear was, and that Christ goes up to Jerusalem so
stupidly, knowing that no one will stand with him; no one was allowed to
be heard speaking anything good about Christ, but the greater and
several crowds consider him a deceiver.

46\. But regardless of the fact that he is weak, he continues to teach
and preach, and does so much with the weakness that they must leave him
satisfied. God does the same to us when we and our cause fall before the
world and fail. We are publicly weak before the world, or each one of us
in particular wants to fall to the ground; \[then each one should keep
himself in such a way that\] 1) he does not become frightened or
fainthearted, but learns from this that our Lord God is serious; he
\[God\] does not joke when he presents himself as weak. He means this,
that he wants to beat down the strong with the weak and lift up the
weak. But we must not look at this with the eyes of reason, as is
commonly done, for then one would be lost; but know that God wants to
lift up the strong with the weak. We are to believe this and close our
eyes straightaway.

47 At Augsburg, at the Diet, they also contended thus: \"There are two
cities and five princes,\" they said; they counted them on their
fingers, and judged them by sight and by reason, and thought that they
had us in the bag. We were so weak that we could not be counted against
the whole Roman Empire. But what did they achieve with their tyranny and
violence? In our weakness, his power grew.

1\) This insertion is made by us to make sense. We have also made
changes in the punctuation of this paragraph, for the same reason.

[22 Erl. 48, ISS-ISI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2211-2243. 23]{.underline}

God has put their defiance to shame; the longer our teaching goes on,
the more it emerges, and they perish. So the Lord Christ goes to
Jerusalem stupidly and secretly, and is a little frightened; but he lies
above and wins, preaches publicly, performs miracles with all joy,
undaunted; but they, on the other hand, become fainthearted, and their
defiance vanishes unawares.

\(48\) Now it is a hard thing, yea, a hard art, which must be seen with
the eyes of faith, to see something higher and different in Christ, than
weakness and temptation. For though ours are few, but the adversary\'s
are many, God\'s power and strength are great, and his word endures
forever. The Word is not a human weakness or strength, but something
higher. He \[God\] does not ask that one who belongs to Him be weak, or
that one who acts against Him be strong and powerful; for He can turn it
around finely, saying, \"You who are weak are strong, and have the
kingdom of heaven for yourselves; but you who are strong are weak, and
have the fire of hell for yourselves; weakness is for His sake. If one
has to suffer something for the sake of God and his word, or \[we\] are
otherwise challenged by flesh and blood, by the world and the devil,
then there is no need, especially if it is God\'s cause; just as our
cause is also God\'s cause.

49 This is the boldness of the Lord Christ, that he goes up to
Jerusalem, and preaches publicly before them, without regard to temporal
and spiritual government, when before he was greatly afraid and dreaded;
but now he despises it all, and tramples it under his feet, and is
obedient to God. This is a clear example of the weakness and strength of
faith. The evangelist does not say what he preached, but only points to
the glorious miracle, the boldness or earnestness in Christ, that he was
allowed to stand in the temple and preach in such terror, and yet was
not forsaken by God. But what do the Jews do about it? The text speaks:

**V. 15 And the Jews were astonished, and said: How can this man know
the Scriptures, since he has not learned them?**

The angry nobles, who wanted to eat him before, are now astonished. For
this defiance is made a terror and fear in them, so that they are
terrified of him, or wonder where he must have gotten the mind and the
thoughts. So who turns the page? Before, they defy him, because he was
not present, that he was afraid of them, and would be very stupid; but
now, when he attacks the preaching ministry, they go about, and fear
him, saying, Verily he preacheth, and knoweth not the Scriptures; what
spirit shall the man have? there shall be something behind him, because
he knoweth no letter, and yet preacheth. Now there is another
appearance, and he has come into another world; before he was afraid,
and they were defiant; now he is courageous, but they are afraid.

51 So you see that they are afraid of the soup. But it is not the work
of man, but God, whom he obeys, makes him bold, and turns back the heart
of his enemies; for it is in vain to do anything against God. And so it
is with the Christians: If one trusts in God, then the enemies do not
have to be so evil, if God wants to protect us, that they have to harm
us, because he has their hearts in his hand, and directs all their
thoughts, as the 33rd Psalm, v. 10, also says: \"The Lord makes void the
counsel of the heathen, and turns the thoughts of the nations. Our Lord
God can soon turn it around, defiant emperor, pope, that they bring out
what they have in their hearts! there is a peg put in front of it, which
is called: Defiance, that you complete your plots and thoughts. God
gives them another sight in front of their noses, so that it does not
have to be guessed. If they could keep the thoughts they have, we would
be in a bad way.

52.. The Pharisee\'s heart and thought is actually this: We want to
strangle Christ. Now God sets the Lord Christ before them to preach;
then the thoughts fall away, and \[they\] marvel, saying, \"How can this
man preach the Scriptures?\" So he takes away their hearts. Therefore to
war with God is evil, because he takes away the heart; but it is good to
hope in him. And these are evil enemies that take away the heart. If I
can take a man\'s heart, then I have

24 Eri. 4S, 1SI-1SS. Sermon on John 7:9-16. W. Vll, 2243-2L4K. 25

I will soon defeat him, he will not do much fighting. So God also takes
away the courage and heart of his enemies, so that they must despair.
Again, to those who hope in him, and are foolish or despondent, he gives
them a courage that they can tear through. These are beautiful examples
and vain miracles, although they do not seem so great as cleansing
leprosy, giving sight to the blind, or raising the dead; but it is so
great that he can take away the thoughts, pride, defiance, and heart of
emperors, kings, popes, or proud princes and turn them around; again, he
can bring forth the poor and stupid so that they are not afraid of
anyone, yes, other people must fear them. These are called divine
miracles.

**How can he learn the Scriptures if he has not learned them?**

053 Who told them that he had not read them? Answer: The Jews had
registered and inscribed all the people, and knew where they were at
home; but especially they had to hear and learn the Law of Moses from
the Levitical tribe, for which purpose the Sabbath was appointed, so
that those who did not know the Law themselves should learn it from
Aaron and the Levites. And the Levites and priests were set apart from
the other Israelites, and had no land, people, cities or government to
govern; they had nothing to do with such toil and labor; they were above
the troublesome worldly government, waiting only for their cattle and
tithes; God spared them the worldly government, this toil and worry;
commanded them to study for it, to read in the prophets, and to teach
the common man. Yes, it should still be so that those who were to become
pastors should be allowed to study; the others, as the common man,
cannot wait for books; otherwise one must also have rulers and farmers.
Therefore they could well have known that he had not read the
Scriptures. Christ is of the laity, of the tribe of Judah, and not of
the priestly tribe, and begins to preach, when only the priests were
commanded to study the Scriptures; wherefore they marvel and are afraid
that he of the tribe of Judah, and not of the tribe of Levi, is of his
own room.

The priests, who had not waited for the priests\' handicraft, lay
themselves down against the priests and preach, and can do their art
better than they can, and so their defiance falls and is transformed
into amazement.

**V. 16. Jesus answered and said, \"My teaching is not mine, but His who
sent Me.**

054 He taketh a cause from their words, that they said he was not
learned, saying, His doctrine is his father\'s, and attacketh the
priestly ministry. They do not boast that he is not of the tribe of
Levi, yet he preaches; they soon let it happen, for they knew well from
the prophets that one would come from the laity who would preach as well
as none had preached in the priestly office. Therefore he answered them
about his teaching in this way: You may not blame me, but God is to
blame; I am not the master, you may not blame me. He does not want his
teaching to be seen with reason, nor does he want to leave the honor to
himself, but he wants to lead and draw them up to the one whose teaching
is, namely God, the heavenly Father, to whom one should give the honor
of his teaching.

**The third sermon.**

Saturday after St. John\'s Day \[July 1, 1531.\] 1)

\(55\) This part, that they marveled, may be understood in two ways, as
of the pious and the wicked. First of all, the pious were surprised that
they thought that he, as a simple, bad man, who was educated like a
layman, should preach better than all the other chief priests and
scribes, as Caiphas, Annas 2c., who had learned it from the books, and
should teach the people. For the priesthood was ordained for this
purpose, that they should preach, and they had their goods from it, that
they should study. Thus they were often astonished at the prophets, and
we often read in the Gospel that they were astonished at the teaching of
the Lord Christ;

1\) In the original margin.

[26 **Erl. 48, 133-136.** interpretations on John the Evangelist. \'
**W. vn, 2246-2249.** 27]{.underline}

for he would have taught mightily, as Matth. 7, 28. 29. is written.

\(56\) The others are the wicked men and the scoundrels, who defile and
blaspheme the known truth and doctrine. They feel and sense the power of
Christ\'s teaching, that it is the holy Scriptures and the Word of God,
and cannot resist it, saying that it is the right wisdom and well
founded; but we still will not accept or listen to his teaching, but
blaspheme it, saying that the devil has taught him this way and given it
to him, so that he may interpret the Scriptures. These, methinks, the
Lord especially toucheth herewith. For this is the way it is commonly
done, when one cannot do anything to the doctrine and truth, or one does
not want to believe in it, then one says: They are heretics, the devil
can also use the Scriptures, so that he sets his errors; must therefore
have the name that it is the devil\'s doctrine, which comes from the
devil\'s inspiration. Although it is publicly stated that it is God\'s
truth, they are still such fellows before they should become disciples
and give way to the truth, before they should trample the truth
underfoot; they thought it would be a disgrace for them if they should
learn anything.

\(57\) The papists and the fanatics are doing the same thing nowadays.
Because they did not invent our doctrine, it is not right; because the
pope and the monks did not start our doctrine, it must be called the
devil\'s doctrine, and the devil started it. Such peelers also wonder,
but nevertheless blaspheme the doctrine. But he still answers neatly,
and indicates where it comes from, because they want to say, as if he
had it out of his head, and speak this doctrine of the devil.

**My teaching is not mine.**

\(58\) He answers neatly, indicating that he understands well and
realizes that they blame him and blaspheme him, as if he had the
teaching from himself or from the devil. For he that speaketh of himself
speaketh of the devil. To this he answers and says, \"My doctrine is not
mine.\" But how does this rhyme? If it is not his, why then does he
preach it and push it, and take it so much to himself?

hard, and yet refuses to honor? Why does he not say, \"This is what I
preached\"? Does a Christian usually say: This is my preaching, my
baptism, my Christ, my God; item, my gospel; and yet it is not his,
because he did not make it, it does not come from him, it is not his
work; and yet it is his, his gift, it is given to him by God. Just as I
say: The child is mine, the man or the woman is mine; and yet it is not
yours, because you did not create it, it is someone else\'s work, given
and given to you; I did not cast it or carve it in this way, but it is
given to me in this way. In the same way the Lord Christ also says of
his teaching.

\(59\) I say the same thing: The gospel is mine to distinguish from all
other preachers\' doctrine, who otherwise do not have my doctrine.
Therefore I say: This is my teaching, Luther\'s; and yet I also say: It
is not my teaching, it is not in my hand, but God\'s gift. For, dear
Lord God, I did not invent it from my own head, it did not grow in my
garden, or spring from my well, nor was it born of me, but it is God\'s
gift, and not the gift of man. So it is both true that it is mine, and
yet it is not mine, for it is God\'s, the heavenly Father\'s, and yet I
preach and teach such doctrine.

60 He interprets it in this way himself and says v. 17: \"If anyone
wants to do the will of him who sent me, he will know whether I speak
from me or from God\"; my teaching is not mine, for it is God\'s, and I
preach it now.

\(61\) This is a necessary article, and even a beautiful text, that one
should speak in the house of fields, meadows, gardens, cows, butter,
calves, cheese, etc., as it does not concern the soul and the future
life, because these things are subject to reason, and say, \"This is
mine, since it does not concern the soul and the future life, as one
pleases, since these things are subject to reason, and say: This is
mine; but in the ministry of preaching, since it concerns the divine
word, this is what Christ says here, that no one preaches some doctrine,
unless he has defiance and ambush with him, that he does not preach his
own thing or doctrine, but that he is sure that he is called by God to
the ministry of preaching.

28 Erl. 48, i3\"-i38. Sermon on John 7:16-18. W. vn, 2249-2251. 29

\(62\) The others also all say that they teach the Word of God. No
devil, heretic, or spirit of the mob comes out and says, \"I devil or
heretic preach my doctrine,\" but they can all say, \"It is not my
doctrine, it is God\'s word; each one wants to have the name that it is
God\'s word that he is preaching. So also the pope and the priests do,
\"Let everyone see to it that he is sure when one is to speak of things
that do not concern the worldly, but the salvation and conscience, that
one knows where to leave the soul when we depart from here into another
life, so that every preacher and listener can then say: I did not invent
this teaching, it is not my gloss, interpretation or pretence, but of
Him who sent me.

Let everyone in Christendom be sure that preachers, teachers, pastors,
and all who speak the word are sure that their preaching is not their
own, but that they truly know that it is the word of God; or if they
doubt that it is the word of God, that they keep silent and do not open
their mouths, for they are sure beforehand that it is the word of God. A
man is a man, and soon dies, and with him die also his words and all his
thoughts; as it is written in the Psalm \[Ps. 146, 4.\], when it is over
with him, so is his word, his teaching, works, thoughts and powers also
over. For a mortal man\'s word is also mortal. If a man cannot have
eternal life through his preaching and teaching, then he should keep
silent, and hear God\'s word alone; for there is no life unless God\'s
word is with it, so that one can say: I did not get it from men, though
I got it through men. For the word of God abideth for ever: but the word
of man perisheth, and cannot be relied on. And if one is to die, one has
no consolation or help from man\'s word, rule, works and teachings;
everything is gone from Carthaeus\' order and other monks\' rules; and,
if God\'s word does not come to teach him something different and
better, he perishes, for man\'s words cannot hold the sting. Therefore,
a Christian, whether he is a preacher or a listener, should be sure that
he is not speaking his own word, but God\'s word, and that

Otherwise, it would be better if one of them had never been born, and
priest and listener, one with the other, had to go to the devil.

Therefore the pope with his brotherhoods and teachers is of the devil,
that in matters concerning the soul he preaches that which he himself
has composed. That should be by no means. Secular authorities, princes,
lords and lawyers can make law, give rights and teachings about house,
farm, villages, grain, wine, land and people, and everything that is
subject to people on earth; but in matters of faith, and concerning the
soul, act and want to do as one does with external and physical, with
oxen, with house and farm, that is not to be suffered.

65\. If now the pope comes trolled, teaches his own thoughts and words,
or a worldly lord wants to have his hand in the sod here, then I say:
Let it suffice thee with the things of the flesh, that thou mayest deal
with emperors, kings, princes, countries, and people, setting them down
and setting them up as thou pleasest, and know how to answer for them;
thou mayest set one as high as thou wilt: but here remember and give me
a baptism which thou hast not made, that thou and I may say, The baptism
is not thine, nor mine. So give me also the sacrament, which is also
ours. Lord God\'s, and is not yours. Item, the gospel or a sermon and
teaching, which is also not yours. Item, the comforting sayings from the
Scriptures; they are not called your sayings, but God\'s sayings.
Therefore say, Give a doctrine that is not thine, of which thou mayest
certainly say: This doctrine is not thine, nor the priest\'s, nor the
bishops\', but the doctrine of him that is in heaven: that thou mayest
give me a saying and comfort in time of trouble, which is not thine, but
God\'s. This is what he means in these words:

**My teaching is not mine, but His who sent me.**

He puts his profession before them, and speaks of his ministry as a
preacher, and not as a god. Otherwise, he is the Son of God and the Son
of Mary; that belongs in another sermon. But we do not speak of the
person of Christ now, lest someone should say: If the sermon is not his,
ei, then he is not Christ, but speaks of his

[30 Eri. 4s, iss-r\". Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
22L1-22L1. 31]{.underline}

Office. The boys or students speak of it in two ways, and use to
distinguish between the office and the person; just as the Elector of
Saxony is a man, who has body and soul, from which he is made; after
that he has an office, that he governs land and people, and can be a
prince. There one speaks differently of the office than of the person.
This is also the case here; the teaching that Christ leads does not
apply to the person, who is God, but to the office. He wants to say: I
am a preacher and have an office to teach; but the preaching is not
mine, it is not from myself, I have no lying teaching, but, as the
office is commanded me, so also the teaching of the divine word is
commanded me. I preach another man\'s word and will, and not my dreams,
which I would have invented; my heavenly Father has imposed the ministry
and the word upon me.

67 Now this is a fine preacher who has the two things, namely, the
ministry and the word. For a preacher should have these three virtues:
First, he should be able to perform. Second, he should not be silent.
Third, he should also be able to stop again.

The first thing is that he has an office, that he is certain that he is
called and sent, and that what he does he does for the sake of his
office. I am not to preach without being called, I am not to go to
Leipzig or Magdeburg and preach there, for I have neither a calling nor
an office there. Yes, if I hear that nothing but heresy is being
preached in Leipzig, let them do so anyway; it is not my business to let
them preach as they wish; I have sown nothing there, so I am not allowed
to cut anything in. But if our Lord God would have me do it, I would do
it, and I would have to do it; as I am called here to preach, and am
forced to preach.

69 Secondly, he should also be certain that he is teaching and preaching
the Word of God and is not teaching the doctrine of men or the doctrine
of devils. Then it is right for a preacher to first be certain that he
not only has the Word of God, but that he also has the ministry. For
otherwise all misfortune comes from the fact that the two parts, the
ministry and the word, are now transgressed and overflowed, as can be
seen in the enthusiasts who boast much about the Holy Spirit.

But they come of themselves, no one asked them, throwing around,
sneaking in and saying they are called by the Holy Spirit. Yes, by the
devil. I do not want to see a preacher in office, even if he does
miraculous signs, unless he is sure that he has a right teaching and
word, and a sure office, so that he knows that he is sent.

\(70\) There must be none without the other. For even if one has a
profession and office, such as the pope, bishops, who are spiritual,
they sit in office just as I and every preacher and pastor sit inside;
nevertheless, it is not enough that they should also have God\'s word
before them. On the other hand, even if one already has the word of God
before him, and is learned, and knows that it is the word of God, he
should keep silent and not take hold of the office, nor preach, unless
he is called to do so. It is not enough to have the word, he should keep
silent and not preach, and expect the calling.

\(71\) Moses was more learned than any man that ever lived on the earth;
yet he preached not at once, but the Lord told him six times, saying,
\"Go. He still quarreled with God, and strove against it, before he
accepted the ministry; and God overtook him six times, but he excused
himself much more, saying, \"I cannot speak\"; until he was forced in a
rage by God, and went up and preached. He might well have said that he
wanted to preach, for he was learned enough to do so; but he waited
until he was called to do so. He could have done it before the call, but
he refrained and kept to himself \[Ex. 3, 10. ff. 4, 1.\]. In the same
way the father of the house calls the servants, Matth. 25, v. 14 ff.,
and gives them his money or pound, so that they should trade and
advertise with it; the servants did not take the money themselves from
the master\'s hands, but waited for the profession. The monks also came
creeping along, saying: I have God\'s word, I have a pound, I am a
doctor, I must preach or be damned and lost. But it is not enough that
one has a pound, but I must also be called, that is, one must be sure
that God has placed me there. If then you have a pound, see to it that
it is not a

[32 Erl. 48, 141-14\". Sermon on John 7, 16-18. W. vn, 2254-2257.
33]{.underline}

Quintlein be. One must first be called; but if one wanted to do
something against the calling, it would be better that he had never been
born, so that the devil would not say to me: You have taken this seat
wrongfully, it is not commanded to you by God, you do not have the right
to do it. After that, one must also have the word of God. If the devil
then comes, let him oppose one who is stronger than I am.

This is the answer of the Lord Christ to the Jews this time, and he will
give them to understand: If ye despise me, ye despise him that sent me:
therefore despise not my word, lest ye despise another. I am sent; you
cannot blame the ministry; the command, the hot one, and also the word
are there; I have come to preach this doctrine. Yes, how do we know? Do
thus unto him, and see if it be right:

**V. 17 If anyone will do this, he will know whether this teaching is
from God or I am speaking from myself.**

73 Thus you learn it, that you see it and judge whether it is my word or
God\'s word; if you do the will of God the heavenly Father, then I may
well suffer you to be judges of my teaching. But how does one come to
this? It is a strange experience, and one will slowly come to the point
that we do the will of the Father. We have said above \[Cap. 6, § 142
ff.\] what the will of the Father is: that one should judge the
doctrine, 1) \[That one keep silence, and only hear that he is sent by
the Father; this is his will, that I teach, and you listen to me and
believe. If you do this and do not resist me, the Holy Spirit will
enlighten you and teach you that the Father\'s will is in Christ, that
he sent the Son to be heard. As in Matth. 17, v. 5, on the high mountain
Thabor the voice of God the heavenly Father was heard: \"This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, and you shall hear him.

74 This then is the will of the Father, that men should see and hear
what the man Christ is doing.

1\) For a proper understanding of these words, compare § 80 of this
chapter at the end.

and hear his word. Thou shalt not puzzle, master, or expostulate on his
word, but straightway hear it; then the Holy Spirit will come, and make
thy heart fine, that thou mayest heartily believe the preaching of the
divine word, and say, This is the word of God, and the pure truth, and
let thy life be over it. But if you want to be heard, and if you want
Christ to spread out his word according to our reason, if you dare to be
a master of it, to chew the cud of other doctrines, to investigate how
it is to be understood, to measure and direct it, so that the words must
be what you want them to be, and if you do not take it into
consideration until you have doubts about it, and if you want to judge
according to your own cops, that is, not to be heard, nor to be a
disciple, but to be a master; So thou shalt never come to know what is
the word of the Lord Christ, or what is the will of his heavenly Father.

Therefore, it is impossible for anyone to understand God\'s word who
wants to master it with his thoughts. As then the pope and the spirits
of the mob do; they take some saying from the holy scripture, slander
it, carve it, play with it, and do whatever they like with it, until
they are blinded by it. They make only a sign out of the sacrament of
the Lord\'s Supper, and they also despise baptism. In such a way one
never comes to understand it and can say: This is God\'s word.
Therefore, shut up your reason and trample your wisdom underfoot, and do
not let it grope, feel or think in matters concerning your salvation,
but badly listen only to what the Son of God speaks, what his word is,
and stay with it, for it is said: Hunc audite. To hear, to hear is the
word; for this is the pure and good work of the will of our Lord God.
And he promised that whoever hears the Son, he will give him the Holy
Spirit to enlighten him and set him on fire, so that he will understand
that it is the word of God; he will make a man out of him according to
all his good pleasure. This he will also do.

76 Again, he that will do his own will, and his own pleasure, and preach
what he pleaseth, and heareth what he chooseth and willeth, hath heaven
shut up and shut out, and shall never smell.

[34 Erl. i8, iis-its. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
rrsr-ssss. 35]{.underline}

or taste a grain or tittle of what a saying or word from the Scriptures
is. They may well shout it, item, make themselves think as if they
wanted to improve the holy scripture; but nothing comes of it. In the
same way it shall be with the pope with the enthusiasts, if they master
the Scriptures, then the Holy Spirit and heaven shall be closed before
them 1). It cannot and will not be otherwise, for God says: \"This is
the only one you shall hear, he shall be your preacher, your doctor and
your comforter; you shall hear him, not master him, not give him a way,
an aim or a measure; you shall neither reproach him nor find out how his
words are to be understood, but the whole world shall be under him;
remember and hear him, this is my will. If you hear him, I will make
disciples, yes, real masters out of you, so that you can judge all
teaching from my word.

\(77\) Well, a Christian soon seeks from afar where God\'s word is, or
where man\'s doctrine is, that one speaks of himself; he sees from afar
that the spirits of the wicked speak out of themselves, and out of
men\'s heads and senses. They cannot escape me, Luther, I can soon judge
and decide whether their thing is God\'s word or man\'s doctrine, for I
do God\'s will, who sent Christ. I have heard the word of God alone, and
I say: Dear Lord Christ, I will be your disciple, and I believe your
word, and I will close my eyes and give myself captive to your word. So
then he makes me a free heretic, yes, a fine doctor and teacher, who is
captive to the word of God, and can judge that the faith of the Pope,
the Turks, the Jews and the Sacramentarians is not right; they must fall
down, I throw them all under my feet, and have become a judge and doctor
who judges rightly. For though a heretic rages and rages for a time, yet
at last he must come down. A Christian can separate doctrine from
doctrine, and say: This is what God has said, this is not what he has
said. Item: This is from God, that is from the devil. Therefore St. Paul
says \[1 Cor. 2, 15\] that the spiritual man who has God\'s word judges
all doctrine, yes, all spirits, and the teachers and spirits can be
divided into two.

1\) Erlanger: those.

They do not judge him. Even though they come here and judge and condemn,
shout and bark, snarl and defy others, their judgment is still wrong,
and it does not remain, as otherwise a Christian\'s judgment remains
before God.

The Christian church has judged and condemned Arium, Pelagium, and all
other heretics, even plunged the sea of heretics into the abyss of hell,
by the divine word; not that she is a mistress over the word of God, but
that she has surrendered to the word of God, that she alone hears Christ
and does the will of him who sent him, and that she is a disciple of
this man, his word or teaching. Therefore she becomes a master over all.
And from this word she has decided that this teaching is right, but that
one is wrong; item, that this one is a heretic and does not teach right.
And even though I can distinguish which doctrine is of God or of man\'s
origin, I do not have the power to rule over the word of God or to
reject God\'s word, but because I am God\'s disciple, I become a master
over man\'s statutes and doctrine with my disciple\'s office, but not
over God\'s word and over God.

The Pope boasts that the Christian Church is above the Word of God. No,
not so. We must be disciples, not masters; for the disciple need not be
above his master. Therefore the Lord Christ says here: \"If you want to
understand my teaching correctly, accept me as a preacher sent by God.
As if to say: If you want to understand my word, it is not the way to go
about it; but rather, accept me as a preacher who has come from God, do
not seek to understand it, but because God speaks it, be silent and let
God\'s will be good for you. In the world, when a sovereign gives an
order, it must not be changed, but when he writes and gives orders to a
city, his letters and orders must be believed and not disputed. It is
the same with a householder. The servant must not question the master\'s
word and argue, but because the master has commanded it, he must believe
it.

36 Erl. ts, ns-its. Sermon on John 7:16-18. w. vn, wsg-2262. 37

Therefore let the servant be silent and do what the master has
commanded; let the servant say, \"The master has commanded,\" and let it
be done according to my master\'s will.

80 Here it shall be just like this. The Lord Christ wants to say: I am a
preacher, and God himself speaks it through me, it is his word, my
teaching is not mine, but God\'s, who has given it to me; therefore
remember and listen to what I speak. O no, they say, should we have the
GOD for a teacher? Should we be such simple-minded fellows? In paradise
we also wanted to be wiser than God Himself is, that is why we have
fallen so low. Well, this is the opinion: You shall become a judge of
the word of God, but not otherwise, than that you obey, and hear the
word of God, and do His will; if you keep to the word of God, you will
judge all teachings, and see whether it is the word of God or not, for
so it is decided. Now Christ speaks further:

**V. 18: He who speaks of himself seeks his own glory.**

As he judges, so do we judge. Whoever does not mean God\'s honor with
fidelity and seriousness, and speaks of himself, it is impossible that
he means well and speaks his word purely. For a servant who speaks his
own word and not his master\'s command is a liar; if he is hypocritical,
he will disgrace his master; he will not speak what the master has
commanded. If this happens in worldly matters, it happens much more in
matters of God and religion, when someone speaks and brings something
different from God\'s word or command. He who speaks of himself is
ambitious and idolatrous, and does not respect God, is God\'s enemy,
idolatrous; he preaches of himself what he wants, and seeks only that he
may be thought a learned man, and that he may be given much pay; he
wants to be heard alone, wants to have all power, to be subordinate and
to rumble as a tyrant; he does not ask where God and men\'s souls are.

Now, nevertheless, all heretics say they seek God\'s glory, all are
silent about God\'s glory. But I hear the words well, and in essence it
is no different than that a heretic

seeks his own honor, whether he says he means the honor of God and of
the holy Gospel; for they speak of themselves, and then want to adorn
themselves with it, so that they do not want to cause trouble. But
seeking God\'s glory must be done differently, namely, in such a way
that God\'s glory is preferred with all our faithful heart and
earnestness, yes, with righteous faith that it is the Holy Spirit\'s
request and not our own. For the devil also wants to prefer God\'s
glory, but not in the same way. It does not have to be devilish or
invented, but the work of the Holy Spirit and his inspiration in the
hearts of the believers.

**The fourth sermon.**

Saturday after Visitationis Mariae. \[8 July 1531\]. 1)

So far we have dealt with the two things, that, first, whoever wants to
know something certain, must lift up and believe. In other arts it is
so, that he who hears and sees much is taught; but in theology and in
divine wisdom neither hearing nor seeing, neither typing nor groping,
applies; but this alone is the beginning, that one hears and believes
the word of God. Whoever does not begin in this way will fail, and he
will not be able to do anything or preach rightly, even if he has the
wisdom of the whole world. This is the beginning of being taught in
spiritual and divine matters; the beginning is called believing the word
of God. Secondly, no one who wants to do things right should teach and
preach from himself, but he should do nothing else but God\'s word. That
is, the disciples must be kept together, and disciples and masters must
be bound together, so that whoever is a disciple and listener must hear
nothing but God\'s word; and again, the preacher must preach nothing but
God\'s word, otherwise it is error and damnable what is done outside of
this on both sides.

**Who sent me.**

84\. this doctrine cannot be unjust, nor can the man preach unjustly,
who is

1\) In the original in the margin, but there \"after\" is missing. The
Visitation of the Virgin Mary was on a Sunday in 1531.

Z8 Erl. 48, i4s-ik\>y. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2262-22W. Zg

Seeking the glory of God who sent him. But this is the glory of God, to
preach and praise God\'s grace, mercy, benefits and works alone, to
everyone\'s salvation. But he who preaches that we are justified by our
ability and works is lying like a wicked man, for he seeks his own
honor, and preaches his works and abilities so that he may be praised
and honored, and does not praise God\'s work, who sent his Son into the
world to die and be crucified, so that he alone might have the honor of
doing it and making us blessed without our doing or piety. This is
called honor.

But the unruly and sinful 1) nature cannot let it go, it wants to get
right with our Lord God, and to impose its good works on him and to
raise something against God, so that one can say: I have done this, I
have preached so much, I have fasted, I have prayed, and thus I have
lived holy like a pious man, woman, servant, maid. That\'s the point.
This filth still hangs on us from Adam and Eve, implanted in us in
paradise, who also wanted to have God\'s honor. Adam and Eve, our
forefathers, were after God\'s honor; everyone wants to have a piece of
the divine honor. But his own honor is sought, and God\'s honor is
weakened, so that I also want to have a hand in the sod, since God alone
should be given the honor. I also complain about myself. But he helps us
again out of pure grace, that he forgives our sin when we die.

The Jews and the pope cannot stand it either; so all the monks and nuns
oppose it; so the senseless, foolish, common man also opposes it; and we
also come up against it with difficulty. However, we have the advantage
that we let the doctrine go and remain; even though we cannot do with
our lives that we give God the glory so purely for the sake of our flesh
and blood, God has nevertheless given us the grace that we preach
rightly, and love the doctrine, and say: It is the truth. And the Holy
Spirit also follows this, saying, Let it be grace, and let it be no
other, but that we may preach the truth.

1\) extensional - stretchable, tough.

Without our works, by pure grace, we are saved. And even though we do
not like to live according to this teaching, it still says, \"Forgive us
our trespasses. This sin remains while we live; but forgiveness of sin
also remains, so that sin may not harm us, and we may praise God\'s
glory with preaching, thanksgiving, praise and confession, and also with
life, as much as we can, and God gives grace.

This is the summa: The disciple hears God\'s word, and the master
teaches God\'s word; both must give themselves captive here, they are
both captive, bound to God\'s word, which to preach and to hear, may not
turn aside to the right or to the left. Now if one steps out to one
side, he is wrong. He who does so 2) is he who seeks the glory of him
who sent him; and if sin remains in us, it does no harm. In him we are
true, and there is no unrighteousness in us, because we teach purely,
and preach of his grace, and receive his word by faith. Therefore this
unrighteousness is gone, it does not harm us. In doctrine there is no
falsehood, there we are pure and true through and through, doctrine is
righteous, for it is a gift of God; but in life there is still something
criminal and sinful, but it is given to us and not imputed to us; it is
not written in the register, but it is struck over it remissio
peccatorum, thereby sin is blotted out.

So we want to be called holy for the sake of doctrine, and we truly are.
For such is a righteous baptism, a true word of God of the sacrament of
the Lord\'s Supper, the holy Scriptures, and the Holy Spirit, and other
gifts of God more; thereby we are holy. In the papacy we were weak
saints with our good works. But if life does not want to go on, we may
crawl or creep. And even if we are frail saints in life, that there is a
lack, as that we do not fear, trust and love God enough, we do not
commit public vices, because we are not fornicators, adulterers or
usurers. And even if one falls into it, we are still in the word

2\) \"He who does\", namely: he who gives himself captive under God\'s
word.

**40Erl. \"s, sol-iss. Sermon on John 7:18-24. W. vn, 22W-22S8. 41**

God again, stop sinning, because the word of God is pure in itself,
delicious, loud, and the truth itself. There is nothing wrong in it. For
this is what the text says:

**V. 18 But he that seeketh the glory of him that sent him is true, and
there is no unrighteousness in him.**

The half piece, as, the life, is half pure; but the dear prayer comes to
it, which cries and sighs for forgiveness of sin. But the other piece is
completely pure, half of the teaching.

Thus the Lord Christ answered the Jews, who wanted to judge him
according to the appearance and pretense that he had not read the
Scriptures, and they looked upon him as a fool, thinking that he was not
learned, because he had not learned their art, but they alone knew the
word of God.

90 And now he comes to this, that they were after his life, and would
have killed him, because he had healed the poor man on the sabbath day:
and the Lord Christ will excuse himself, because he hath healed a man on
the sabbath day. For the Jews accused him of breaking the Sabbath, as we
have just heard in the fifth chapter, v. 16. The Jews were hard on the
Sabbath, and would not suffer him to heal a sick person on that day. And
he had many disputes about it and was scolded as a heretic, Matth. 12,
2. 10. Marc. 3, 2. ff. And a Pharisee stood up once, and said unto the
people, Come not on the sabbath day, but at other times in the week, and
be healed: and the Lord Christ answered and said, Do ye not water your
oxen and asses on the sabbath day or on Sunday, 2c. and silence them
with their own example. So does he here also, excusing himself, and
saying, Ye accuse me that I have broken the sabbath: this shall be the
heresy and sin which I have committed, wherefore ye would put me to
death: but if it be a sin, and worthy of death, ye ought to be put to
death also, all of you: for ye break the law of the sabbath much more
grossly than I do. And turn therefore the accusation which they brought
against him upon their own heads, saying:

**V. 19. Did not Moses give you the law, and no one among you keeps the
law; why do you seek to kill me?**

\(91\) He does not speak of the whole law of Moses, though it would not
be a bad opinion if someone were to interpret it that way. But I take it
that this is the opinion: Moses gave you a law of the Sabbath, why do
you not keep it? You punish me for breaking the Sabbath, and you praise
and extol yourselves for breaking it, and say that it is well done to
circumcise a child on the Sabbath day. This was Mosi\'s commandment, to
circumcise the babe on the eighth day \[Gen. 17:12\]. Item, he gave a
law that one should not work on the Sabbath, and that one should keep it
strictly. Now it often happened that the eighth day of the child\'s
birth was on the Sabbath; for one child was born on that day, and
another on another day, and many children were born on the Sabbath day;
and you circumcise people on the Sabbath day, boasting that you keep the
Law of Moses by circumcising a child on the eighth day; and yet it is
against the Sabbath, for God has forbidden that one should do no work at
all on that day; how will you bring this together?

92\. so he turned their own question and blasphemy, and thrust it into
their own jaws; saying, If it be lawful for you to circumcise a child on
the sabbath day, it is lawful for me also to heal a sick man on the
sabbath day; but if it be not lawful for me, it is not lawful for you.
For Moses permitted an ass and an ox to be drawn out of the well on the
Sabbath day. Therefore, to help a man from his sickness is also a good
work. Therefore, if your works do not break the law of the Sabbath,
neither will my good works break the law. I have as good a cause as you.
If your works are good, so are mine. Ye have the law of Moses concerning
the sabbath day, wherein ye shall do no work: but there is none of you
that keepeth the sabbath day, or the law, because ye circumcise the
little children that are born on the sabbath day. What will they answer
to this? They excuse themselves by saying that they must obey Most, who
has commanded it. Now therefore ye go on, and dissolve the law of Moses
by

42 Erl. \"8, ISS-ISS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vii,
2258-2270. 43

another law, and the sabbath must give way to circumcision; circumcision
breaks the sabbath; therefore take yourselves by the nose, hold my work
against yours, and they must kill you before me.

It can also be understood from the whole law that they have not kept it,
but I think that the same mind is too high and too sharp, that no one
keeps the law; because this is also St. Paul\'s teaching and opinion.
But I now leave it pending that Moses gave the law, but Christ
established and brought the truth and grace 2c. But this is the best
understanding of the words of Christ, in which I stand, that he says, Ye
break the law as well as I. For if ye would keep the law, ye must
confess that I also keep it. If therefore I do a good work on the
sabbath day, as good as circumcision, ye shall not punish me. If yours
is good, mine is also good. Then the people said:

**V. 20. You have the devil; who seeks to kill you?**

It may be that there were pious people who liked this answer, that he
convinced them that he had not done wrong, and therefore should not be
put to death; but there are others among them, who are nevertheless
annoyed, as hopeful, coarse asses, who cannot stand the truth, who say:
Do you want to reproach us as slayers? Do you want to defile us holy
people? Who wants to kill you? Just as our papists forbid, and do not
want to suffer, that it should be said and held of them that they are
murderers, or kill without cause, or persecute the gospel and truth. So
these also will not have the name, saying, \"Thou hast the devil.\"

95\. like the murderers and bloodhounds who kill so many people, and yet
want to have the honor of being able to boast that they have done God a
service. Let it be said that they acted well, and whoever said or judged
otherwise must have a devil. Nevertheless, one must tell them the truth:
\"Why did you kill? Then they say, \"O wicked man, do you think we are
killing you? They shed no blood for the sake of the gospel.

but want to defend the gospel; they want to have the name that they are
God\'s servants and do right, do not want to have the imprint 1) that
they pursue it, but that they represent it; despite that someone else
says. It speaks Christ semer:

**V. 21. I have done some work, and you all marvel at it.**

96\. He wants to say: You cannot give me one good work and give me
credit for it, since you break the law yearly and daily. You can be
silent about yours, and clean and decorate your works, but you cannot
give me credit for one work.

Well, it is true that we and all Christians are still in the same
situation, we also have to suffer it from our adversaries, there is
nothing good with them, they are vain devils; there is unbelief, false
trust, great contempt, the highest blasphemy, disobedience to authority,
murder, thievery, fornication, their life is the sorrowful devil and
hell itself. We must give them credit for this. But when they hear that
one of us has talked too much, or taken half a monastery, or seized a
spiritual good, they say, \"Oh, that is a great sin. And even if we do
good works, that we suffer, preach, give alms; still it is not right. In
sum, the Lord Christ cannot be credited with a single work, but what
they do, regardless of the fact that it is not fit for the dogs, or even
belongs to the devil, is so holy and delicious a thing that covers up
all their evil. Well, this is the world\'s judgment; the mote in our eye
must come forth, they must wash their mouths with it; but their beam
must be nothing. This is very grievous in the world. For we cannot be
without sin, though it be one drink too many, notwithstanding that the
world is full and drunken, yea, drowned in sins. But their *vitia*.
should be nothing, they adorn themselves, do not want to let it be evil,
color themselves with their baseless sins, and challenge the saints of
God for the sake of a splinter, or for the sake of a small sin.

1\) Imprint \-- what one imposes on someone, reproach.

44 **Erl. 48, LSS-1SS. Sermon on John 7:18-24. W. VII, 2270-2273.** 45

98 But this is enough, that Christ saith, He that seeketh the glory of
him that sent me is true. We have this testimony, which the world, the
earth, the angels, and all creatures must bear witness to us on the last
day. In the meantime we must suffer that the world rages and rages
against us, and does not let us do one good work, but blasphemes
everything, and adorns all its evil works against it. They can do no
evil, neither have we done a work that they praise; but we cannot and
will not praise their works. We may be satisfied that we have a gracious
judge in heaven; yet we shall have more consolation than they. I D.
Luther know that my preaching will be witnessed by the birds, the stones
and the sand of the sea, for I will have more comfort than all of them.
The Lord pours out to them even better, and says:

**V. 22. 23. Moses therefore gave you circumcision, not that it came
from Moses, but from \[the\] fathers. Nor do ye circumcise a man on the
sabbath day. If a man receive circumcision on the sabbath day, lest the
law of Moses be broken: are ye then angry with me, because I have made
all man whole on the sabbath day?**

99\. There were two laws of circumcision: one adopted by the fathers;
the other given by Moses. And circumcision was kept more gloriously than
the Sabbath. Cause the Sabbath had to give way to circumcision, and if a
child was born on the Sabbath, it was done as if there were no Sabbath,
and the law had to be broken from the Sabbath. Why then will ye be
angry, that I have healed the whole man on the sabbath day? It is a
strong answer, and probably the other way around. Moses must depart for
the sake of the fathers\' laws; why then do you press hard upon me that
I have made a whole man whole on the Sabbath? Moses must go back for
your sake, and you want to punish me. As if he wanted to say: You are
blind, mad and foolish, you do not know what you are saying, you do it
worse than I do. For my work is greater, to help a whole man on the
Sabbath. I

I have not only circumcised him, but I have brought him completely to
rights. So you are running nonsensically with it, you do not know what
you are talking about. My work is much more glorious and greater than
circumcision. It is ever so much more, to help the whole man, to love
the man as oneself, to help him when it is necessary, God grant it be
done on the Sabbath, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, or when he needs it. And
if I should break the love of my neighbor for the sake of the Sabbath, I
will not do it, saying, Troll the Sabbath. For when trouble comes, this
commandment ceases. For there cometh another, which saith, Love God thy
Lord, and love thy neighbor as thyself \[Matt. 22:37, 39. 1\] Ye may
well say, Troll the Sabbath, when there cometh the law to circumcise a
child on the eighth day.

\(100\) But it is of no avail, for Christ does not make a difference
with it. Even if the Jews are overcome with the truth, they still say,
\"We will not do it. So do our young men, the papists, who also rage and
rage against us in the name of the devil. Therefore we do not want to be
better than our Lord Christ was; we are not worth better. If they
despise these words of Christ, who answers so strongly, they will also
despise our doctrine, and in this they will do as their fathers did,
that they publicly resist the truth. It is enough that we have a witness
for us who is greater than they are, and we should do as the Lord Christ
does here, who only rubs the holy scripture and the divine word in their
noses honestly.

**V 24. Do not judge by reputation.**

He chides and warns them that they should not judge according to their
foolish head and discretion, and how they look at it. As through a
painted glass that loses its color; so a blinded man does not look at
anything rightly with his crazy thoughts, even though he has words of
truth before him, for his heart is embittered and inflamed with hatred,
it is like a colored painted glass: as he is in his heart, so he looks
at another, namely as an enemy, whom he resents with all his heart.

[46 Erl. i8, iss-iso. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2273-227.\" 47]{.underline}

and repugnant. You can adorn yourselves finely, and look at your date
and work as a good cloth or precious stone without glasses; that is what
the painted glass does. Why do you not also look at me with your eyes,
so that you look at yourselves? My work is a hundred times better than
yours, nor must mine be evil and wicked, but yours is good and precious;
so your heart is corrupt, and your eyes are unclean.

This is how it is in the world: no one looks at another with pure eyes,
except a Christian whose face is bright and pure. He looks at his enemy
with eyes of mercy and grace, and does not allow him any evil; and if
his enemy is equally bitter and evil against him, he thinks: This great
Hans is a wretched man, he is already damned, what would you wish him
still much evil? if he remains so, he is the devil\'s own. I have pity
for him and would like to make him blessed. Others look at another
according to their hatred, envy and jealousy; as they look at us as
evil-doers. To this the Lord Christ says: \"Judge not according to
outward appearance, but judge righteously,\" that is, look righteously
at the work and at myself.

\(103\) Now this is done for us as an example and comfort, so that we
should not be dismayed when this happens to us. The truth is preached
and heard, but one is also scolded as if one were a liar. And even if
one answers in the best way that it is clearer and brighter than the
dear sun, one must still be scolded and blasphemed about it; nothing
else comes of it, we must let ourselves be condemned and looked at
through glass eyes. Well, if it is not to be otherwise, then it may
remain so; if one looks at it through a painted glass, then it is so; I
will not make it better. The same happened to the Lord Christ; they
called him a rebel, yes, they called the father of the house Beelzebub,
therefore they will also call us devils \[Matth. 10, 25\]. And we suffer
it justly. But as he hath brought it forth, so shall we bring it forth
by his help.

1\) Erlanger: \"vollst.

**The fifth sermon on the seventh chapter of John?**

\[Saturday, July 15, 1531.\]

104\) The Lord Christ, having done his work, excuses himself against the
Jews, who punished him for having healed on the sabbath day, and puts
circumcision under their eyes to show that they circumcised men on the
sabbath day, so that they broke the sabbath day more than he did; and
concludes, \"Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteously.
Can ye take it to yourselves, when ye break the sabbath day with
circumcision, and water oxen and asses on the sabbath day, and when the
priests light the candle, and slay the sacrifices, and have made fire,
and laid wood? by which works you do not call them transgressors of
God\'s Sabbath, ei, you should also give me credit for having done a
greater and better work, because there is slaughtering, watering cows
and horses, feeding or sacrificing 2c.

\(105\) The answer is enough for them, but it is of no account. For in
the world it is said, What Christ does is never right, it is not good;
but what the devil and the world do cannot be wrong. Therefore we are to
learn that what Christians do that is right, delicious and good is not
good. The cause is that one is hostile to the person, therefore one
judges according to the reputation of the person. And if this happens,
their \[the Christians\'\] 3) deeds can soon be blamed, if what they do
is equally good. 4) They were also enemies of Christ, therefore they
could not stand what he did. What is finer and better than making a man
well? But it must have the defect that it is done on the Sabbath. But
their pruning, sacrificing, burning incense, burning wood, slaughtering
every evening, that was not sin, because the Jews did it. If Christ had
done it, it would not have been good and should have been a sin.

106 Thus it is: what Christ and the

2\) In the original without time determination. Our date is derived from
that of the next two sermons.

3\) \"of Christians\" inserted by us.

4\) \"thun\" put by us instead of: \"thut\".

[48 **Eri. 4s, iso-iss. Sermon on John 7:25-29. W. vn, 227S-2278.**
49]{.underline}

Doing his own is and must be wrong, but what the devil and his do must
be right. Do we not also see it with the pope? All the good we do is
evil done; and though they do not publicly blaspheme, yet they say, O,
all heretics also lead such good appearances, serve everyone gladly, and
do it for this reason, that they draw people to themselves and seduce
them. But if public lies and sin are found among them, yet they have
forgiveness of sin daily; they are pure, but among us none is pure; our
daily sins must be the greatest sins, even mortal sins, and have no
forgiveness. In sum, one must be prepared for this: if one does good, it
is punished, it is judged evil; but if they do evil, it must be of the
very best thing. Again, if the world does the greatest sin, it must be
right. So now also the pope does with his princes; they lie, deceive,
and steal, and all must be well done. Well, one must suffer it.

107\. But we know that even though we have weakness and sin in us, we
expect forgiveness of sin, not from the world, but from God. If I do
something good, it pleases God. We must set our good works so that they
will be judged as good works in the sight of God; we must make them
presentable to him. But if we are punished by the world, let the devil
strike at the world. If I do something that is infirm, I pray to my Lord
God to forgive me, I crawl into the Pater noster and say: Dimitte nobis
debita nostra. With this, the world should throw its mouth away; it has
enough to do with its sins and must not wash its mouth with us. Now
follows how they have held themselves against this sermon of the Lord
Christ.

**V. 25. 26. Then said some of Jerusalem, Is not this he whom they
sought to kill? and behold, he speaketh freely 2c.**

In the beginning of this chapter, the evangelist St. John writes that
the Lord Christ no longer preached in the Jewish country, because the
Jews wanted to kill Him; for this reason He fled from the devils and
remained in Galilee until the feast.

When the same thing comes, he goes up to Jerusalem and preaches so
freely that the people were amazed and said, \"How is this? Earlier they
were after him because he could not stay in Judea, they did not want to
suffer him, but should be killed; now he preaches publicly in the temple
in front of them: how is it that they do not attack him? do not speak to
him, keep quiet about it, since they wanted to strangle him before; I
mean, they should almost take him for the Christ, believe in him and
convert. We do not know what kind of people they are, whether they are
pious or wicked. He goes up into Judea, from which he had fled before.
It seems as if they were more afraid of him than that he should be
afraid of them, who had previously chased him out of Judea. Truly, it is
a great miraculous sign that he teaches and preaches in the temple, as
if no one were there to do him any harm; this may be called courage. I
think that the Pharisees have now certainly learned that he is Christ,
but it sounds as if they were flying theids and speeches. Neither this
nor that is smelled, and they themselves go back and speak:

**V. 27. But we know from whence this is. But when Christ comes, no one
will know 2c.**

\(109\) So they conclude, and this speech will have become obscenities
among the common man 1) although it has been clearly expressed in the
holy Scriptures. Therefore they knew that Christ should be born of the
seed, lineage, and lineage of David, and they certainly knew that he
should be born out of the city of Bethlehem. This much they knew; the
people were persuaded that Christ was to be expected from the land of
Judah and from the tribe of David. This was the prophecy of Christ, and
there was a clear text of it. There was still talk among the Jewish
people that the Messiah would come secretly, so that no one would know
where he was coming from.

\(110\) But I hold that this saying or discourse is from the prophet
Micah.

1\) Zote-Zottel.-to zote go-hasten, root in.

[50 **Erl. 4S, 1S2-1W.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VII, W78-2L8I.** 51]{.underline}

as it is written: His coming forth is from eternity 2c. \[God wanted to
hide the birth of His Son so that He would be born in Bethlehem, but
where and how He would come from, no man would know nor be able to
calculate. They wanted to interpret the prophecy that Christ would come
from somewhere other than David, that it would be strange, and that it
would be a miraculous future; just as his mother also became a strange
mother, he had a strange, miraculous arrival. Now, they have known the
city as Bethlehem, the country as Judea, and the lineage, namely
David\'s, from which Christ was to be born, and yet they are not to know
the person. And I think that this saying among the people, that one
would not know from where the Messiah would come, originated from the
fact that the coarse, unintelligent people interpreted it as if one
should not know from which city, from which parents he would come.

\(111\) These two things were well understood by the prophets, and by
the fathers that read the prophets, that he should be conceived of a
virgin, and be born of the seed of David, and yet be from everlasting;
but that it should be in secret and in obscurity, that no man should
know it so soon. Therefore this speech remained among the people and was
formed in them, that he would come secretly and miraculously, that no
one should know where, how, or from where he would come; he would be
born miraculously. This is what the Fathers 1) meant in the Gospel, that
if the Messiah appeared in the world, no one would know where he came
from, namely, that he would be born of a virgin; he would also be a
preacher, so that no one would know anything about it. Therefore the
Jews say: We know him, we know his brothers, sisters and Mariam; but we
are not to know where the Messiah comes from, but this one we know,
therefore he is not the Messiah.

112 So it\'s loose students, they may well hear ringing, but do not beat
up.

1\) \"The Fathers\" are here the just mentioned believing Israelites
before Christ, who read the prophets; \"in the Gospel\" - at the time of
the Gospel.

He that heareth not well, he that believeth not well. They have heard
that Christ should come in such a way that one does not know from where;
but they have not understood correctly that he should be born of God
from a virgin, and thus come secretly into the world, as Micah says;
therefore they have led the saying of the fathers wrongly, and wanted to
comfort themselves with the fact that he is not Christ. On this speech
of the people Christ starts a new sermon, which reads thus:

V. 28. 29. Then cried JEsus in the temple, teaching, and saying, Ye know
me, and from whence I am, and of myself I am not: but he that sent me is
the true, whom ye know not, but I know him: for I am of him, and he hath
sent me.

St. John sums up this sermon briefly with few words, but the Lord Christ
will have expressed it much more abundantly and beautifully. And John
adds that Christ shouted and cried with a full voice, and preached
strongly. The sermon is: You know me, and know from whence I am. It
seems to me that he meets their wrong thoughts and minds, so that they
think they know where he comes from. But I do not want to defend any
opinion or understanding, but let it remain so; however, the following
words indicate that they do not know his future.

It is a truthful one who has sent me.

\(114\) As if to say, Ye know not of whom I am: for if ye knew, ye would
know him that sent me: if ye read your scriptures, ye would know whence
the Messiah was. So it is: Because you do not know the one who sends the
Messiah, you do not know the one who is sent. Therefore it is mockingly
said, \"You know from whence I am.\" And how well ye know it; for ye
know not him that sent me, how shall ye know me, and whence I am? Though
it be true, and ye know it, that I am come from Nazareth, out of Galilee
and Judea; yet that same coming is not enough, unless some more be known
of it. Just as if I alone knew that a message is over the Elbe bridge
from

[52 **Erl. 4S, IS5-167. Sermon on John 7:25-29. W. VII, 2281-2284.**
53]{.underline}

Brata 1) and Kemberg come to the city of Wittenberg, and I wanted to say
that I wanted to know the message of it; but what is this knowing? Not
yet, it does not follow, one would take me for a fool, if I wanted to
say, where it would be from, because it would have come over the Elbe,
because it goes daily much in over the Elbbrücke. They are just as
clever in this chapter. Therefore he takes an occasion from their words
and says: \"You do not know at all where I am from, but it is important
that you know the one who sent me and who I am. This art is preached to
the people, and Christ speaks:

**I hm not come from myself.**

115 As if to say, Ye shall know me otherwise than that I come from
Galilee, and from Nazareth: for many other Jews also come from Nazareth,
but they come not as I come: for I come as a preacher sent to preach the
ministry and the word which is commanded him. But it is necessary for
you to know him who sent me; we are arguing about this, that you may
know him from whom a message is sent and him who is sent. If we know
this, accept the message; though you do not know the face of the
messenger, take the seal and the letters from him, they are known.
Whoever does not believe that God sent me and that I am from God, does
not believe me to be a preacher; but whoever knows it is easy to talk
to, and I can deal with him, because he will look at me with different
eyes and accept me, and will not believe me to be a bad Nazarene. So he
also said above \[Cap. 6, 37\]: \"Whoever hears it from the Father comes
to me\" 2c. Item \[Cap. 6, 44.\]: \"No one comes to me, the Father draws
him.\" It is almost one opinion.

\(116\) It is essential for anyone who wants to become a Christian to
know that Christ was sent by the Father, so that I may know where he
came from. This is the sermon and the argument, for which we must accept
Christ and cling to him in such a way that we

1\) \"Brate\", the next village to Wittenberg, beyond the Elbe. - In the
original, \"Kemburg\" instead of Kemberg.

We do not speak or act of God, for we have this man before our eyes. Be
mindful that I have preached it; let others speculate sharply about God,
Creator of heaven and earth, about the angels and other creatures, how
God created heaven and earth; let them do so, sing about our Lord God,
dance and jump. But when one begins to speak of our main article, which
makes us Christians, it is even necessary that I take hold of Christ,
who is sent by the Father, and also learn to recognize the Father, to
understand Christ\'s office and word; otherwise, if this is taken away
from one\'s eyes, then one is lost. You will not become a Christian by
knowing that God created heaven and earth; this knowledge does not
redeem you from sins or from the devil, nor does it make you blessed,
for otherwise even the Turk would be a Christian. And if you want to be
saved, your good works will not make God look at you and your good
works; but learn to become a Christian in this way, so that you do not
know how to do it, but put down your hands and feet and all your arts
and works, and badly lift up your ears and hold them, and badly hold on
to the Lord Christ, and hang on his mouth and listen to his words,
because they have been put into his mouth by the Father.

Notice it, hang on to it, and believe it. So I am a Christian when I
have attained that which is the chief article. After that I go and
preach about the righteousness of the law, about worldly authority,
about obedience, how one owes father and mother, how one should honor
them, and also preach about other things, about all other things that
God has also commanded, such as not killing, stealing, committing
adultery, etc., which also have their time and place. But here, if one
wants to act as a Christian and become pious; item, get rid of sin,
death and the devil, I should not disputing about the righteousness of
the law, how to do good works, become obedient to father and mother,
give alms, or enter a monastery.

2\) \"that has its decision\" - that happens at its place and time.
Compare the following paragraph: \"which also have their space and
time.\"

54 Eri. 4s, IS7-4SS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2284-228.\" 55

run 2c. Here belongs especially that I listen to the preacher alone. As
the Lord Christ also says to Martha in the Gospel \[Luc. 10, 42.j: Maria
optimam partem elegit, et unum est necessarium etc.\]. You, Martha, are
diligent, you do a lot, you work delicious, good works, you rule house
and court, you are a mayor, a servant and a maid, or a preacher; but it
does not work. Mary hit it, the rhymes 1) added, she sits at my feet,
and hears my word, so she hits it, goes 2) straight. That is the handle,
alone hear me; the piece thut\'s alone. After that, Mary will also do
what you carefully do Martha, the same will also be found afterwards.

118 This is the reason that we may distinguish the righteousness of
works from the righteousness of faith; and he who learns this well will
preach better than I can preach. Therefore we are called Christians;
otherwise we would have enough of Moses, who teaches us how we should
live, and it is finely found in Moses. But the man, Christ, comes for
the sake of this article, preaches, baptizes, establishes the word,
preaching ministry and the sacraments, and has given himself. Now we
have to: 3) hear his word, and actually recognize and believe that God
speaks through him. Therefore, if one is to deal with conscience, sin,
life, death, or even with God or the devil, remember \[the word of
Christ\] 4) and leave everything in the world. Let Martham go to the
kitchen, wash pots; let Martham put away, and become M\[aria\]
Magdalene. For Mary remembereth, It is mine not to seek works and merit,
but only to listen to his mouth, and believe his word; then it meet, his
mouth then speaketh vain sweet words, which comfort, refresh, and
refresh her heart; for he saith \[Luc. 19, 10.\]:- \"The Son of man is
not come to condemn any man, but to seek that which was lost.\" Item

1\) \"rhyme\" here is probably as much as: hit the target. Cf.
\"geramen\", Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, 1941,? 2.

2\) \"goes\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) \"There it is now:\" put by us instead of: \"That is now,\" and so
on.

4\) Switched on by us.

\[Matth. 11, 28.\] \"Come to me, all you who labor, and I will give you
rest.\"

\(119\) So he also is called a savior, that he may save. When he speaks
the same words, this is the art of learning where the man and these
words come from, and to conclude and say: He does not speak these words
from himself as a man alone, but it is the true word of God, and I know
no other God. So the article hits the conscience particularly, that one
hears only what the man, Christ says, and let the God now go, who
pretends to honor the parents, to be obedient to the authorities. When
one hears this man in matters d\'conscience, that is \"to know\". For in
this way one hears and recognizes the true God who sent Christ, and one
then also recognizes the Christ who was sent.

120 The Lord Christ teaches the Jews, saying, Ye know me well; ye know
that I am come out of Nazareth unto the gate: but ye shall learn whence
the person is, and whence he bringeth his word, and that his word alone
is to be hearkened unto. He does not send you away to another, nor put
another in his place, but says, \"Listen to me, believe in me, I point
you to me, I am sent by my Father; so I preach to you, I come to you as
a preacher, bringing a word from the Father: do not doubt it, and you
will know who I am and where I am from. But if thou believe not, and
suppose otherwise, thou shalt not know me, nor him that sent me, neither
shalt thou know whence I am. Then he said:

**I did not come from myself.**

The sermon is there, and yet always points to another, indicates from
whence he came. I have not come from myself,\" he says; \"but from
whence I have come I will tell you: you will not know, and are mistaken,
you do not know from yourselves, from whence I have come. Ye know me,
from whence I come, yea, that I come in at the gate; but that doth not,
it profiteth you nothing that ye know it: for no man knoweth him that
sent me, but by

56 **Erl. 48, ISS-I7S. Sermon on John 7:25-29. W. VII, 2286-228S.** 57

my mouth, that my word may be heard; it must be made known to you by my
word and mouth. And says further:

**But he is a truthful one who has sent me.**

This will have been a beautiful sermon, which can be seen in the words;
they have an emphasin. He does not name him, but they understood that he
meant God; however, they are good fellows, 1) and did not understand. He
goeth to the words, and saith, The words that I speak are the truth
itself: for he that sent me doth not lie, but is true; whatsoever he
speaketh is the truth. Do not say, God sent me, whom you do not know; he
does not say this, and yet he means it. As if he wanted to say: If I
preach the truth to you for a long time, then I must lie to you; my
word, which is commanded to me, will not be heard. Our Lord God must
always be a liar and a disciple in the world, and let himself be
mastered by its reason. This still happens often, as we also read in the
Gospel; everyone lets himself think that they are the people who are
supposed to judge and master God\'s word. That is also where the spirits
of the sects come from, and what Christ says must be a lie and a
forgery. The Lord Christ still comforts himself here: Even though I must
be a liar, God sends me to you, and I know him and know that he is true.
As if he should say, \"My office and the word that I speak is the truth,
for I know it; and because it is preached to you, you do not want to
hear it, so you remain liars; and \[it\] goes as the prophet David says
in the 51st Psalm, v. 6, \"That you may be right when you are judged.\"

This strife of the devil with his limbs, against God, remains in the
world, that when the devil speaks, it must be called truth, and when God
speaks, it must be lies, since God is the truth. The world does not want
to be wrong, nor to be mastered, but to quarrel with God, to speak: We
are learned enough, as these ungodly drops

1\) As the context shows, the word \"good fellows\" is taken here in an
evil sense, for instance for: Hypocrites; in ? 123, Luther calls them
\"godless drops.

and say, \"We know from whence you come. But the Lord Christ answers:
You know, alas, too little of it, if God would have you know it! you
know it), that God may have mercy on you! if one wants to tell you, you
do not want to hear it. Therefore, I say, the world disputes with God;
his word must be the devil\'s word, and their word must be God\'s word.
Let this be the right fruit for me.

Dear, what does the pope do with his companions, and also the spirits of
the rotten? They go about, and are called deceivers, preaching and
teaching God\'s word; this must be the truth. If we say that we are from
God, and that in our preaching God Himself is heard, and that the grace,
goodness and mercy of God are offered, they say, \"Where do you come
from? It must all be no, it must be the devil and vain heresy. This is
because they do not know Him whose word we teach and guide, and who sent
us, therefore they cannot do the will of the heavenly Father. The Lord
Christ insists on it, as do we; but he cannot obtain it, as we cannot
obtain it either. Therefore we let it go as it goes; we are excused.

Now some have believed that his word and doctrine is the Father\'s word
and doctrine, who does not lie, saying, \"We know this man, and we know
that he is from God. He who stands on this, and who can thus praise
Christ\'s word, and believes it to be spoken by God, who is true, can
boast and insist on the word (it is true), and make the heart firm, and
say: God is nevertheless true, and should the world be so much annoyed
by it, or should it immediately have heartache over it. He who believes
this, that he makes no doubt of it, is well, for therefore he is called
a Christian; for he does not deal in commandments and works, but with
Mary he bears himself to his neighbor, that is, how he may become a
Christian. For thus are we Christians, when we hear the word, and accept
the same, and believe that the word is sure and true.

Then I learn where Christ came from, that Christ is the Son of God, sent
by God, and then through the Holy Spirit.

58 Erl. \"s, I7S-174. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
22M-22M. 59

Holy. Spirit and was born of a virgin. And I find and learn everything
in his word. For everything is in his word, which God speaks through his
mouth. We become Christians through the Word, and through the Word sin
is remitted, for it preaches forgiveness of sins. His words serve that
one may be freed from sins, attain blessedness and eternal life; we are
thereby delivered from the devil and death, for his words all go against
sin, the devil and death, and give eternal life. One has forgiveness of
sins and all good things from it; he also makes us righteous, for his
word deals with righteousness. Then a Christian knows that Christ is the
Son of God, born of a virgin.

\(127\) When I deal with my sins, I find no good work that I have done,
but hear all the works that Christ does, and gives me his grace. I ask
nothing here of that which I do. They do not know this, they do not know
the one who sent him, therefore they will not accept his word and cannot
be saved. In sum, they cannot be Christians, because they hear their own
word, and must remain in the devil\'s prison, because they completely
despise Christ. Thus God has bound us to the man, Christ, and He has
always been concerned about this word of Christ. Mary therefore sits at
the feet of Christ and listens to him teach the word of God. In the
piece (which makes Christians) there I recognize Christ 2c. The other
things may also be done with Martha, washing, sweeping, cooking and
being busy. Follows:

**And I know him, and am sent by him.**

I have the nature of him from eternity, as it is written in the prophet
Micah \[Cap. 5, 1.\] I am his only begotten Son, born of him from
everlasting; he also sent me into the flesh, that I should be born of
the virgin man, and sent me to be a preacher, and to preach this
ministry. If you can believe that he is the Son of God, and that his
preaching ministry is the Word of God, then you have done well, and
abide in these words, and know that you are the Son of God.

sin, death and the devil, because you know the Christ who is sent by the
Father, and you cling to this person alone. When you hear the same, you
also hear the Father, from whom the Son is sent; then you hear words of
grace, and I can say: I hear that God speaks nothing through man but
grace and forgiveness of sin; there is no wrath, no example of disgrace,
nor punishment for sinners, but grace reigns \[Ps. 117, 2\]. This is the
sermon that he, Christ, is of God; and he himself interpreted it, what
it is to be of God, and that he knows God. And they also understood it
well, but they would not let it be known; therefore they were angry and
wanted to seize him, but he got away.

**The sixth sermon.**

On Saturday, M. Magdalen\'s Day 522 July

129 Next we heard how the Lord preached against the Jews, saying: You do
not know me, who I am, I did not come from myself, he is true who sent
me 2c. Then you have heard that the opinion of these words is that they
know neither Christ nor the Father, for they do not accept his message
and word which he teaches and brings, thinking they are wiser than he.
But if they had accepted him, they would have known that he was sent by
God. Well, what do they do?

**V. 30, 31 Then they sought to lay hold on him, but no one laid a hand
on him, for his hour had not yet come. But many of the people believed
in him, and said: When Christ comes, will he also do more signs than
this one does?**

130 John says that the Jews decided to seize him, because he preached a
shameful thing, that they did not know him who sent him. This was an
insulting sermon, because they did not know who he was.

1\) In the original in the margin, but there it is erroneously written
\"after\" M. Magdalenen-Tage. The Saturday after Maria Magdalma in 1531
was July 29, the same day on which the seventh sermon was preached,
\"Sonnabend nach Jacobi\".

[60 Erl. 48, 171-17°. Sermon on Joh. 7, 30. 31. W. Vll, 22SI-2294.
61]{.underline}

had sent him, and who he was. So mock them: \"Yes, you know very well
where I am from. I went in the door. That was said in German: You are
rough asses, unlearned, you know nothing of the holy scripture. You
preachers, Levites and priests, your title is, you know nothing of God
and His things. This is not to suffer, it is too high hewn that the
chips fall into your eyes: They want to be masters, to sit in office and
lead others, and yet they shall know nothing, they shall not know him,
nor him who sent him; as he says here to them.

That is, to wrestle with misfortune, to punish the high priests who were
in office, and who came from the tribe of Levi, chosen to preach, and
were earnestly commanded that the people should obey and follow the
teaching of the priestly estate. The sacerdotium was our Lord God\'s
order, commandment, and strict earnestness, for which many thousands
were slain before it should perish. 1) And he, the Lord Christ, comes
straight against the commandment and order of God, takes away their
glory and obedience, and says: \"You do not know him. As if to say, You
are not worthy to teach; you are not worthy, able and skilled to teach;
you are vain knaves, deceivers of the people, deceiving the people with
dead, false doctrine and hypocritical living. That is to reach into the
rinds and the wool. Just as it is said to the pope and bishops to this
day: You do not preach rightly; you are in office, but you cannot
preach; you are not worthy of office; you deceive and corrupt the
people. That means preached high, and the hair ruffled, that the rind
cracks. It is very daring.

**You do not know me, where I am from or where I come from.**

132 This is one of the things that John says has displeased the Jews,
for he has touched their hearts and made them feel it. It has affected
them more than it seems to us, because he condemns all their art and
doctrine, and has torn off and withdrawn the people from

1\) The meaning is: God rather had thousands slain than that he had
suffered that his priesthood was disregarded.

Their obedience, when they had orders to be obedient to them. Just as
the pope and his bishops are also in office, but nevertheless they
deceive the people. That is why they should be brought down; they should
be told that they do not know Christ and the heavenly Father. They have
orders, we also have orders, the Jews also have orders, Christ also had
orders. Therefore, we must go up fearlessly, as Christ does here, and
say to them: \"You have the name of the Christian church, you have
baptism, sacrament, Bible; yet it is not right that you teach and
preach. That is to say, wrestled after blows, and there one should
certainly carry off a bloody head.

133 Well, he must do it, it is commanded to the Lord Christ, he has the
office, he must attack them. And he also does what he is supposed to do,
it is done by him. If someone else had done it, it would have been fair
to strike him; but he has the office, otherwise he would have been 2)
thrown into the fire; he would also have deserved, according to reason,
to be struck. For it is a great thirst and presumption that he attacks
such high, great people, and punishes their teaching, preaching and life
so violently and bitterly. This was called preaching sedition. But
Christ asks nothing of it. If you do not want to preach rightly, says
God, then I will find someone else to preach, and I will make you as bad
as the painted bishops; you may have the chair and the honor, you may
also eat and drink from it, but I will give the name and the office to
someone else. He has made this true here.

**But no one laid a hand on him, for his hour had not yet come.**

This is a beautiful and wonderful text. There is a saying in German: An
eigener Gedanken und gespannttem Tuch geht viel ab. Item: Eichene 3) or
own strokes

2\) \"him\" by us instead of: \"one\", because we assume that also here,
as otherwise almost without exception, \"them\" stood for \"him\" in the
original.

3\) For understanding we put here what Dietz, Wörterbuch zu Luthers
Schriften, s. v. \"eichen\" from the prophet Habakuk states: \"as one
speaks, it is an oak touch, since one wants to say, it is an own touch,
just as one speaks: oak leaves stink, since one wants to say: own praise
stinks.\"

[62 Erl. 48, 17S-I7S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2284-229\". 63]{.underline}

rarely turn out well. It has also never happened to me in my life
according to my plans. I have taken many plans to do so, but if it has
not been the word and work of our Lord God that urged me to do so, then
many of them have remained. So God has kept it all in his hands, so that
no one on earth may direct his thoughts; indeed, thoughts shall not do
anything, if one asks him beforehand for advice. The chief priests of
Jerusalem had a great people among them, and were mighty lords, and
would attack him, and Annas and Caiphas were about twenty thousand
strong; yet the poor man Christ stands alone for his own person, and
goes to Jerusalem in the midst of the feast, and stands in their face
and in their noses, asking nothing of their great honors, dignities, and
glory, and scolding them besides, saying that they are fools and
deceivers; and a single despised Perfon shall punish them. Well, they do
not lack fists, power and wisdom, there is enough right strength and
power; nor do they lack good will and thought, that they did not seize
him; and yet they had to leave him satisfied against their thanks.

**No one laid a hand on him.**

135 Who is his patron? Who is there to defend him? No one, but the text
says: \"His hour was not yet.\" Listen, only one hour, that is a low,
bad patron. He does not say that he had so many thousand horses on his
side and thirty thousand men on foot to protect him, but one hour is all
his armor, which was given him to be crucified, that was not yet there,
and because it was not there, all that his adversaries undertook against
him was of no avail. Thus also the wise man says, Ecclesiastes 3:1 ff:
\"There is a time for everything, sowing and planting\" 2c. If any man
begin out of season, let him see how it turneth out, if the hour be not;
though thou rend thyself, and bite thee to death, it will not avail. So,
whoever starts something in the church out of time, gains nothing from
it. Seek the grain harvest around Christmas, break cherries in the cold
winter of

the trees, also break the apples around Shrove Tuesday. You won\'t find
anything there.

For God has so precisely conceived and measured everything that He will
have all thoughts and works in His hand, that it cannot proceed unless
the hour appointed by God comes. So also the Graeci have said: Ager non
producit, sed annus; and if the field would do it, it would bring forth
fruit every day, because the field is there every day; but if its time
does not come, nothing will come of it, it must have its time. Item, one
says: Time brings roses; and: Time makes hay, the meadows or the field
do not make hay; for the meadow is also in winter and in spring, but
there one does not make hay. God has made it so that everything in the
world shall have its time and hour; he has set a fine, free hour for all
things; that same hour is the enemy of the whole world, which must
challenge it. The devil also shoots and throws at the poor little
hand; 1) but in vain, for there it all stands on the little hour; before
it comes and the little hand runs out, the devil and the world shall
accomplish nothing.

137 A year ago, this was the counsel at Augsburg, that everything should
now lie in blood with the Lutherans; but the hour is still there, and
has not been overturned, the thoughts have gone back, and two or three
cubits have fallen in on the stretched cloth, and many have fallen to
the ground over it. Now the same Diet at Augsburg has become mud, and
all the mocking has become a mockery. So it happens to all tyrants that
their plots are disgraced, just as it happened to the Jews; it was only
thoughts that they wanted to seize him. Now they must not lift a finger,
for it was not in their thoughts, and the hour was not yet. Our Lord God
said: \"Dear chief priests and bishops, come on, ask me also if the hour
has come; if you are planning something, ask if my hour or will is also
there; if the hour has not passed, then it is all in vain. Yes, they
say, what is the hour to us?

1\) \"Zeigerlein\" here, and \"Zeiger\" in § 137 at the end stands for
\"Seiger\", i.e. sun pointer or sand pointer. Cf. §143.

[64 **Erl. 48, 17S-IS1. Sermon on Joh. 7, 30. 31. W. VII, 22SK-22SS.**
65]{.underline}

Let\'s do it anyway, and fish in front of the Hamen. Yes, you will see
not fish, but toads. That is, rumbled through the pointer.

Thus, what the world wants does not happen unless it comes from God\'s
command and order. What God has decreed goes by his command and his way,
as when parents bring up their children, that is their hour. The rulers
are to rule and punish evil; and this continues, because one has God\'s
word and command, is also their hour; just as also building the field.
All this is contained in the word \"hour\". But what is apart from
God\'s word and work, and comes from our thoughts, goes the way of
cancer and falls to ruins. Therefore, it is not enough for them to have
thoughts that they want to take hold of Christ; they must still be
satisfied and let him remain. So too, at the Diet of Augsburg, they
wanted to suppress the Lutheran doctrine altogether and exterminate us.
Who ever ordered it? No one. This is due to their own anger and their
own attempts.

139\. For this reason it is so here that no one lays a hand on it; they
want to come before our Lord God before he has ever decided, and before
the hour comes. Afterwards the Lord Christ says, when he was caught in
the garden, when the hour came, and God took off the bar \[Luc. 22,
53.This is your hour, and the power of darkness\", otherwise you should
not take hold of me even now in the garden, I wanted to remain safe from
you, and you should leave me untouched; but the hour has come, and the
Father has withdrawn his hand, and lets me fall into your hand, you
should leave it well, if his will and hour were not there; the hour of
light has been taken away, and the hour of darkness has come, otherwise
you should leave me well satisfied.

140\. summa, what one takes before him shall not go out, but back,
unless God has commanded or decreed it; or if it goes out, it shall do
ten times more harm. It is all in one hour; it must not strike before
one, unless twelve have struck first; nor can summer come sooner, unless
winter comes first;

Nor can it be evening unless it was day before; nor can you grow old
unless you were a child before; so God has ordered everything in time.
Thoughts shall not do it, God must give the hour.

This is a glorious consolation, and Christ is presented to us as an
example, that he has dared such a meager thing, and goes up to Jerusalem
to his enemies, who had previously condemned him to death, and he had
fled before them from the Jewish land, because they had wanted to kill
him. But now he goes to them, and well deserves to be killed, for he
reads them a good text, and yet remains unharmed and unkilled, \"for his
hour was not yet come. This is also our consolation; we are also sitting
like this on the hill, and as to the goal; every hour the devil tries to
kill us all. Immediately after you are baptized, you have no respite
from him. 1) If he could kill you in the womb, he would. He will not
spare us a grain of the field, a fish or a morsel of bread, a cherry or
an apple, or any good thing that may come to us. Much less does he spare
us who expose our behinds to him; item, go under his nose, and preach
what we should, namely of God\'s grace, and of the devil\'s works. He
would rather break my neck in a moment than let me stand there and
preach and storm his kingdom.

This is how it is in the world; this is how the devil rages when you
hear God\'s word. The emperor, princes and bishops, if they could
suppress us, they would. They are mortal and murderous enemies of us,
they would like to exterminate us. They do not lack good will; and many
tyrants have proved it by deed, as Pharaoh, Sennacherib and others.
Well, they are more powerful, and theirs is also more than ours. Item,
the devil is also more powerful; nor must he, nor they, do what they
have in mind, and must have it sung by them: You are knaves, murderers
and full of devils, you want to destroy the country and the people.

1\) Meaning: The devil does not give you any respite; immediately he
starts chasing you.

[66 Erl. 18, 181-IS3. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
22W-2WI. 67]{.underline}

and yet they do not kill us. They must not lay a hand on us or take hold
of us and do what they would like to do. Why? One might say, \"Perhaps
they feared a riot in the city of Jerusalem. No, there is another
reason: \"The hour has not yet come. That is the reason, dear disciples,
popes and bishops; it is said: \"The hour has not yet come\"; so when
the hour comes, my neck will not stay any longer, I will have to take my
place.

But what is the use? If the doctrine perishes at one end, it rises again
at another. The devil would have preferred to dampen it, and has done so
from the beginning of the world, but he has not been able to do so. But
where he has brought it through in one country, there it has gone, and
there the hour has come; but the gospel has gone out again in another
place. Thus baptism, the Lord\'s Supper, and the text of the Gospel, the
ministry of preaching, remained in the world under the papacy; although
many abuses were committed at that time, so that they wanted to suppress
it. Do you think it is a small thing that the devil has gladly left
baptism? Ask the Anabaptists about it. It still remains. Who will keep
the Christians and the baptizers? Not I; no one can do it, I cannot
receive a Christian or a sacrament. Who will do it? It is a little hour,
a sand pointer, which God has in his hand and says: Dear, do nothing to
him, unless the sand runs out. Do they then say: No, I must do it. Dear,
hold on, the sand has not yet run out. If they have it in mind, there is
still a secret force that hinders it, that we do not see how it will be
hindered.

144 As these peelers have thoughts here in the Gospel, so it is also in
our time. If our enemies, the princes, could drive the Elector of Saxony
from his lands and people this hour, and kill us all, they would save
nothing. That they now write to us in a friendly manner, as cousins and
elders, is a lie; they have it in mind and have decided that they would
like to exterminate us, which we could testify about them from their own
words and deeds. I know their thoughts and intentions well, and even
though they may have given us good

If they give words, they are lying. But this is our consolation, that
all their practices and good suggestions have fallen to the ground, for
their work has come too high, it has been hard-stretched cloth, and half
of it has fallen in. Therefore we should joyfully continue with
preaching, and command this hour to our Lord God, for he has it in his
hand; and he has a finger a little stronger than our church pillar, as
Isaiah says \[Cap. 40, 12. 48, 13.\] that the world hangs in God\'s
hands, just as a drop of water hangs on three fingers 2c. And one of his
fingers is greater than ten worlds, as one finger is greater than ten
drops.

So we say, we will dare to do it, dear God, if you will have it, it will
be done, otherwise they shall not and cannot do it. Meanwhile they shall
plague and torture themselves with evil suggestions and thoughts, have
no rest and celebration, ride together, and be their own devils, with
their own thoughts, hatred, envy, biting and gnawing each other. This I
see, and meanwhile I laugh at them as at fools, saying, Ye shall not do
as ye will; press, push, run, practice as ye will, yet ye shall not
accomplish anything till the hour come. That is why Isaiah Cap. 8, 10
speaks like this: Inite consilium etc., nihil fiet, congregamini omnes
etc.. Well, you are fine fellows, yes, nothing will come of it, you
should leave it; you great emperors, kings, princes and lords put your
heads together and think, so and so we want to do it, but it will be in
vain.

We Christians have this advantage, that a Christian remains with God,
and adheres to His word, and then says like the 31st Psalm, v. 16.My
life is not in my hands, but in yours; not in the hands of the devil,
emperor, pope, bishop, prince, or some tyrant, whether pious or wicked,
here or elsewhere; but this they shall have to do, gritting their teeth
day and night, struggling, toiling and torturing themselves with their
purpose, and thinking how they will kill me. This torture

1\) Original: are.

68 Eri. 48, 18S-IS6. Sermon on John 7, 30. 31. w. vn, 2301-23\". 69

I like them to have their devils with them, who torment themselves; but
I go and pray an Our Father, eat and sleep 2c. They are my devils that
afflict themselves; when the hour comes for them to eat me, their
bellies will burst. This is our comfort, that every man may do what he
is commanded. A Christian preacheth, believeth, speaketh, or doeth that
which he is commanded, and putteth the hour in the hands of our Lord
God; there it standeth most sure, to comfort me, and to despite the
devil, and all mine enemies: he hath thus set the hour, when no other
can set it.

We have seen this in our time in the imperial congresses and in all the
histories of the holy scriptures. The example of Christ stands there as
well. There is no lack of good will on the part of our adversaries; the
poor little sand hand still stands there, and has not yet run out, and I
can say: Wait, do not do it before, because the hand has run out. But if
it has run out, then say: Because the hour has come, then we stand here,
and let the head be taken, let us be eaten; but what they will gain from
it, let them grease their shoes and wipe with it.

**The seventh sermon.**

Saturday after Jacobi \[July 29, 1531\]. 1)

**V.32-34. And it came to pass before the Pharisees, that the people
murmured these things of him. Then the Pharisees and chief priests sent
out servants to seize him. Then said JEsus unto them: I am with you yet
a little while, and then I go to him that sent me; and ye also shall
seek me, and shall not find me.**

The evangelist John writes how many of the people believed in Christ,
and some had said, \"When Christ comes, it will not be known from whence
He comes,\" but the Lord Christ will say afterwards, \"You will seek Me
and not find Me. Then the dance began. The people began to praise Christ
as if he were the true Christ, saying \[v. 31\]:

1\) In the original margin.

\"When Christ comes, will he also do more signs?\" As if they were to
say, \"Of course he must be the Christ, for no one will do it before
him; be he who he will, he will come when he will. This grieved the
Pharisees greatly, for they understood it well; therefore it was not at
all to their liking that they should conclude that he should be the
Christ. Therefore, lest they should conclude that this man was Christ,
they took hold of him, and sent out servants, and put their heads
together, and thought how they had killed him, that he should be spoken
of no more, saying, Ye see that the whole matter of all uncleanness,
unpleasantness, and unhappiness in the clergy, is nothing else, but that
this man should be Christ. Otherwise there was no sin among the people,
because they, the chief priests, were so diligent in respect that they
did not take the man for Christ.

This has always been the case in the whole world, and will remain so.
Do, preach, and teach what you will, and how you will, and all will be
well, except that Christ will not be preached; when Christ comes, all
the noise begins, for they will not suffer him. Now this is not the
fault of the Lord Christ, but their own; they will not tolerate him. The
guilt is actually theirs; but the punishment shall be of the innocent
Lord Christ. Christ is the Son of God, sent to them as a preacher, but
they are guilty of not wanting to accept him, and he must nevertheless
bear the guilt. It was the same with Abraham, Noah and others; it will
be the same with us. But it is written for us as an example.

\(150\) That the pope hates me, and the princes are angry with us, we do
not admit, but this is the cause, that we say he is Christ, and that we
preach the word of God, otherwise we do them no harm; the fault is
theirs, that they will not believe it, and are guilty of the word, and
will punish us according to it. It is a fine rule, and very grievous,
that he who is guilty should punish others, that they should be guilty,
that they should be cast into hell fire, that they should not hear
Christ, saying, We will not hear thee, therefore thou art not Christ; we
will not receive thy preaching.

70 Erl. 48, 186-188. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
W04-SM7. 71

We do not like what you preach, therefore you are evil; and if we do
evil, you are guilty and shall be punished.

151 Now Christ answers this wickedness to the scoundrels, and puts away
such evil as is fitting, just as we are accustomed to answer, and want
to answer better.

**V. 33. I am with you yet a little while, and then I go to him that
sent me, and ye shall seek me, and shall not find me.**

These words are frightening enough, but the wickedness, the ungodly
nature and the ingratitude of the boys is much greater. So one must
answer them: \"I am still with you a little while\" 2c. As if he should
say: It would not be necessary for you to hurry to kill and exterminate
me, I will stay with you short enough without that.

So we also say to the pope, \"It is not necessary that you should thus
rage against us and tyrannize against the teaching of the gospel, for
without this the gospel will remain with you for a short time,
especially when we, who are now preaching the gospel, have laid down our
head. After our death it will not remain, because it is not possible for
it to remain. The gospel has its course, and runs from one city to
another; today it is here, tomorrow it is in another place, just as a
downpour goes on, and rains now here, soon in another place, and
moistens the land and makes it fertile. As the Lord Christ also says
Matth. 10, 14: \"If you are driven out, go from one city to another\";
and when the cities are all gone, then I will come with the last day.
So, even though the gospel has now been accepted, it will not remain
long in one place; people hate it, envy it, curse it, even starve it.
Therefore Christ says: I will not be with you long, you must not
persecute and condemn the gospel very much, I will soon leave you,
without which there will soon be darkness hereafter, that you will know
nothing. How will it go then?

**You will look for me, and you will not find me.**

These are frightening words, I do not like to read them. But how should
one do to him?

It must be said. When the gospel is gone, the light, understanding and
wisdom of faith and Christ are gone. So it will rise again, that one
will seek this, another that; then they will all seek Christ,
forgiveness of sins and grace, but in vain. They will run and seek to
St. Jacob; the one will pray and fast, wear caps and plates, but the
other will do something else. Then it will come to pass that they will
seek Christ. Just as Christ was lost in the papacy, people went back and
forth, looking for Christ, but did not find him.

So Christ remained with the Jews three years preaching in person, and
after that they lost him. After his departure he preached to them by the
apostles forty years, but the gospel did not remain with them more than
forty years; so they lost Christ, and have now sought him more than
fourteen hundred years, and yet have not found him, tormenting
themselves greatly with many sorrows, and leading an austere life; as
there is no more wretched, miserable people under the sun than they; and
they say they suffer therefore, that the Messiah Christ may come and
find them; but it is nothing. O a terrible word it is, that he saith, Ye
shall seek me, and shall not find. 2c. That is, you will have much
trouble, and undertake much spiritual life, endow services, torture
yourselves to death, flog yourselves, pray and fast much; but it is all
in vain, for he says, \"You will not find me.\"

The same thing happened under the papacy. The whole world was full of
monks and nuns; indeed, many thousands of sects and sects arose. For how
many orders did the barefooted have, and did each one boast that he
wanted to be better than others. There has been no other Christian who
has not done something special to serve God. The world has been so full
of seeking, and have driven the seeking with great burden to the body
and expense to the goods, but have not found; it has all been in vain
and lost. Therefore St. Paul rightly says from the prophet Isaiah \[Cap.
**55, 6**.\]: Quaerite Dominum, dum inveniri potest, et invocate

72 Erl. 48, 488-isi. Sermon on John 7:32-36. W. vn, 2so7-2:uo. 73

eum, dum prope est**.** For so he speaks in the other epistle to
Corinthians Cap. 6, 1. 2.: \"We admonish you that you do not receive the
grace of God in vain; for he says: I have heard you in the acceptable
time, and have helped you in the day of salvation. Now is the pleasant
time, now is the day of salvation. \"2c. \[Isa. 49:8.\] As if he said:
Believe, honor the word, live according to the word of God, while you
have it, watch, do not miss it and do not sleep on it, because it will
not remain forever, it will not last long.

157 Therefore this is the very best counsel, that we think not that the
gospel which we have now shall abide for ever; tell me again for twenty
years, as it is. When the present pious, righteous preachers are dead,
then others will come who will preach and do as the devil pleases.
Behold, how the gospel has already been lost by many of the nobility and
in the cities of this land, and in the great imperial cities it is
already gone; and everywhere it will be so. People are getting tired of
the word and think it will last forever. When a good beer is open,
everyone runs to it and does not stop, for they know that it does not
last long; one does not have it every day, therefore one fetches it
while it is open; if it were open for a long time, our mouths would be
spoiled, too, that we would not respect it. But here one thinks that the
word will remain forever, if it remains and lasts even for a short time;
but one comes to it; if one does not accept it with thanksgiving and
reverence, then one is soon gone.

When the word is gone, you will not be able to leave it, you would like
to be pious and saved, to have God\'s grace and forgiveness of sin and
heaven; but it is in vain, you will not find grace, forgiveness of sin,
life and righteousness, but everything will be condemned, even the best
that I do. Behold the good works of a Carthusian, how he laboureth day
and night in fasting for water and bread, and weareth hare shirts, or
runneth in harness to St. James; yet shall it be called lost, and he
shall earn hell fire therewith; he shall not find Christ, which alone is
the Father.

reconciles us, forgives sin, brings God\'s grace, and leads us out of
hell to heaven. This is the worst of all: when he is gone, I shall seek
all these things and not find them. For if he is not there, then only
pure reason remains, which will not do it, it cannot act like Christ,
Christ is too high. But we act as if we had not experienced this, and as
if we were not wise under the pope, and do not ask anything about it.
But it will happen that we lose the word, because it goes away secretly,
as it happened among the Jews.

As then the nobles and imperial cities, the sacramentaries and other
enthusiasts have all ready lost it. Then they teach how it should be
done, and then everyone will want to be pious; and yet they do not know
that it is in vain, they will tire themselves out, and run around like
mad dogs, losing life and limb over it, and will not obtain the right
help, because they do not want it now. Now we are warned enough; the
word cannot stand long, for the ingratitude is too great; so the
contempt and the weariness makes it have to go away, and God cannot
watch in the length. Before, people greatly honored the doctrine of
rosaries, indulgences, pilgrimages, etc., and thought that it was God\'s
word what they pretended, each had its paternoster. Now, when they
preach about faith in Christ and how to live friendly among each other,
they say: What is this? Then they soon despise it, and it must fail and
fall to the ground.

160 That is, \"I am with you yet a little while, and ye shall seek me,
and shall not find me: and where I am, ye cannot come. There are two
things, first of all, much and great trouble. For when faith is gone,
great spiritual works begin; but forgiveness of sin they obtain not.
Secondly, heaven should also be closed in your devotion and holy works
and being. You Carthusians with your masses, pencils, fasts, rosaries
shall not come there where I am. That means arid, the heaven with vain
adamantine stones walled up and closed.

He said this to the Jews, but it did not help. And it shall be given to
all work-

74 Erl. 48, ISI-ISS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2310-2312. 75

sanctify nor thus go when the faith is lost. For what the Jews have
obtained, that shall we also obtain. The world cannot be helped, it does
not believe it; I am almost tired of it; but for my own sake and the
sake of some pious people I must preach, otherwise it is in vain. One
does not want to believe, but to experience. The Jews did the same.
Christ, the Son of God, came himself, then the apostles, and warned
them, but they did not believe. So Germany must also go there and hold
out. So it will go over us, nothing else will come of it, we want to
know.

The boys should be frightened by this, but listen to what the angry
squires say in reply to the words that are so terrible; how arrogant,
proud asses they are! They speak:

**V. 35 Where will this one go, that we shall not find him?**

163\. egg, how ridiculous it is to them! He is only going, they want to
say, who is holding the other? These are mocking words, as if they
should say: We are the people, he must not teach us, we can well do
without him, we have preachers enough every hour, we can preach and read
ourselves; if he does not want to preach in God\'s name, let him do it
in the devil\'s name. Just as they say of me now, D. M. Luthern: If he
does not want to, let him, we have his books. I poor beggar and
disciple, how many doctors I have made with my preaching and writing.
They say: Just troll away, go to the devil 2c. It is ridiculous to them,
but it is also an unbearable word that he refuses them so scantily. How
hopeful, they think, is the drip; does he mean that it is nothing with
us? can we be well advised; does he mean that it is such a big thing, if
one looks for him, and also finds him immediately, or that one comes
there, where he is?

It must be the same for us. If we preach for a long time, they laugh; if
we promise them God\'s grace, they cheat and whistle at us; if we are
angry and angry, they mock us and hit us on the head, laughing in their
fists. That is part of it. Who does not want to expect it, and

If he has this thanks from his disciples, let him stop preaching. When
Isaiah preached and punished the Jews severely, they opened their mouths
against him and stuck out their tongues at him \[Isa. 57:4\]. The
children also mocked Elisha and called him bald \[2 Kings 2:23\]. These
are the true children of the world, the pious; so one should do when one
hears frightening sermons of God\'s wrath, that one secretly sticks the
tongue into the neck, drives the mockery out of it, mocks us in the
teeth, says: Yes, yes! think they have smelled themselves well when they
betray us, and drive the mockery out of it.

But we will let them do it all, laughing, mocking, and pointing fingers
at us, and yet watch how they carry it out, how they sing out the song,
namely, how the Jews sang it out. Now they have laughed and begged for
fifteen hundred years, and at last they go body and soul to the devil
into the hellish fire, because they despise Christ the Savior. So it was
with Lot; his sermon was to them a joke and a child\'s play, it was
spoken ridiculously to them, and yet it was serious, horrible and
frightening words. Since they laughed it off, they had to experience it
with the fire, that Sodom lay on the morning in the hellish fire. So
they also considered Noah\'s sermon about the flood as fool\'s work, he
must be a fool, that our Lord God should drown and drown the whole world
with water for the sake of the old fool\'s sermon; he must be a fool and
delusional for his age. Summa, they want to know.

Is it not still like this? But God cannot tolerate ingratitude and
contempt. They turn a deaf ear to it and say: \"Oh, if we had money
enough to count for a while, we would have good courage in the meantime.
But if today or tomorrow Germany will be swimming in blood, then what I
have said and warned will come true. Now they say: What is he
pretending? He has no need; do you think that we are such evil people?
therefore let him only wash! 2)

1\) i.e. mockery.

2\) \"wash\" put by us instead of \"grow\", which gives no sense.

76 **Erl. 48, ISS-ISS. Sermon on John 7:32-36. W. VII, M2-2S1S.** 77

always go there! Well, we have been well warned. Non me Doctorem, sed te
ge- heieris^1^ ) ipsum. I am worried, we will not deceive him; but many
have been deceived about him.

It is written for our comfort that we do not abandon the confession of
faith, of our Lord God and His Word, even though the world persecutes
it, ridicules it, and scornfully opposes it, saying, \"Let us see whom
it will repent of; let them not laugh and mock our Lord God in vain, for
He will not lie to them. Meanwhile, let us listen to their defiance,
watch their mockery and persecution; it is for a little while. Let them
laugh now with confidence, but afterward let them weep. It happened to
our head, the Lord Christ, to the apostles, prophets, Lot, Noah, Adam,
Abraham and the other patriarchs; what should we have better than them?
It will happen again in this way.

It must be a ridiculous sermon if we say: God will punish you; and they
answer: You must not teach us how to go to heaven, I know it well
myself. So they shall answer, and so our words shall come to pass and
come to pass. If they are sure, then it is right; if they think it is
ridiculous, then it is a sign that misfortune is on its way, and already
created, when they have laughed, that then it comes to pass that they
also must weep. So also it is said of the last day, when they shall be
punished. 2) O, they say, we still have such a long time, so long the
shirt here to the skirt. So they will be safe, they will eat, they will
drink, they will build houses, they will be free, and they will let
themselves be free, and they will live safely enough, as is being done
now. When they have the glass in front of their mouths, play, wrestle,
jump, lie with their wives, sit over tables, then the lightning will
strike, and the last day will break everything into a heap and melt it.

1\) xstisisris. The word \"secret\" - to fool, to mock, to deceive, is
inserted into the verse with Latin inflection instead of: äsos\^sris.
Cf. § 130 of the eighth chapter. In the sixth chapter of the great
interpretation of the letter to the Galatians, § 76, äslussris is
written.

2\) Erlanger: \"shall be punished shall be.\" We have omitted the first
\"shall be\" because it is too much.

So it shall be, and God grant that it may soon be so. Let us say Amen to
it, and let us learn patience from the words when they say, \"It shall
not come to me; we will come higher than he; where shall he go? Then we
will sing the Amen to it, so that it will not remain.

**The eighth sermon. ^3^)**

\[August 1S31.\]

**V. 37. AVer the last day of the feast, which was most glorious, JEsus
stood and cried out, saying, Whosoever thirsteth, let him come unto me,
and drink.**

The Lord Christ hath hitherto threatened the Jews, that he would go away
unto him that sent him, and that they would seek him, but come not where
he was. By this he frightened them, that they should be afraid, and take
heed lest they lose him. For when he departs, he leaves nothing behind,
for sin, sorrow, devils, death, sweat, toil and labor, he takes all good
things with him. But they turned back just as much as one still does
now. Nevertheless, he continues like this, and finally preaches with
power and all his might, shouting loudly and saying:

**If anyone thirsts, let him come to me.**

This is the sermon that has pleased the afflicted hearts and the common
people, especially the pious, because they praise Christ highly as a
prophet and for the Messiah. But it does not seem that it is such a
delicious sermon as the people praise; therefore he has put the words in
such a way that they strike the heart and please those who need them;
and here are comforting, kind and sweet words, which refresh, comfort
and strengthen those who are thirsty. He has understood that if his word
is not preached to the thirsty, it is more despised than accepted. And
this can be seen in our time, just as it was with the Jews. The Jews
were full and drunk with vain holiness, and did not want this drink; so
now also

3\) In the original in the margin, without time determination.

78 Eri. 4\", igs-iM. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
rsir-wi8. 79

the common man, and the riffraff spirits; it is all full and great, that
they spit upon themselves for great holiness, they have no thirst. But
Christ says that his teaching belongs to the thirsty. Those who feel
thirst have here a comforting preacher, Christ himself, who tells them
where they can find drink and quench their thirst, namely, with him, the
Lord Christ. They shall find the same drink in him.

But what is thirst, first of all, one must ask; then one will know and
understand what drinking is, how one quenches thirst. But thirst is not
a bodily thirst, as one drinks beer and wine, but the thirst of the
soul, and a spiritual thirst, which means a heartfelt desire, yes, a
sorrowful, miserable, frightened, stricken conscience, a despondent,
frightened heart, which would like to know how it would be with God; as
there are the stupid, fainthearted consciences that feel sin and know
their weakness in spirit, soul and flesh, and look at God\'s
forbearance, fear our Lord God, look at His law, wrath, judgment, death
and other punishments. The same fear is the right thirst. For it happens
naturally that those who are in anguish, temptation and distress thirst
greatly because of fear; for in fear one\'s tongue becomes dry and dry,
one becomes hot, and out of fear the juice is consumed, which makes one
thirsty. How much more is it here, that the soul thirsts and becomes
powerless, when the spiritual fear is there, and the sin and wrath of
God pushes one under the eyes.

Therefore it was a fine, sweet, excellent sermon to them that were under
the law, hearing Moses, the Pharisees, Sadducees, and other deceivers,
which afflicted the people, and weighed them down with the law, and left
them without consolation: they could not preach the consolation of the
forgiveness of sins, neither had they any commandment of this sermon.
Matth. 9, 3. They grumbled that he forgave the sin of the water addict,
saying, \"Who is the one who forgives sin? Item \[Luc. 7, 47\], when the
Lord Christ absolved Mary Magdalene. They did not get so much comfort,
juice and power from their preaching of good works. And still today

In the day the heretics wanted to abolish the forgiveness of sin by
grace, saying: \"We know that sin is forgiven by God, but if someone
does good and does it right, then God will forgive the sin. This is the
heretic\'s sermon.

The monks, nuns, and the pope have also taught that if you read psalms
and confessed, you would have forgiveness of sins. Item, if one ran to
St. Jacob, became a monk, said mass, vigils 2c., one would have
forgiveness of sins; wanted to get forgiveness of sins themselves,
pointed to us, said: Do this, do that, then you deserve forgiveness of
sins. They did not deny that God was gracious and merciful and forgave
sin, but that one had to do something for it oneself. This was the
devil, and a Jewish teaching. Annas and Caiphas also taught in this way,
saying, \"Be righteous, and I will forgive your sins;\" and they
condemned man to himself, because his thirst was never quenched. But
they should have said: Believe in Christ, ask God, and he will forgive
your sin. One should have consecrated man from himself to God, otherwise
no man will be sure of the forgiveness of sins.

Now the poor consciences would like to know, if they are to deal with
God, that our Lord God once said to them: Remissa sunt tibi peccata, and
they would like to comfort themselves, and say: I am sure that my sin is
forgiven me; then the thirst is quenched. Otherwise the heart says: I do
not know whether I have a gracious God, and whether my sins are forgiven
me, because I have lived evil. Such a thirsty person can never know,
even if he does good works for a hundred thousand years, that he would
say: God says yes to this; I am sure that my sins are forgiven.
Hilarion, the abbot, was also like that. He had been in the monastery in
holy life for 73 years; when he was about to die, he was also afraid of
death, but he said: My soul, why are you afraid, since you have served
God for 73 years? The thief on the cross would have fared badly in this
way, for he had no works or services to boast of. Well, in thirst must
remain and be stuck, whoever does not rightly experience Christ and his
word.

80 **Erl. 48, iss-roo. Sermon on John 7:37-39. W. VII, 2318-2320.** 81

knows. But the pope, the Turk, the Jews, the common man, and the
riffraff do not recognize him; therefore this thirst will kill them, and
they must die within. But those who feel the thirst, recognize Christ,
and hear and accept his word, marvel at it and say, \"This is the right
prophet and the right Christ.

In the papacy, people did not preach as they do now in our time. When
the word of God first appeared twelve or fifteen years ago, the people
listened diligently, and everyone was glad that one should no longer
trouble oneself with good works, saying: Praise God that one has water
to drink; for then we were thirsty, and the teaching of the Gospel
tasted good, we drank from it, and it was a delicious teaching. But now
we are full, and weary of drink, and weary that our Lord God must go
away, and leave us to die of thirst; for he abideth with them that feel
their affliction. But there are few of them who know it; the majority
make a carnal freedom out of the gospel, a carnal refreshment and drink,
so that they no longer want to fast and pray in this way, have gained a
benefit from the gospel, do not care where the soul stays, do not seek
comfort from it, it does not taste good to them anymore.

176 Therefore this was a sweet sermon, that he saith, Whosoever
thirsteth, 2c. And the Lord Christ said, \"Hitherto you have not
received a drop from all your teachers, preachers and priests to comfort
you and quench your thirst; there has been nothing but a hunted,
tortured and frightened conscience, which is in such a thirst that it
wants to pine away; there has been no one to comfort you, as there is
still little comfort among the friars and papist bishops. Therefore the
Lord Christ says: \"I preach another doctrine to you, which shall make
you alive, refresh you, water you, who are thirsty, who are also
despondent, frightened, and doubtful in your conscience, and uncertain
as to your condition with God. Just come here, I will not beat you over
the head with a club or gouge out your eyes; come to me, I will water
you, that is, in me and through me you will learn the words and
teachings of God.

that will comfort and strengthen your heart, and take away doubt and
make you certain that you are well with God.

177 Of the two things preach. The law makes one thirst, and leads to
hell, and kills; but the gospel makes one drink again, and leads to
heaven. The law says what we are to do, and that we have not done it,
how holy we are; so it makes me uncertain, drives me into thirst. It
says \[Ex. 20:13\], \"Thou shalt not kill,\" drives me all into my
works, says \[Deut. 6:5, Matt. 22:37\], \"Thou shalt love God with all
thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself. Not to commit adultery, not to
swear, not to steal \[Ex. 20:14, 15\], and says, \"See that you have
lived this way, or that you still live this way. When you get there, you
will find that I do not love God with all my heart, as I should, and you
must confess and say, O dear God, I have not done this, I have not kept
the law, because I do not love God with all my heart today or tomorrow,
and confess one year as another, that I have done this and that. This
confession will not cease; when will it end and your heart rest, and be
sure of divine graces? You will always remain in doubt; tomorrow you
will confess the same as today; the common confession will always
remain. Where will you now rest and rest your conscience, so that you
will know how you would fare with God? Your heart cannot tell you; do as
much as you can. For the law remains, which says: You shall love God and
man with all your heart. But thou sayest, I will not do it; and the law
saith, Thou shalt do it; and the law maketh me afraid, that I must be
thirsty, and be afraid, and tremble, and say, How shall I do that God
may look upon me with mercy? I shall obtain God\'s grace; yes, if I keep
the Ten Commandments, if I have good works and much merit? But this
never happens, I do not keep the ten commandments, therefore no grace
comes to me. Thus it is that man cannot rest in his good works, and
would like to have a good conscience; he gains a desire that he may have
a good, happy, peaceful, comforting conscience; he thirsts, he would
like to be satisfied.

82 Erl. 48, soo-sos. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
W2\"-2323. 83

That is, the thirst that lasts until Christ comes and says, \"If you
want to be satisfied, have rest and a good conscience, I advise you to
come to me, and leave Moses and your works; make a distinction between
me and Moses. From Moses thou hast thirsted, he hath done his work, he
hath done his office, he hath afflicted thee, he hath made thee thirsty;
come now also once unto me, believe on me, hear my doctrine; I am
another preacher, I will water thee and refresh thee.

\(179\) He who is able to do this art, or to make this distinction, may
well be called a doctor. For the law and the gospel must be separated
from one another. The law should frighten and make stupid and despair,
especially the coarse, crude people, until they realize that they cannot
do what the law wants, nor attain grace, so that they despair; for it
comes to nothing that they could attain grace. As Doctor Staupitz once
said to me: \"I have lied to God more than a thousand times that I
wanted to become pious, and I never did; therefore I will not pretend to
myself that I want to be pious, because I see well that I cannot keep
it, I will never lie. So it was with me: In the priesthood I was very
serious about being pious; but how long did it last? Only until I had
said mass. For over an hour I was more angry than before. This lasts
until one becomes tired and has to say, \"I will put piety, Moses and
the law in another place, and go to another preacher who says, \"Come to
me when you are weary, and I will give you rest, and let the word,
\"Come to me,\" be dear to you.

This preacher does not teach that you can love God or how you should do
and live, but says, if you cannot do it, how you must nevertheless
become pious and holy. This is a different sermon than the teaching of
the Law of Moses, which deals only with works. The law says, Thou shalt
not sin; go thy way, and be godly, do this and that; but Christ says,
Take thee away; thou art not godly, but I have done it for thee, remissa
sunt tibi peccata. This

Two sermons must be taught and practiced at the same time. For if one
teaching remains the same, it is not right. For the law alone makes
thirsty, and serves no purpose except to frighten the heart; but the
gospel alone makes full, cheerful and alive, and comforts the
conscience. So that the teaching of the gospel does not only make lazy,
gluttonous Christians, who think they are not allowed to do anything
good, the law says to the old Adam: Do not sin, be pious, desist, do
this 2c. But when the conscience feels this, and knows that the law is
not a number 1), man is frightened. Then hear the teaching of the
gospel; if you have sinned, hear the teacher Christ, who says: Come to
me, I will not let you die of thirst, but I will give you drink 2c.

181 This sermon will have pleased the pious hearts very well, so that
the people said, \"Oh, if we had known that before, 2c. Yes, if such had
been preached to me, Luther, in my youth, I would have saved much of my
body and would not have become a monk. But now that it has been
preached, the godless world despises it, for they have not endured the
bath and the sweat in which I and others in the papacy are immersed.
Therefore, because they have not felt the need of consciences, they
despise it, for they have no thirst; therefore, they are now creating
mobs and raving. It is true: Dulcia non meminit, qui non gustavit amara,
those who have not been in thirst taste nothing. Thirst is a good
waiter, and hunger is a good cook; but when there is no thirst, nothing
tastes good, be it ever so good.

182 The doctrine of the law is therefore given, that one may be bathed
in it, and sweat in the law as on a sweat-bed, and suffer anguish and
distress; otherwise it is not good for the weary and the satiated. But
let them go; it is not preached to them, for it is a sermon for the
thirsty, to whom it is said, \"Let them come to me, and I will refresh
and water them. Then the heart must say, \"He is certainly a prophet,
yes, Christ himself; he is able to preach well,

1\) digit \-\-- zero.

84 Erl. 4\", sos-sos. Sermon on John 7:37-39. W. vn, 2323-232\". 85

there is no one else who can preach better, let it be whoever wants to,
be it Annas or Caiphas, this man preaches much differently, his
preaching surpasses all human teaching. Now he says in addition:

**V. 38. 39. He who believes in me, as the Scripture says, from his body
will flow rivers of living water. But this he said of the Spirit, which
they that believed on him should receive. For the Holy Ghost was not
yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified.**

183\. rivers shall flow, water that gives life. Whoever comes to me, I
will prepare him in such a way that he will not only be fed and
refreshed for himself, so that he can quench his thirst and be free from
thirst; but I will make him into a strong, stone barrel, give him the
Holy Spirit and gifts, so that he can flow to other people, water them,
comfort them, strengthen them, and also serve many other people, as he
was helped by me, as 2 Cor. 1:4 St. Paul says. So the Lord Christ wants
to make a different man out of the one who comes to him than Moses would
have done.

In the papacy, we mad saints have made one sentence after another, and
there has been no end to the laws, have only frightened the consciences
and made them thirsty, their preachers have only increased the thirst.
How it cannot be otherwise. When the saints of works teach, they make
one thirst over another, and one law out of another, so that there is no
end nor cessation of the laws, as we experienced all too much at that
time. Every year there was a new doctor, and the fools only plagued the
consciences. When, that was a serious law, that one was not allowed to
touch a corporal 1) or chalice, made everything full of mortal sin. A
monk was not allowed to go without a shepherd 2) because these teachers
could not do anything else, because they wanted to rule with laws. So
from one law grew many other laws, nam casus sunt infiniti, and from one
law a hundred glosses were made. It is the same with the jurists. It
always changes, one

1\) i.e., the white linen cloth used to cover the hosts.

2\) Schepler - scapular, shoulder dress of the religious clergy.

will always mend and improve it, et sic multiplicantur leges in
infinitum. Just as a snowball that falls from a roof or a high mountain
starts out small, but as it falls it takes on more and more snow and
becomes so large that if it fell from a roof or a mountain and a child
stood on the ground and the snowball hit it, it would be killed. This is
also how it happened in the papacy with the laws and human orders. First
there was the order of St. Benedict; then the monks of the Barefoot; and
after that, out of the Order of the Barefoot, seven different orders
swarmed and became Mosi\'s servants. When they begin to thirst, they do
not stop, they cannot quench the thirst.

\(185\) But Christ does the contrary, and never ceases to comfort, and
not only quenches you, but through you he also quenches the thirst of
others, which the law has caused. And the longer the gospel is preached,
the more abundantly the thirst is quenched, and the better it tastes to
the thirsty. Therefore, whoever believes in Christ and is watered can
also water, comfort and refresh others. If all the world stood before
him, he could give words enough to comfort them all. This is what the
Lord means here, that he will water them; not with a spoonful, or with a
tube and spigot, 3) but whole rivers of comfort shall they have, and
with all power and riches shall they be abundantly full, for all that
thirst. So a godly minister can comfort all who are in sins, that he
takes away sin; however great and many they are, he blows away all sin
with one saying; and when death and war come, a preacher can strengthen
a whole army, so that they throw away death and respect nothing. That is
why they can sweep it away and take it away with one word and one
comforting saying. With what? With the water of life.

So he thinks that his preaching ministry is a stream of life, so that
one may be refreshed. But it seems not, because it goes badly. You may
only hear it, read it, preach it.

3\) Tenon on a barrel.

[86 Eri. t\", so\"-so?. Interpretations of the Evangelist John. W. vn,
2328-2328. 87]{.underline}

I hear only a poor sound of a voice, I see a poor letter in the book,
and I have the thought in my heart. This same word, which is preached,
shall exercise such power secretly that it shall wash away from the
heart with heaps of devils in the kingdom of the devil, where he reigns
fiercely, as the Elbe washes away chaff. He knows well why he calls the
word of God a river. For it does great things, and much, it sweeps away.
So does St. Peter on the day of Pentecost, Apost. 2, 41, when he with
one sermon, as with a river of water, rooted out and washed away from
the devil\'s kingdom three thousand people, whom he redeemed in one
hour; he washed them from death, sins and devils. It does not seem so,
but the word has such power; the river has refreshed them and brought
them here. Those who come to the gospel and to Christ should have the
honor of being able to profit in this way. Father and mother can comfort
and teach their servants, children and neighbors, so that they neither
fear nor despair, and can help them, because living water flows from
their bodies, which refreshes and revives the dear souls in all kinds of
distress and suffering.

187\. Note this saying against the Anabaptists and the revolters, or the
shameful blasphemers of the oral word, who say that the spirit and faith
are inward, therefore the spiritual word must do it, that if God does
not comfort, the outward word is nothing, as the pope has also said; and
cut off from our ears the bodily voice or the bodily word, saying that
the sermon is only a poor cry in the pulpit; item, baptism is only bad
water, and in the Lord\'s Supper is only bad bread and wine. But what
does the Lord Christ say here? He speaks:

**He that believeth on me, and cometh to me, and drinketh of me, out of
his body shall flow rivers of living water.**

What does a belly or body mean? That is, the same Christian man should
be able to 1) advise and help other people physically. How can he do
that? O! the oral word

1\) \"bodily\", that is, by speaking God\'s word with his mouth.

can do more than you are worth seeing and noticing. Now where are those
who say that the word can do nothing? You hear that it is a stream that
gives life. The oral word is a living word, they have not tried it; but
I know it well and have experienced it in hardships and temptations. I
feel that life is given to me through the word; as in the 119th Psalm,
v. 50, it is also said: \"Your word restores me; your word is my comfort
in my affliction\"; one helps me with a word that I feel life. So I also
counsel another with the word of Christ, and give drink to another, and
he gets courage, and is healed, yea, converted, if he be in error.

Thus the Lord Christ calls the oral word to be living water in a
Christian brother, so that if one believes, he is already comforted and
strengthened; and the unholy drips still want to despise it, saying it
is an outward thing; a sow also knows this well. But the word makes
alive. Notice that when God\'s word comes from a believing mouth, it is
a living word that can save a person from death, forgive sin, and lift
him to heaven; and if you believe it, you are comforted and
strengthened, for it is a river of life. Item, which is even more
comforting and greater: A right Christian cannot preach falsely, Christ
does not let him err, everything he teaches and speaks must be right
water; they are living and comforting words. And he who believes, let
him be sure that he will preach the articles of faith well; he will not
preach evil. As it is also said in another place: He who believes in
Christ, non dicit anathema Jesum. If then faith is righteous in the
heart, the words will also be wholesome, for faith in the heart allows
nothing to be preached but what is right and true.

190\. Therefore the word of God should be held in honor and esteemed,
for it produces much fruit. And though it does not do so to the crude
and ungodly, yet it does so to the thirsty; those who accept it are made
superfluous and refreshed with a river. Again, he who is not

88 Eri. 48, S07-2U. Sermon on John 7:37-39. W. vn, WW-Wi. 89

Article lacks and does not believe in Christ, he must not think that he
speaks a good word or preaches. Even if he is fine and pure, this living
water is not. Therefore it is essential to know Christ well, so that we
will not err, for this teaching gives life and comfort. Other doctrines
bring poison, are no drink, and do not quench thirst, but are foul,
stinking, murky and unpleasant waters or puddles of dung, as God says in
the prophet Jeremiah Cap. 2, 13. also says: \"My people commit a twofold
sin, forsaking me, the living fountain, and making them beautiful
fountains.\" But if we stay with the article, as in the faith in Christ,
then we want to resist all kinds of sins, otherwise we will not be able
to stand before a united one.

**The ninth sermon.**

Saturday after Bartholomew \[August 26, 1531\]. 1)

191 This is the other sermon which the Lord Christ preached at Jerusalem
in the feast before the chief priests, and he hath set forth this sermon
in much more abundant words. For John the Evangelist alone has put it
into a theme or resolution, which is secret and special, as if he were
saying, \"Come here, I will preach something different and better than
you have ever heard before, but it will be nothing. For they have never
heard that the divine word should quench thirst, and that the word of
God should make such people that whoever believes in it, rivers of
living water should flow from his body. And it may well be that the Jews
did not understand this sermon correctly. For it was their opinion that
Christ would come as a king in the flesh, and as a lord of the world,
who would deliver the captives, comfort the miserable, water the
thirsty, and feed the hungry, and give the Jews all things enough that
they might become lords and captains in this world.

192Therefore they have heard him on this opinion, saying, If any man
thirst, I will water him, and give him enough, that springs and rivers
also shall flow from him.

1\) In the original margin.

flow, that also others should be watered by him and have everything
enough. It reads almost imperious and royal, as if he wanted to be a
lord who would help everyone, with whom they should also have good days
and everything enough. To this carnal sense they have interpreted it,
and still to this day, that Christ should be a worldly king, who would
deal with good days, power and riches.

193 They were accustomed to these sayings, that in the Scripture it is
written of lands, and people, and rivers of water: but John glossed it,
saying, He spake not of these things, but of the Spirit, which believers
should receive. Now Christ did not interpret this in this way, but John
helps him. And these are called spiritual interpretations, as ye have
heard, which is to drink and to thirst. And the Jews should also have
interpreted it that way. For Christ did not interpret the fountain or
stream of water; but this is the opinion that streams find the Holy
Spirit, that those who have the gospel and have obtained the Holy Spirit
can comfort, instruct, teach, warn, yes, be of use to the whole world,
and help to destroy eternal death and obtain eternal life. This is the
right understanding that John himself gives. As if he should say: The
Lord Christ does not speak of the fleshly mind and opinion of the Jews,
that it should fill the belly, and give all things enough, and refresh
them; otherwise they had many dreams of it; but of the Spirit, which
they alone shall have who believe. 2c. And follows:

**Because the Holy Spirit was not yet there.**

194 At the time Christ preached, he promised the Holy Spirit, and
therefore the Holy Spirit was not yet there; not that he was not in his
nature in heaven, but that he was not in his revelation and work. For
this is the real work and office of the Holy Spirit, to reveal and
glorify Christ, to preach and give testimony of Him. This ministry was
not yet in progress; the ministry of glorifying the Lord Christ was not
yet in progress, that is, the preaching of the forgiveness of sins, and
how to be delivered from death, to have comfort and joy in Christ, so
that it concerns us.

90 Eri. 48, sio-SIS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2331-2334. 91

That salvation, blessedness, righteousness, joy and life should be given
to us through this man, Christ, was not known at that time. He promises
it here, and makes it clear that it is he in whom one should believe,
and whoever believes should have what he promises. One should not fall
into these nonsensical thoughts, as if the Holy Spirit was only created
after the resurrection of Christ from the dead, but that it is written
here, \"The Holy Spirit was not yet here,\" that is, he was not yet in
his office, the old preaching and the law were still there, of which we
often say and always preach that one should distinguish between the
preaching of the gospel and the law.

For when the law is preached, it is a sermon that makes sin; it is a
poor and meager sermon, it makes hungry souls, frightened, afflicted,
meager hearts and consciences that groan for God\'s grace. This sermon
remains until Christ rises from the dead and is transfigured, where
there is a great thirst, thirst and lack, yes, neither counsel nor help.
For then it is said, Thou hast done this, thou hast omitted that, thou
art in death and under the wrath of God, as we well know who have
accepted it; for the common man does not much inquire what the spiritual
thirst is, and whether the gospel is preached or not. So it was in the
time of the Lord Christ, that if the preaching was good, he that would
be saved should keep the law. But where to take the keeping, or how to
be blessed, who had not kept the law and could not boast of works, no
one knew, because the Holy Spirit was not yet there, Christ was not yet
transfigured. Now follows a discord and disunity among the people.

**V.40-44. Many of the people who heard this speech said: This is a true
prophet. The others said: He is Christ. And some said, Shall Christ come
out of Galilee? saith not the scripture, Of the seed of David, and out
of the village of Bethlehem, where David was, shall Christ come? So
there was a**

**Discord among the people over him. Some wanted to take him, but no one
laid a hand on him.**

196\) It must have been a great and beautiful sermon that caused such a
commotion and discord among the people that one said, \"He is Christ,\"
and another said, \"He is not Christ.

So it is still going on today. It can be seen that it has happened as
with the spirits of the mob; wherever they go, they look at you like
this: You have heard many good sermons so far, it is true, but you have
not yet heard the right reason; I will tell you the right truth. So,
they can put it on. If one then has sleepy ears, then it happens that
one thinks it is so; thereby the other sermon is soon put down, so that
one says: \"Well, I have not heard such things preached before all my
life, I would not have thought that it was such a small thing. It is the
same here.

198\) Well, it is true that if it comes to pass, it is good. This man\'s
judgment was right, for he had a command from God, and it was prophesied
of him beforehand that he should do so; item, that Moses and the other
preachers should yield to him. Therefore he says: You have not yet heard
that which you are to hear. He had to speak this officially because of
the prophecy and for the sake of John the Baptist, saying, \"Hear me; I
must stand out and open my mouth to the people and lead them to me. It
behooves me, for I am to preach something special. And it shall befall
him also, and he shall be judged to put down all other preachers, and
against his preaching all other preaching shall be regarded as nothing.
Just as when the sun rises and darkens the moon so that it looks pale,
the moon and the stars lose their light and are no longer seen during
the day, because the light of the sun is too great. Moon and stars would
like to shine, but the sun is too strong with its brilliance and light.
So it is in this also. The prophets are the stars and the moon,

92 Erl. 4\", M-S14. Sermon on John 7:39-44. W. vn, Wsi-W\". 93

But Christ is the sun \[Malachi 4:2, Psalm 19:5\], and if he comes and
preaches and shines, his word is so great that the others are of no
account, and are not seen before him; though the moon and the stars also
shine and shine very brightly. So, Moses, the law and the prophets are
well taught and fine sermons; but against the sermon of Christ it is all
nothing, for they are not different, as if on a day, against the
brightness and light of the sun, some wax light were lighted, whose
shine is not seen at all before the sun\'s rays and brightness, but must
fade away. So Moses and the prophets also hide themselves from the Lord
Christ. For Christ alone must do it; we must hear his command, that he
says: Now comes the right light, which is commanded to me, I must shine;
you star and moon stop with your shine, show your shine to you; they
stand still, but they do not shine.

\(199\) So it is with Christ, to whom alone it behooves him to preach.
He cannot exalt himself too much, nor exalt himself too high, nor make
too great a disturbance; for he is the true light that kindles the day
and makes it bright. But they that will imitate him, being wanting, do
evil, and will make disciples after them, as Christ and the Lord
Christ\'s disciples did. But they come after the resurrection of Christ,
and they are rotten, they are not one with Christ, they want to be the
sun themselves, and to eclipse Christ, the true sun. As Christ Himself
says \[Matth. 24, 5. 23.\]: There will come after me, who will say: I am
Christ, see there is Christ, there in the wilderness; item v. 26: in
chambers, but do not go out 2c. For they pretend that my doctrine and
the apostles\' doctrine are nothing; they want to be everything, just as
now the sun obscures everything.

200 Thus it was with the great teachers when the gospel began. They soon
wanted to imitate Christ, that as Christ had darkened Moses and the
prophets, so they also wanted to imitate him and be everything, as we
have seen in Carlstadt, Münzer, and other heavenly prophets. No, it is
not because of prosperity, but because of the

Command. It still goes on like this; there is not a fool or a dautaut 1)
of the rats and papists who does not want to follow it. For when they
saw that the gospel had risen, everything that had been in the papacy
was darkened. Even though a little remained in the papacy, as the Ten
Commandments, the Lord\'s Prayer; item, baptism, the Bible; but it shone
as the pale moon, it has been eclipsed. But now they themselves want to
shine, like the sun.

\(201\) Now this is a doctrine and a warning, which serve against the
sects and cults. It was Christ\'s alone to preach thus, saying,
\"Whosoever thirsteth, let him come unto me.\" It is not fitting for any
other man to say this, and it is not fitting for any other preacher,
except I point to him and lead other people to his mouth, so that they
hear his word and do not look at themselves, but open their mouths to
him. He alone says: I am sent to be heard; as the heavenly Father also
cries of him: Hic est filius meus dilectus, hunc audite \[Matth. 3,
17.\]; and the holy Scripture in the other passage, v. 7, testifies of
Christ that the Father said to him: \"You are my Son, today I have
begotten you\" 2c. You must not look at us preachers, but look at him
and hear him; for I do not know how to do what he has done.

But the devil cannot help it; he has seen that Christ has come forth,
and has declared that he is the Messiah and Prophet, and that he is to
shine as the sun above the moon and all the stars, and to take the light
from the stars, and he will do so, and he will raise up mobs who want to
be the light, and will destroy and darken everything. But see thou out
of it, and take heed, that thou find the right man and the right sun,
and know them, and keep them. For there will be no lack of such
scoundrels and false teachers; they have always been in the world. Many
times more suns have been seen in the sky, yes, often three suns at the
same time; item, that six or seven suns have shone; nevertheless, one
must be the right sun; and shine

1\) \"Dautaffe\" perhaps as much as: Deutelmeister. In Dietz\'s
dictionary this word is not found.

[94 **Erl. 4s, 214-S17.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
vn, Ws-Lsss.** 95]{.underline}

But all three are such that one cannot be recognized before the other;
but the right sun must keep its place. So the same husks and the spirits
of the wicked also come forth and shine, so that one almost loses
Christ; they want to be bad Christ and boast of the Holy Spirit, other
righteous preachers must count for nothing at all.

For this reason, let it be understood that it belongs to the man Christ
alone, that he and his word may be heard. And all the Scriptures are
directed that Moses should preach the law, but Christ should abolish
this preaching of the law and make it dark, as the sun makes the moon
and the stars dark. As you see that the stars do not shine now in the
daytime 1) even though they are in the sky before your eyes, because the
sun takes away their light. But when the sun goes down, you see the
stars shining again; when the great light goes away, the little one
begins to shine and shine. But when Christ, the sun, sets, God help us.

\(204\) But what befalls the man to whom it is due that he should make
all things dark? He is to be the sun, and his word such a light of grace
that one forgets all others; his preaching is to occupy the whole
conscience, filling heaven and earth, so that my heart is free from the
law, and knows no more to say than about Christ crucified, who is to be
the day and the true sun, whom the Lord makes, as the prophets say. But
how is he? Some say, \"He will indeed do it; it has long been said that
a sun will rise one day that will shine brightly; for the stars will not
do it, they will not make a day. Now we have enough, we want to look at
this sun, we wait for the blessed seed Abraha; he will do it, the man
will be a prophet.

205\. Others want to lift him higher, saying, \"He is Christ.\" Some
say: \"A prophet cannot speak like this: To me, to me. He saith, Come, I
will water you; he will refresh all the earth; he must have something to
say.

1\) From this place it follows that these sermons were held during the
day, not in the evening. On August 26th the sun sets at 7 o\'clock 2
minutes.

He will be higher than a prophet; it is the Christ who is promised. They
want to go up and meet that they want to become great lords out of
carnal opinion, and think that Christ will only be a carnal, fleshly
Messiah and King. This is a childish, Jewish belief and delusion, just
as we teach our children that our Lord God sits in heaven on a golden
chair, has a gray beard and a golden crown; and yet with faith they are
attached to the man, so that they come up and meet the man who has such
a garment on; then, when they grow up, they are taught otherwise. So
here the good people are also on this track, they want to go up. The
apostles also worked on it, and thought he was such a man, who would
rule there in the flesh; but there is nothing to it. The poor people
want to go up, that the man should be Christ, who forgives sin and tears
apart the devil\'s kingdom, and that he should darken the stars and the
moon, so that he alone may kindle his light and let it shine; but it
does not want to go anywhere, it has to block itself. Therefore they
say:

**Is Christ to come from Galilee?**

It is an inconsistent thing, and they make believe that nothing more
ridiculous and foolish has been said; they put a block in the way, make
a hindrance, and push the poor people before their heads, so that they
bounce back again, who were nevertheless on a right track; for they make
believe that this sermon is too delicious, say that it is not possible
that Christ should come from Galilee, otherwise that would be a bad
Christ. But this is the wretched devil. In the 11th chapter of Matthew,
v. 6, Christ says: \"Blessed are those who do not take offense at me.\"
This doctrine is and remains an annoying doctrine, if one wants to
measure and grasp it with reason and get into it with our head and five
senses, namely, that Christ wanted to be the light of the world and help
everyone, when he went along as a poor carpenter who often did not have
the dear bread in the house. Neither he nor his father Joseph had a foot
of his own on earth, and in the end he was hung on the cross as the
worst murderer. He was a poor servant.

96 **Eri. \"s, 2i7-zig. Sermon on John 7:39-44. W. vn, 233S-2342.** 97

This annoyance is too great, it does not rhyme anywhere with the words:
\"He who believes in me\" 2c.

Thus, the word of God suffers an offence, apostasy, hindrance and
annoyance everywhere, so that those who want to go to it are thrown
before the head, as happens here. They use a seeming argument, which is
still used by all the wise men of the world, and thus repel many of them
when they say: \"Should Christ come from Galilee? Now it is true, the
holy scripture has said, he should come from Bethlehem, as Micah
indicates, and also names the tribe and place where he should be born.
So the scripture is in both places. Micah says \[Cap. 5, 1.\], \"Thou
Bethlehem art by no means the least among the daughters of Judah. \"2c.
And to David it is said \[2 Sam. 7, 12.\], A child of thy stock, flesh
and blood shall be Christ. They knew that Christ would come from the
tribe and blood of David and from the little town of Bethlehem. These
sayings were proclaimed to the people that Christ would come from the
blood of David and from Bethlehem.

But this man is of Galilee, where is not the tribe of David, neither was
the city of Bethlehem in that same land. With this they are cast down to
the ground, and lay all things low; and the wisdom of man also opposeth
it mightily, because it cannot be denied; so can no man resolve it, and
who shall rhyme it together? We know among the people where the Messiah
comes from, they say above \[v. 27. 1; both are known among the people.
They knew both that he should come from Bethlehem and from Judah, and
yet secretly, that they knew not whence he came, as the scripture had
declared, that he should come secretly. Therefore John the Evangelist
says that they themselves testified that he was born in Bethlehem of
Mary the Virgin, of the tribe of Judah, and after that he went into
Galilee. Some will have known this. But the others are good fellows, 1)
speak here: Be evil and wise enough; you think we do not know the
Scriptures? From Galilee no prophet arises, but from Jerusalem, and
Christ shall arise from

1\) Compare the note to § 122 of this chapter.

Jerusalem come. Therefore, because Christ is now going out of Galilee,
and is entering his thirtieth year in his old age, he must not be
Christ.

These are called the scandals and pleas against the dear gospel, as it
is now said in the papacy that a doctor should come from nowhere except
from Christendom and the church; so they stand up and rely on it as a
goat on its horns. And it is true, there is no preacher outside the
Christian church, that is impossible. It is decided that God does not
want to make Christians, unless they are baptized and called by the
Gospel. He wants to separate all who are called Christians from the
world through the gospel and baptism. So there is no right preacher or
prophet outside the church. This is what the Scripture says, and no one
can deny it. Just as here the Jews say, \"Out of Galilee comes no
prophet.\"

It is a strong argument that moves many who know that our doctrine is
right and can say nothing against it, and yet stand as a steady horse,
saying only that the holy Christian church has not yet decided and
approved it. With the word \"Christian church\" they capture both the
simple and the great Hanses, just as this text pushes everything to the
ground. Credo unam Ecclesiam Christianam. Item: Credo etiam in Spiritum
Sanc

tum[. Now, apart from this Christian Church, there is no salvation nor
Holy Spirit, because the]{.underline} Symbolum [says: I believe in the
Holy Spirit, A Holy Christian Church. The Holy Spirit makes the
Christian Church holy through His holiness, just as Christ also makes
the Church holy. And here there is no need to waver or doubt, it is
true, just as it is true that Christ came from Bethlehem and Judah.
Therefore, no preacher should be sought or accepted who does not come
from the Christian church.]{.underline}

211 How then is it done? they say: The Christian church has not yet
decided, it is not out of Christendom; and then they wait for concilia
and imperial diets, until the scholars come together and conclude there.
Because this does not happen, they remain as they are. So now both the
fools and the prudent speak, wanting to wait until it is decided by the
Christian church, because one of them says

[A8 Eri. is, ris-WL. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
\[they-Wis. 99]{.underline}

So, the other otherwise, the Christian church has not yet come to it; we
want to remain with our fathers\' faith until it is decided what is
right; and so we thumb our noses at the simple-minded. Now, we do not
deny that Christ should not come from Bethlehem, but neither do we say
that he should not come from Galilee. So it is also true that he who is
not in the Christian church, and whose doctrine is not decided by it, is
a right false, unrighteous preacher.

This is preached enough, that God made a man out of a lump of earth, but
the devil also took earth and made a toad or a monk out of it. Item, one
says: Where God builds a church, the devil puts a chapel next to it. The
Christian church is of two kinds. They call that the Christian church,
which is not; and that is the right church, which must not be called the
church. The question is not whether one should believe in the church?
item: whether there is a church? but which is the right church, that is
the question. . For whether there is a church, we are at one with the
pope in the matter. We believe that there is certainly a Christian
church, as the pope also believes; there must be a Christian church on
earth, we believe this as firmly and strongly as he does. But this is
the point, and this is the point of conflict, who is the Christian
church? because the devil divides all the names, and falsifies them, as
the pope also does. The Anabaptists say just that: they have baptism,
and without baptism one cannot be saved. Now we do not ask, nor do we
dispute, whether there is a baptism that makes one blessed. So it is
also with the sacramentaries, where we confess that they have the
sacrament of the Lord\'s Supper, there we are one; but about this the
question is, which have the right sacrament? So also in the Christian
church the gospel must be preached; but there is a dispute about which
is the right gospel and who has it righteously? We are now discussing
the same thing with the pope, whether they, the papists, or we are the
right Christian church? whether they have and need baptism, the gospel,
and the sacrament of the Lord\'s Supper rightly? They say: We have it
right; so we also say that we have it right.

The quarrel arises over this. They persist in their delusion that we are
heretics, as the Pharisees and Jews do here; then they cry out that they
are good Christians, but we are heretics. We cannot and will not suffer
this either; we suffer it with our hands, but not with silence. Well,
the pope says that he is the Christian church; we say no to that,
although there are some among the pope who belong to the Christian
church, just as there are many among the Turks, in France and England,
who belong to the Christian church; they are baptized, keep the gospel,
use the sacraments rightly, and are true Christians. But that they now
condemn us, and say that our doctrine is not right, and burn themselves
white against it, and justify themselves with their laws, poems,
brotherhoods and good works, and say that he who keeps these is a right
Christian, and is the right Christian church, we say no to that.

\(214\) We allow this to happen, that they are in the Christian church,
but they are not true members of the church; they have the chair,
baptism, the ministry, the sacrament, and they are in the church, but
they are not righteous. Just as there are many among us who are
baptized, go to the sacrament, present themselves as Christians, and yet
they are peelers in the skin, they are not righteous. Therefore we say:
They are among the number of Christians, they have the name, appearance
and vocation of the church and Christians, but therefore they are not.

215 You must therefore distinguish the true Christian church, which is
the church in truth, from the church which wants to be the church and
yet is not. The false church has only the appearance, but nevertheless
has the Christian offices. For a prankster can baptize, read the gospel,
go to the sacrament, and say the ten commandments; all this is and
remains right; but he remains a bad prankster, and is not called a
Christian, nor the Christian church, but is said to be in and under the
Christian church, just as mice droppings lie under the pepper, and wheel
under the corn, and help to fill the bushel. Just as in the human body
there are fine, pure, healthy, righteous members, which man uses for his
need.

100 **Erl. 48, SSS-SS4. Sermon on John 7:39-44. W. Vli, 2S4S-2S47.** 101

can. But after that there is also sweat in the body, butter in the eyes,
snot, scab, boils and other filth. These things are in the human body as
well as the ears, stomach, heart, fingers or eyes; but the filth is also
in the body, although it stinks. So the heretics, false teachers, or
ungodly, even in the church, are not natural, righteous members, but the
filth that festers out of the body. Therefore it is true that no one
will ever preach rightly unless he is in the Christian church. He can
preach, but that is not enough; he must also have the Holy Spirit,
preach rightly and live. He cannot do this unless he is a true member of
the Christian church.

2l6. Now that they say they will wait until it is decided by the church,
let the devil wait; I will not wait that long. For the Christian church
has already decided everything. Just as the members of the body are to
be one body, and must not wait until the devil says or concludes whether
the body is healthy or not. We want to know and learn from the members,
and not from the urine, dung or filth. So we do not want to wait until
the pope and bishops say in a concilio: It is right, because they are
not one piece and pure, healthy members of the body, but they are Junker
Unflath and snot on the sleeve, yes, the dirt they are, because they
pursue the right gospel, which they know is the word of God. Therefore
it is seen that they are filth, stink, and the devil\'s members.
Therefore it is said: The Christian church has already decided it,
because everywhere they teach this way, and all Christians who have been
baptized believe as this teaching says. This decision does not involve
an outward meeting, but is a spiritual concilium, and one does not need
a convention for this. One may assemble and hold a 1) concilium to order
how to fast and pray, and how to dress, and how to confirm and confess
the right articles of faith, or to judge other things, as was done in
the Concilio Niceno.

1\) \"one\" put by us instead of \"none\" which seems not to fit us.

But to decide the Christian doctrine whether it is right, there 2) one
may not concilii to, but I say: I hold over baptism, and believe in the
gospel, that it is right and holy, believe and hold over the sacrament
of the Lord\'s Supper.

Then they say, \"Yes, you do not believe correctly. Then it begins, and
the quarrel arises; there belongs a spiritual concilium to it, that as I
believe and preach, so my brother also believes, yes, so all Christians
believe where they are; they are unanimous. That means One Christian
Church, which believes in Christ, and which wants to be saved by Him,
not by our works or merits; and what the Holy Spirit says to us, He says
to all Christians, wherever they are. This is the Bethlehem and the
tribe of Judah where Christ comes from. So it is also true that outside
the church there is no prophet, no Christian, or teacher and preacher,
for it is a body and soul that clings to each other as the members cling
to the body, for they are members of the body. A fist that is cut off is
dead, does not live, does not cling to the body; so also a heretic is
cut off from the Christian church by false teaching and unbelief, and is
dead; for those who are outside the Christian church are dead.

218 The Christian church is not called a heap full of bishops\' or
cardinals\' hats, and it may be called a concilium, or from them a
concilium, but not a Christian church. For the same cannot be gathered
together in one heap, but is scattered through the whole world; it
believes as I believe, and I believe as it believes; we have no offence
or disparity in faith, we all believe One Christian Church; outside this
Church all is nothing. So I believe; about this then the dispute arises.

219 Therefore, since the argument is so strong, be prepared to say,
\"This word \'Christian church\' has two meanings, as do other words,
for some are the true church and some are the false church. Show me now
the true church. The pope also says that he is the right church, but
wherewith will he prove it? You have the

2\) Erlanger: so.

[102 Eri. 4s, 2S4-MS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
W-n-Ws.\" 103]{.underline}

Gospel and baptism; we also. But see who has the right gospel and the
right baptism, or the wrong one. The one Christ is right, but all
heretics make a new Christ. The words are twofold. Every heretic has a
special word, and also bears the name of the divine word. Item, the name
of God is the most diverse word; one has probably thousands of gods.
Mammon is a god; Francisci and Carthaeus order is also a god; everyone
has his own god. Behold now. As the name of God is of one God and yet is
drawn elsewhere, so that the name of God is interpreted variously: so
also the name of the Christian church is torn apart, drawn from time to
time. You must not turn to it, that they say: Here is the church. You
say: I know that there is a Christian church, and I know the word
\"Christian church,\" but whether you are, I do not know. You may well
boast, but the beautiful names shall not deceive me, for the heretics
shall come under the beautiful name of God, Christ, and the Christian
church, and deceive the world.

\(220\) Therefore it is dangerous and suspicious that they thus boast
the name of the Christian church, as if it were the great art, and no
one knew anything else before them. But say thou: If you want to be the
church and have the name, prove it. Teach rightly, as the holy Christian
church teaches; so live as it lives; prove your faith and the fruit of
faith, and prove that you are the Christian church. But that they do not
want to have the office of a true bishop, but persecute whom they will,
and want to be godly princes and to be the Christian church, we must say
that they are the church of the devil, for the Christian church does not
deal with doctrine in this way. So that the heretics frighten and
deceive many people with the name of the church, just as these also did
here in the Gospel, saying: Christ is to come from Bethlehem, but that
he comes from Galilee must be wrong.

So they also say about us now. Whether we are the Christian church,
nevertheless because we are from Galilee or from Wittenberg

come, and do not wait until they decide it, therefore it must be wrong.
So we say: Ei, from Galilee and Nazareth also Christians come, who
preach and believe what is not pleasing to you, so we do not have to be
Christians. But so long will we not wait, nor preach what they would
have. Let us preach of the man who after this life will also give us
enough. If we wanted to preach to please them, we would have become
great lords for a long time; but there is (as they say) no counsel in
it.

**The tenth sermon.**

Saturday after \[September 2, 1531\]. 1)

222This is the dissension that arose among the people concerning the
doctrine of Christ, that some said he was Christ; some, he was a
prophet; others, they roundly rejected, saying: Out of Galilee there
ariseth not a prophet. This discord among the people is stuck there. Now
we cannot say much about this, but these are examples and histories that
serve to show us how it is with the people who hear the Lord Christ
preached, and we receive strength and comfort from it against the great
trouble that is called making error in the faith. For this is the
highest, if they blame us, that our doctrine is new, and they want to
remain with the old faith, and so strife and discord arise from the
doctrine. For some say: I will wait for a concilium, and what the
emperor and bishops will decide with the princes that one should hold,
that I will also accept. This is the greatest annoyance, which fills the
eyes, ears and mouth, and is difficult to bear. Therefore we need
comfort, that we do not turn to it; it should and must be so, we will
not have it better than he. If the gospel could have been preached
without such confusion and discord, it would have been the same with the
man Christ, who could preach better than the apostles. But because it
happens to him, the Lord Christ, that when he preaches, there is a
delusion of faith among the people, yes, a discord over his sermon; they
know themselves to be in the wrong.

1\) In the original margin.

104 Erl. 4s, \[ss-229. Sermon on John 7:45-\^49. w. vn, 2W0-2W2. 105

not to send into this new doctrine, one saying otherwise, the other so;
this he, Christ, has done himself, that with his preaching he has misled
the people.

223There are so many sects rising up, one wanting to go out here, the
other there, that they make the people very suspicious and confused.
Then you say: That there are so many sects, what can I do about it? A
Christian who believes the word of God and preaches it does not have to
accept it; there is no other way, so send yourself in, so that it will
not be better in the world. If the sermon is God\'s word, sects rise up
and proceed in this way, as we hear here.

The papacy had a fine reputation, it was all quiet; and although there
were many monks and orders, it was all on one head, and in one man\'s
fist, as the pope\'s, that there was only One Faith and One Doctrine.
This is what one sees, and this is what one is still working towards.
And it would be fine if there were one head to govern everything, but it
is impossible, because neither Christ, nor a prophet, nor an apostle,
has led it out like this. Therefore send thyself in, consider, that as
soon as the gospel is given, there arises a strife and a noise, as the
similitude in the gospel also shows \[Luc. 11, 21. 22.\]: When the
strong-armed man kept his palace, his own remained in peace; but when a
stronger came upon him, he divided his spoil.

Now the fault is not of the gospel, but of the enemy, the devil, who
does not want to suffer the gospel. If we preached as the pope wanted us
to, pretended to him and courted him, we would still have peace under
the pope; but we served the devil. Therefore, there was peace under the
pope; for everything was let go as it went, no one was against the
other, the devil\'s teaching had to be God\'s word. The pope lay like a
sow lying in the dung, and snores when it is scratched; but now he wakes
up and stirs, because he is attacked and knocked on the skin; as such
things now also come into our hands.

226 But let us be comforted when we see that many of them fall away; for
there are

frightens people and makes them turn away, when they see that everything
was quiet before, good peace everywhere, but now it is all full of mobs
and sects, and such a horrible being that it is to be pitied. But turn
it around and say, \"This is what frightens you, but I accept it as
comfort. For it is a sign and a sure seal that it is the true word of
God. For if it were the word of the devil, it would go quietly and
silently, as the serpent screeches along; but if mobs and sects rise up
over it, it is surely the word of God. Because it must go thus, it will
also go thus. It happened to Christ and the others in this way, and it
will not happen to us in any other way. It also happened to Jeremiah the
prophet, as he laments in chapter 15, v. 10, and cries out: \"Woe to my
mother, whom have you begotten in me? You have borne a man who is
nothing but a quarreler; everyone in the country cries out against me;
when I open my mouth, there is quarreling and unrest. I have neither
lent nor borrowed on usury; nor does anyone curse me. He also says,
\"What shall I preach? I have determined to be silent and to preach no
more, for if I preach long, I preach only my harm and shame. For this
people brings God\'s word upon my neck; therefore I will be content, and
let preach whoever wants to preach. Well, I would have liked to do it,
he says, but your word was like a fire in my legs. The 120th Psalm also
says, v. 7: When I kept peace, they began wars; when I opened my mouth,
war and strife came quickly.

This does not happen when the devil preaches to his own; his doctrine is
smooth, for he preaches what is easy for reason to understand; but here,
since I am peaceful, and do not seek war, but would gladly bring all the
world to salvation. When I preach the gospel, 1) war is already here,
for the devil feels that people should be saved from his nets and yarns
and led to the kingdom of the Lord Christ. Therefore he awakens

1\) The preceding is incorrectly interpung in Walch and in the Erlanger:
\"is understandable. But here, since I am peaceful and do not seek war,
but would gladly bring all the world to bliss, I preach\" 2c.

[106 Erl. 48, SSS-SS1. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2SZ2-23SS. 107]{.underline}

what he can, and also wakes up himself 2c., wants to become mad and
nonsensical. So the seeds of peace must have the name of waging war,
must bear the name of discord; and again, those who break the peace, and
raise war, boast that they are lovers of peace. Now let it be, the devil
rages thus, and wants to make people stupid, so that they do not adhere
to the gospel, and thereby insults Christ, the apostles and his own, so
that they cause strife and discord. So they also accuse St. Paul in the
stories of the apostles and say: \"We have found this man harmful, and
the rebellion arouses all the Jews in the whole world\" \[Apost. 24,
5.\]. And Christ himself also says \[Matth. 10, 34.\]: \"I have not come
to send peace\" or to make peace, \"but the sword.\" I will make father
and son at variance with one another. This is a piece and a consolation
from the example, against the disgraceful agitation, and against the
great washing and shouting, which even our adversaries are doing against
us now.

**V. 45. The servants came to the chief priests and Pharisees, and they
said to them: Why did you not bring him?**

These are not the words of the Lord Christ, nor a doctrine, but a
history, which was preached after his sermon, against the trouble and
against the useless mouths, because one must win this piece from them
with patience. And here the Lord Christ shows how powerful he is with
his own. The chief priests and Pharisees send out their servants to sing
to the Lord Christ, and the servants want to be obedient to their lords
and masters, and have it in mind to do their masters\' bidding, and to
seize Christ in the temple; and if the prison is very near to the Lord
Christ, he could not have come nearer to it. He is commanded to be
seized, and the servants come and have it in mind, wanting to seize him.
Well, what happens?

229 There you can see what the human heart and thoughts can and do, how
a heart is not at all powerful of itself and its thoughts. Therefore
also the Psalm \[Ps. 33, 15.\] says: Qui fingit singulatim corda eorum,
das

is, \"He directs the heart of them all.\" Item, in the same Psalm, v.
10, it is said: \"The LORD brings to naught the counsel of the Gentiles,
and turns away the thoughts of the nations.\" Not only does God see
their thoughts, but He also makes them change their hearts in an
instant; He can turn away their thoughts and make others take their
place. The servants are murderers, they want to catch an innocent man;
their heart and thoughts are in the devil\'s obedience; but their
thoughts they are not able to lead out. For when they hear him, it comes
to pass that the thoughts depart, and get another and humble heart, and
become the disciple and pupil of that master and preacher, whom
otherwise they would have caught and killed.

230 This is a fine example by which we see that the angry nobles do not
do everything they have in mind, nor do they lead them out. For where
are they here? A year ago, at the Imperial Diet in Augsburg, it was
decided that they wanted to dampen things in eight days, and they went
along thinking that they wanted to wipe us out in a hurry, that this
year should be our last. But what happens? When our Confession and
Apologia were read, and they heard it, many fell back and said: We did
not know this before, but heard that it was a doctrine that made all
disobedience to the authorities, separated husbands and wives from each
other, and caused all evil, sin, shame and vice, of which they had been
told before. So when they heard it, their anger went away, although it
still remains with some wicked people.

This is also the way it is done here. The servants become different
people. Even though the Pharisees remain as before, they cannot carry it
out, because it is not in their hands. They remain in their thoughts,
which they have created, but they do not sing out the song. The servants
have received pay, and are sworn to the Pharisees to be faithful to
them, are obedient to their masters, come and want to catch him; but
soon they turn the devil\'s obedience, and become obedient to Christ,
but disobedient to their masters. They should have caught him out of
fear; for they should ever be afraid of their masters, that the same
should have

[108 **Erl. 48, SSI-SS4. Sermon on John 7:45-49. W. VII, 28SS-2SL8.**
109]{.underline}

not throw him into prison, but it does not happen. What kind of heart is
that? They become so brave and bold that they go back in disobedience to
their masters, knowing that it will annoy their masters, and that they
will be considered rebels and disobedient 2c.; yet they do not respect
it all.

**V. 46. The servants answered: No man ever spoke like this man.**

232\. they think, We will leave the man who speaks thus assaulted, and
will not sin against God, and will let the neck go over it before. They
become disobedient to their masters, defy their masters, and condemn
them, become their judges, and say: Such a man ye make us to catch, and
condemn his word, yet we say, feel, and know that here is vain GOD. We
have never heard a man speak like this before. As if they should say:
There is vain God in his speaking, and you take him for a devil, and
condemn him. So the servants become strange teachers and doctors, who
condemn the Pharisees, only from a few sermons.

233 And behold, Christ came not for peace, but to make mischief \[Matth.
10, 34\]. He separates masters and servants, and those who were at first
well united, now go about in disobedience, and do the contrary, now
become rebellious to their masters, and punish their masters with pretty
words. Is this disunity not strong enough? They condemn what their
masters do, and confirm the man\'s teaching, whose enemies they were
before. The servants think: Our masters will be our enemies, may they
counsel against us what they will, and may also have an evil purpose
against us, it is not because of their thinking and purpose, but there
is one in heaven who has it in his hand.

234 We also know that our adversaries still have plots and schemes, that
they want to dampen our doctrine; this we may provide to them. Whether
they give us good words, they still think to exterminate us and to
reinstate their thing; they think that we do not know, and they think
that they cannot miss it, so it must be to

meet what they have in mind. When they come together, they confer with
each other about how they want to attack us, and they try to subdue us
by force, because they cannot suppress it with cunning and art, and
their thoughts and counsels are not hidden from us. But above all this
there is one more thing, the most supreme. If they have been guessing
for an equally long time, they have not therefore brought it out soon.
There is still one who can turn it around. God comforts, and says: \"If
the hour does not come (come what may), and our enemies are as evil as
death and the devil himself, they shall not lead it out and end it. We
know well what the devil has in mind; not that he wants to make me a
pope or bishop, and you a prince and mighty one, but he wants to destroy
me altogether. As we see, then, that he sets up many mobs and awakens
other ungrateful people, and would gladly set up a bloodbath so that
everything would swim in blood. We have the advantage of saying,
\"Devil, you may be angry, but you will not be able to do it unless it
is God\'s hour.

The servants are sent here, but not only do they become powerless, so
that they, the angry Hansen, can do and create nothing, but they are
also converted. The other great lords remain angry, but they can do
nothing. It is a great comfort to know that we have such a strong hand
over us, not only over us, but also over our enemies\' hearts and minds.
Our Lord God decrees that they creep together, deliberate and conclude
how they want to chase and plague our sovereign, the Duke of Saxony,
from lands and people; but let them be wise and wicked, if it goes to
the meeting, then nothing will come of it. This we have before, that we
know that they shall come to nothing.

**No man has ever spoken as this one speaks.**

It is a humble speech, but also a powerful speech. They do not say with
hopeful words: You peelers, you want to kill the man who is of God; but
they keep a servile humility with them,

[110 Erl. 48, 234-2SS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2358-2381. 111]{.underline}

Let them remain masters, do not take them by the sword and by the power,
they remain servants, and in their state. The quarrel is not about
bodily things; they do not exalt themselves higher than they are, even
as servants; but the quarrel is in the spirit. This is the real strife
and warfare, that their faith and doctrine is different from that of the
Pharisees; they do not want to be one.

237 And so a servant shall not flee or run from his master, nor a woman
from her husband, though one believes differently from the other, for
God the Lord does not want the estates to be divided, so the estates
shall not be divided. But they must be separated, and not mix spiritual
and physical disunity, so that as far as the Lord\'s authority goes, it
is good; then let a servant serve with his body and be obedient, namely,
according to the outward, worldly rule, as far as his authority goes,
and the house rule, city rule, or land law is able. Let not the servant
oppose him, let him not murmur against him, but know that he is his
lord. But over and above this, that they are in agreement outwardly, and
the servant serves humbly, the servant has another lord, namely Christ,
who is a lord over the conscience and over the soul, and he should also
be served. For the master of the house is not a lord over the conscience
of the servant or of the maid. The servant can say to him, \"Lord, I
have committed myself to you with my body, hand and foot, but not with
my conscience; I take no reward for learning and believing the word of
God; I am free, and this is someone else\'s business; I will be at ease.

238 Therefore, when they are divided, they remain distinct, being one
outwardly in matters of the world, and divided inwardly in matters
concerning conscience and faith. Thus a servant can well suffer a master
who believes differently from him, and a master can well suffer a
believing servant with him, if the servant does what he owes. But if the
master is unbelieving and wants to force the servant to unbelief, he is
a tyrant. Just as these servants do, saying, \"What do you want with us?
We have been obedient to you as servants.

But you want to go too far, you want to have servants here who do
against their conscience, and sin against God\'s commandment, and should
offend against this man, that is, do against the faith and against
God\'s word; we do not want to do that, we are not your servants there;
therefore we come and remain servants of the other Lord, whom you have
otherwise commanded us to catch.

It is a strong word that they speak in humility. They honor the
preaching of the Lord Christ, and they confess Christ freely. Of course,
they know that their masters want him dead; nor do they honor his word.
And on such faith follows such a mighty speech, and they make a
beautiful confession, saying: Do what you will, but you cannot preach
like this; no prophet has preached like this. That is to confess the
faith mightily, and yet with all humility, that he is Christ, the
Messiah. Do not push their masters out of their dominion, they remain
servants as before. Here we see that the enemies cannot do everything as
they would like.

**Then the Pharisees answered them, \"Are you also deceived? Does any
ruler or Pharisee believe in him? but the people who know nothing of the
law are accursed.**

He who has respect for it sees that it always happens this way when one
goes against the word of God. The longer one resists the word, the more
nonsensical they become. This is the first foolishness, that they snort
at the servants in this way; but the longer they go on, the more foolish
they become. For now they let the servants and the Lord go, and defile
the innocent people, saying: Where have ye seen that any of the rulers
and Pharisees believe on him? What devil told you? Did not Nicodemus,
Joseph, and others believe in him? But they blunder in like this, they
do not know what they are saying. And if they knew it right away, how
would it work and sound, that they say: You shall not believe in him?
because the princes and Pharisees do not believe in him. Wise men! shall
they preach like this, when they are ten times more senseless? Is that
honoring the faith, if I believe what the Pharisees, rulers,

[112 Eri. 4s, SSS-2S9. Sermon on John 7:45-49. W. vn, Wgi-WW.
113]{.underline}

Princes and bishops believe? Even if one wanted to say: Harlots and
knaves do not accept the gospel, therefore it is wrong. They should have
ever read the holy scripture and know that it says: You shall not rely
on princes, wise men and scholars \[Ps. 118, 8. 9.\]. What is this
saying: Because we Pharisees do not believe it, it is not true, and
faith is wrong? This is great wisdom, that if men believe not a thing,
therefore it is wrong; and though thou hast God and His word, yet shalt
thou not be sure that thou hast the right faith; but if men believe it,
thou hast it; but if men believe it not, thy faith must be wrong.

241 So if they want to preach: What people believe, teach and do, you
also do. What then do they do? Oh, they commit fornication, adultery,
theft, usury and other sins, and live like harlots and knaves. That
would be to lead the conscience on an ice, to point at people or men, as
if men could not err; to despise, blaspheme and disgrace others who do
not howl with them and blow the same horn. Thus human foolishness is
poured out, that one should look around at people. But they will say
many things, We Pharisees cannot err, therefore hold yourselves fast; we
are without sin: whatsoever we speak, believe, or do, it is right and
good, and without blemish.

But the Lord Christ indicates that when wise men begin to be foolish, a
wise man does not commit a little foolishness, but the longer they rave
and rage, the more foolish they become. Therefore we teach that no one
is to be regarded, neither princes nor lords, doctors nor disciples, but
my faith is to have no other foundation than the word of God. What the
pope said in former times was called Christian truth, and were articles
of faith, and were badly attached to men. It also happened that one sank
into it and lost everything that is Christ and God\'s word. Therefore
one should now say: Pope, Concilium and Doctors, we do not want to
believe you, but the divine word.

They boast that such great people do not err. I let that go and pass in
jurisprudence, that they do not err; let them also speak it, as jurists,
that they do not err in external matters. For what do I ask about it, I
may believe that they are not mistaken or mistaken, it does not break my
leg; it is a worldly matter, does not concern my faith. But that they
want to make it so that the pope cannot err in the Christian faith and
doctrine, I say no to that, and I do not come to the sermon. We say
outright: God has commanded that in matters of faith we should not look
to any apostle, nor to prophets, nor to anyone else; for faith does not
stand in human power, but on divine own power, and not on what the pope
or emperor, the great crowd and Concilia believe, unless they have
God\'s word for them, then I believe for the sake of the divine word,
and not for their sake, and say: Prince to, prince to, let the Pharisees
teach me nothing out, nor in. If they bring GOD\'s word, we say: GOD
welcome. But if it is not God\'s word, we let them go; as here the
servants let their masters be Pharisees, but do not believe and follow
their teaching.

244 Then take hold of God\'s word with certainty, and you will know what
you do or believe, or where you are at home, for a Christian alone knows
what he believes or does. The others walk in darkness, and are quite
uncertain of their status and nature, looking at faith as a calf looks
at a new gate, and so one deceives the other, wanting to believe what
the emperor or their priest believes. But believe then, you will see
what you believe. I do not want to believe what the emperor, prince or
Elector of Saxony believes, but what God\'s word is certain. So I know
where I am at home, and I walk in the light, and I know where to wait
for my faith. And will not bring me into the black hole, which is
imagined for me, because I am uncertain, and do not know what is
believed. And there faith is pure.

Otherwise, the others have made themselves God, and pretend they cannot
be wrong. They are proud rogues. Fie on your mouth.

[114 Eri. 4\", SS\"-\"\". Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2303-230\". 115]{.underline}

They condemn all the people as if they knew nothing about God or the
law. Do they not know that there is a God who has forbidden not to
steal? Item, that there is a God who brought them out of Egypt? O they
must know nothing; they take it all from the people, and ascribe it to
them. O the people, they say, know nothing of the law, therefore they
are condemned and cursed; we know everything of the law, therefore we
are blessed and blessed.

The devil himself should not come and speak so rudely. They condemn the
whole people, all their works, life, faith and worship; so our Lord God
must go with them. But God is in the people; and though the common man
may go, yet among the people there are some who are pious; though the
nobility and the princes are devils in spirit, yet among them are some
pious princes and nobles. So the Lord Christ has also had His own here,
even though the Laurians, the Pharisees, are vain thieves. Why would we
even want to throw away the house, as they do? Nicodemus will also come
into play. But here the Pharisees consider themselves blessed, and
condemn the people with their God. This is what we do when we are
against our Lord God, and rage and rage against him and his word.

**The eleventh sermon.**

Saturday after Nativitatis Mariae \[Sept. 9, 1531\]. 1)

This is the history of how the servants of the Pharisees were sent to
seize the Lord Christ, but were converted by his preaching, so that they
neither feared nor were afraid to confess and boast of Christ as their
Lord. This is written for the comfort of those who believe, so that they
know that it is not in the power of tyrants to harm us, for God can turn
their heart, their word and their work. We also need this consolation,
so that when it comes to moves 2) and encounters, we may be certain of
what evil befalls us through the devil or through men, for the sake of
the teaching of the gospel that

1\) In the original margin.

2\) \"zun Zügen\" to the last breaths, to die.

they would not be able to harm a hair of our head with their own
strength, if it were not imposed by God, and God would have it
graciously. As the Lord Christ says \[Matth. 10, 30\], that not a hair
shall fall from our head without His will. It is lowly spoken, and the
words have no honor, but it is highly spoken that not a hair of our head
shall fall off. Reason does not understand it, and the contradiction is
there, which even nullifies these words. For a Christian loses not only
a hair, but body, goods, honor and glory, house and farm, so that it is
even reversed, and so it would be said, \"Not a hair remains for a
Christian; so he is destroyed, he is condemned, and so he is cut off, so
that not a hair remains there.

248 Christ turns it around and says: Not a hair shall perish; much more
shall the body, goods and honor not perish. But the consolation is that
we cling to the words, and confirm this saying with examples when
trouble comes; otherwise there is no help. They have in mind and intend
to clean up everything so that not a hair will be left behind; but God
turns it around and makes it so that not a hair will be harmed, not a
hair will perish; it is even the other way around. That is a beautiful
comfort, they shall not pluck a hair out of our head without His will;
they will not end what they have in mind. We must hold fast to this
promise, that they shall not pluck a hair of our head, if he will have
it; but he that loseth aught above it shall have it again. Now follows:

**V. 50, 51 Nicodemus, who came to him by night and was one of them,
said to them, \"Does our law also judge a man before he is questioned,
and know what he does?**

They have caught themselves, the dear fools, that they say: Do also the
Pharisees believe in him? There have fallen vain foolish speeches. As if
to say, \"You foolish, foolish people, how can you cling to this man
with the mad, common rabble, who know nothing, and yet all the princes
and Pharisees are against him? There they have

116 Erl. \<8, S41-S44. Sermon on John, 7, 50-53. W. vri, 2ss\"\--2Mg.
117

have gone astray. They do not say that they have one standing with them
other than Nicodemus and Joseph, who were attached to him. And here the
same Nicodemus confesses Christ, but in Nicodemic he defends him; he is
the Lord\'s disciple, but secretly, and protects him in Nicodemic. He
does not say whether he is right or wrong, as these servants do here,
but he carries the tree on both armpits, does not want to say that he is
a heretic or a prophet and pious; but wants to say that one should deal
with this man according to worldly law and the judgment of reason, and
first interrogate him before condemning him.

250 This is Nicodemus speaking. He is silent that he should be heard as
a prophet and that his teaching is right; but it would be fair, he says,
if one did not want to hear from the divine word and the holy
scriptures, that one should not break the worldly law against him, that
one should not condemn anyone unheard. This is what God and the emperor
commanded; the law of nature also says that one should not punish or
condemn, but first let one come to the answer, and that he is rightly
overcome. So the imperial law and Portius Festus in the stories of the
apostles in the 25th chapter, v. 16, says to St. Paul: The Romans
condemn no one, they have first interrogated him, he has then come to
the presence of his accuser to answer.

So he would like them to let the secular law go and apply to him at the
least, because they do not want to deal with him according to the
Scriptures. Politely and reasonably, he wants to reject them from their
evil behavior, but he does not expressly defend him that he is right in
his teaching. He only says that they are going too high against worldly
law; he does not say: You are fools and unrighteous, you act against law
and against reason; but he goes out stupidly and asks thus: I command
you, think for yourselves whether it is fitting that he should be seized
and condemned, since you cannot bring guilt upon him.

This is another comfort, and here it is presented as an example of how
our Lord God comforts and saves His own, as it often happens. For God is
a wonderful man. When the princes at times

If they come together, and are wicked in their counsel, and have evil in
their mind, and agree together, and want to make it out in fury and
wrath, then our Lord God shall often give a Nicodemum among them, who
shall speak into the play, and destroy all their things, and make them
astray; that it may be seen that he hath their thoughts in his fist,
even their own hearts.

253 There are many such examples in the Scriptures. When David was
driven out by Absalom his son, a council was held on how to overtake and
seize David, and Ahithophel gave Absalom counsel, saying, \"It is a
matter of one person, namely, David;\" and he offered to go after David
with twelve thousand men and deliver him into Absalom\'s hands. Now this
was wise counsel; but our Lord God sent Chushai into the midst of the
counsel, and when he came into counsel, he turned it, and made them
astray, saying, Do not do it, Absalom, but this I counsel thee: gather
all Israel; for thy father David is an angry man of war, or thou shalt
lose \[2 Sam. 17:1 ff\]. This is what our Lord God does. Chusai\'s
counsel was sheer ridiculous; nor does he disgrace Ahitophel\'s counsel,
who nevertheless gave wise and prudent counsel. Our Lord God is a master
of this.

In church history, an emperor wanted to exterminate all the righteous
Christians, and they were all to be judged outside the city. The
captain, who was ordered to do so (whether he was a pagan or not),
slowly went out to the city to be judged, and thought that the
Christians should roll away in the meantime, so that he would not find
anyone in the square. Then he saw that they were running out much more,
and in particular he saw a woman with a child running toward the gate.
Then he asked her, saying, \"Where are you going? She answered, \"Ad
martyrium, that is, where they are going to judge the Christians, and I
want to die with them. Then the centurion was astonished and withdrew
with the people of war, not wanting to judge the Christians, disobeyed
the emperor, and said: I will let myself be put to death before I kill
another Christian.

255\. thus our Lord God always sends it; if one thinks that it should
now go to failure, then a Nicodemus or Chusai comes in, for example.

[118 Erl. 4S, S44-24S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2389-2372. 119]{.underline}

the game, he turns it. So he can endure through one man and one person,
and make a whole country go astray, yes, he can make the whole world go
astray through one person. But if he has no person, he does it alone,
and takes their thoughts and heart, turns it around and prevents it;
that he can do. Sometimes he takes single persons, and thereby hinders
all princes, and says: Defiance. Thus our Lord God comforts us and
defies the devil, which makes him angry: no worse mischief could be done
to him than that our Lord God should attack him so ridiculously and
shamefully.

The devil, who would gladly throw them all into one heap, makes the
princes and great men furious and angry, so that they have much evil in
mind; so they also have power to lead them out. But God, who sits in
heaven, laughs and says: \"What do they want to do? do they want to kill
Christ, my Son? O I will make this wisdom foolishness, and will take
away the heart of their servants, that they hurt not my Son. Secondly, I
will send a Nicodemum to make them false in their counsels. That is, the
devil\'s mocking in the teeth; the servants and a single person,
Nicodemus, shall make them astray. By this we shall see his great power,
how easy it is for him to help and save. He casts a Nicodemus among
them, and makes the servants also other people.

257 If he can do this by a single Nicodemus, so that he makes all the
great merchants mad, and the great rulers and angry nobles miss their
attempts, what would he do, if he needed his angels for this? What would
he do if he came with twelve thousand angels? But God will not do it, he
does not need so many angels, but says: Only alone, my child, believe in
me, and cling to my word, there shall be no lack of help; I will be
strong enough for my adversaries, and meet them with a strong arm, and
make all the counsels null and void, to comfort you, and to defy the
devil. And you shall have this as an example and a sign: The heap of the
great Hansen I will repel by a Nicodemum. It often looks at you as if
everything wants to fall to ruins, to failure and to the ground.

Remember, then, that if God can do this, and make believers of so many
servants who want to catch Christ, and ward off the grumbling and great
violence of the Pharisees by a few Nicodemus, and postpone it, at little
cost to him, he will also find some counsel. If he protects us through
angels \[Dan. 3, 25\], well and good; if not, I have a comfort here and
a sure sign that it is his gracious pleasure.

They want to wear me out, so that not a hair of my head shall remain;
but this is my comfort, that they shall not turn back or bend a hair of
my head. They have in mind to throw Wittenberg into heaps, so that not
one stone will remain upon another; but we are not worth it, and can
hardly suffer God to protect us from them; we would well deserve
punishment. But God says: Yes, dear sirs, think only thus; but it would
be well in the letter if you said: if God wills. But they say: We still
want to do it. So God says, \"I will watch,\" and if a Nicodemus or a
Chusai should come in, he will mislead them, so that they do not know
where to begin or where to leave it. The blues here and the wall of dirt
will not protect us in Wittenberg, the Scharrhansen and Eisenfresser
will not do it either, it is a paper wall; but the one above in heaven
must do it, and send some Nicodemum or Chusai.

259 This is now this text, where we hear that if one should suffer
something for the sake of the word of God and faith, that we do not
become soft. For if something happens to us, and we only believe
rightly, there is no lack of protection and shielding; he can easily do
it if we only believe: \"He resists the hopeful\" \[1 Pet 5:5\], and
will not dare much to protect us. He lets the devil pour out all his
wrath, fury, malice and violence, but God laughs at it, and puts a word
or a Nicodemum before their noses, so they are misled; or, if they think
they have cut us all off, we have the consolation that they have not
turned back a hair. Would to God that we were so pious that we would
know it and be worthy of this comfort. Follows in the text:

[120 **Erl. \"s, S4S-S49. Sermon on John 7:50-53. W. vn, 2372-2374.**
121]{.underline}

**They answered and said to him, \"Are you also a Galilean? Search, and,
behold, there ariseth not a prophet out of Galilee. And they went home
every one of them.**

How mocking and pointed they have been. Above \[v. 48.\] they say: The
princes, rulers, and Pharisees believe not on him, but the common man,
so cursed; but here they are even fools, saying, \"Art thou also a
Galilean?\" They do not grudge the pious man so much as to say: Are you
also a Christian, or a Jesus of Nazareth? but give him a mocking,
derisive name: \"Are you also a Galilean?\" do not call him by his right
name, do not call him a Christian, but say: He is a Galilean. Just as in
our time, when someone is a preacher, they say. What is he? A Lutheran.
That must be a shameful word, as if he were a Turk or a Jew, and not
worthy to be called by his name. They can do nothing more. Nicodemus has
pushed them with one word, that they are mad, speak: We have said above
\[v. 48.j that there is no Pharisee or ruler who believes in him; and
you Nicodeme, \'as a Pharisee and ruler, would believe in him?

\(261\) Neither should they so condemn Nicodemum, if they had first
questioned him; but he hath troubled their consciences, and made them
mad, that they know not what they say; they can find nothing against it.
If they should say, though it be true, It is against the law that we
have condemned him; that would be too much. Now conscience is before
their eyes, saying, We have done it, and ordered that he should be
caught and condemned unheard. And the law is thus before their eyes;
they had never thought of it. They are ashamed in their hearts that they
have done contrary to the law. So they are still proud: even though they
feel that they have done wrong, they do not want to confess the sin;
they do not say to Nicodemo: We have done it, it is true.

262 No, a trustworthy saint, when he sins, does not come to know his
sin, or say, I have done wrong; they do not. That is where you get

He may feel it in his conscience that he is stuck, and his conscience is
moved to shame in his heart; but it is not brought out that the mouth
said what the heart feels, they remain obdurate. They do not confess the
sin, and yet they cannot hide the sin; they neither say yes, nor no, but
the heart says yes; but before they confess it, they do something else,
and go out, scolding for a while the good pious man, Nicodemum. So one
should eat the truth in oneself, go out, and disgrace and blaspheme
others.

Thus also do our papists: Because they have felt that we have thus shot
into them with writings, and have not lacked them at all, that they
cannot pass, they go forth, blaspheming and reproaching, and reviling
us; but to the matter they answer nothing, that they have acted contrary
to the law of God, and have condemned the unheard, as these wretches
also do here. They should answer: Nicodeme, yes, yes, you are right, we
have been hasty, and we have done wrong, we have done contrary to the
law. Then they say, \"Are you also a Galilean?\" They feel that they
have done wrong; but because they have no excuse, and cannot excuse it,
it must go through the Nicodemum; on which they have a cover of shame,
so he must have the title: You are a Galilean.

This is what the enemies of the gospel always do. They are so perverse
that they do not immediately get right under one\'s eyes, but they
always flutter aside. If you tell them about an apple, they answer about
a Turkish penny. No one can keep them on the track. That is a sign that
they have been hit; that is why they seek evasion, escape and all kinds
of plots, so that they will not be disgraced, but they will be a stain
on us who have hit them.

Now this is a confirmation nostrae doctrinae, they like to embellish
themselves, because they feel that they are hit. For if they had not
been hit, they would not have made themselves useless. But while they go
about, and strike aside, this gives us joy, boldly, courageously, and
confidently, that we see that they are wrong, and we are righteous. You
can say: From your own

[122 **Erl. \"8, S4S-W1.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VII, MI-LM.** 123]{.underline}

Confession and testimony I know that you are overcome. I have told you
(Nicodenlus will denounce) that you do contrary to the law, so you
reproach me a Galilean. Where do I come to this? I am not here to
dispute whether he is right or you Pharisees: I consider that I have
struck you, and that your conscience is caught and stirred; you have
foxed yourselves in your hearts; I have told you the truth, my
conscience is cleansed.

This is what our Lord God does for the comfort of his own, and he has
written these three things: First, that he has our enemies\' hearts,
works and thoughts in his hand. Second, that he may have some man to
make them go astray. Thirdly, that they may come out and testify by deed
that they are unrighteous and fools. God disgraces them with foolish
speeches; they must burn themselves out. If, for this reason, they do
not want to go according to their thoughts, we have enough; it is a
testimony of truth and justice.

There is no greater confession than when the enemy himself must confess
that I am right and he is wrong. For this testimony, if the pope says
that my cause is right, is much dearer to me than if all my followers,
whom I otherwise have, said it. For there is this danger that they might
confess my cause for friendship\'s sake, or for friendship\'s sake, and
for other causes and opinions; but my enemy seeks with all his diligence
how he may resist my doctrine, and yet can muster nothing against it.
But if the devil confesses in the battle, and must say that our doctrine
is right, who otherwise wants to devour and suppress our doctrine, it is
a testimony that he is wrong and has been overcome, and we are well off.
From this we see that our Lord God does not want to abandon those who
are hard, he wants to help them so that they will not be disgraced; but
the disgrace must go out on those who want to disgrace others.

Search and behold, out of Galilee no prophet arises.

268 They have been wise, and have well understood the Scripture, that
Galilee has no

prophets. Just now \[v. 42\] they said that Christ was promised from
Judea, and that he should come from Bethlehem, and they are such fools
that they understand here that Christ should come from Galilee, when he
only wanders and walks through Galilee. Because he traveled through
Galilee, he should not be Christ. It is well known that his coming,
birth and future are from Bethlehem, and not from Galilee; but they
understand his future as going in at the door. How if he had come from
Damascus or Antioch, should he not therefore be Christ? So, if he had
gone through the door into the temple, they could also have said: This
one is not Christ, for he does not come from Bethlehem, but enters
through the door of the temple. But they are fools, and remain so.

This is what happens to those who resist and oppose the gospel. God
tells them to bathe themselves in their wisdom, and to cut themselves
off and disgrace themselves, and see that God easily changes this. He
does not dare much to protect us, but takes some Nicodemus, or after
that his own enemies, who must condemn and disgrace themselves, but
praise and justify us, that there is no need for any disgracer or judge,
but the wicked must become his own judge. This is the highest art, which
Christ begins here. This is how it will be on the last day. He will not
pass many judgments, but they will bring these consciences with them in
public, which they have now; the heart will be revealed, how it now
secretly condemns itself here, and how it is with these.

\(270\) Nicodemus does not come to frighten them, but they condemn
themselves and disgrace themselves; they conclude about themselves. It
is a fine judgment. It is for the benefit of those who believe and are
subsequently challenged and afflicted by the devil and the world, that
they may learn how our Lord God can help us with little, and mock the
devil\'s great wisdom, glory and power. This should give us courage, so
that we know that he cannot and will not withdraw his hand from us
(because we believe and remain steadfast). This text should be good for
us.

124 Eri. 48, söi-ss6. Sermon on Joh. 8, 1-11. W. vn, 2378-2387. 125

**The eighth chapter of John.**

**The first sermon on the eighth capitet.**

Saturday before Michaelmas \[Sept. 23\] done, Anno 1531. 1)

**V. 1-6. And JEsus went unto the mount of Olives. And early in the
morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came unto him;
and he sat down, and taught them. But the scribes and Pharisees brought
unto him a woman in adultery, and set her in the midst, and said unto
him, Master, this woman is caught in the very act of adultery. But Moses
commanded us in the law to stone such, what sayest thou? And this they
said, to try him, that they might have a cause against him.**

1 Here another sermon begins. For we have just heard the story which
took place after the sermon which the Lord preached in Jerusalem in the
temple concerning eating, drinking, and the Spirit. Now when he sat
down, before he began to teach, the Pharisees fell upon him, and brought
a woman in adultery, and accused her before him according to the law of
Moses, saying that she was guilty of death; for Moses had earnestly
commanded this. Deut. 20:10.

2 This history is now described so that one may see a clear difference
between the law and the gospel, or between the kingdom of Christ and the
kingdom of the world. The Pharisees had heard that the Lord had preached
much about the kingdom of God, that it was a kingdom of grace, wherein
was forgiveness of sins. Against this, the Jews had the Law of Moses,
which threatened the transgressors of God\'s commandments with wrath,
disgrace and punishment from God. Just as the worldly authorities have
this power, that one should punish gross vices and sins and not forgive
them. These things seem to be contrary to each other. For in the kingdom
of the Lord Christ there should be no punishment, but only grace and
forgiveness of sins; but there, in the kingdom of Moses and the world,
there should be no forgiveness of sins, but only wrath and punishment;
for whoever sins there shall be stoned and put to death.

1\) In the original margin.

The peelers would gladly throw the rope and cord over the horns of the
Lord Christ, bring to him a woman who has not been condemned by the
judge, do it for mischievousness, leave their laws in place, bring her
before the Lord Christ, try what he wants to say, think they have
blocked his way on both sides, he says yes or no, then he is caught. If
he should say no, then the commandment of Moses was there, which says
that they should be stoned. Then they knew that he could not speak
against Moses and say no to it, or punish Moses; otherwise it would have
been against the majesty of Moses and rebellious, and Mosiah would have
been caught in the regiment, who otherwise spoke from God; and God
commanded Mosiah that such should be killed. Then they thought, his
mouth is shut, he cannot say anything, otherwise he would be Mosi\'s
worst enemy.

\(4\) Secondly, if he were to say that they should be killed and stoned
according to the law of Moses, as they themselves say, he would be
imprisoned again, and his mouth would be shut, and they could say,
\"Where is his teaching? He said, \"Come unto me, all ye that labor and
are laden with sins, and I will refresh you\" \[Matt. 11:28\]. He said
to the sick of the palsy: \"Be of good cheer, my son, your sins are
forgiven you\" \[Matth. 9, 2\], as if he were a preacher sent to teach
forgiveness of sins. This glory, praise and honor they would gladly cast
down upon him, and put his teaching to shame. As if they were to say,
\"We have presented him with a poor little hurdle, but in spite of his
neck, that he might come out and say, \"Your adultery is forgiven you.
Thinking that he is now stricken, and let the people stick, and will now
draw in the pipe; for the way is lost to him on both sides.

Where shall he go now, the poor man Christ, if the hole is thus made for
him? If he is to remain silent, it will not rhyme. If he says yes, it is
against his sermon; if he says no, it is against his sermon.

2\) Erlanger: \"the.\"

[126 Erl. 48, \[ss-SSL Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2387-2390. 127]{.underline}

Moses. So they also say of us, scolding us, that we only hold a boys\'
school here in Wittenberg, that we teach forgiveness of sins; for it
seems as if it is contrary to each other to punish sin and to forgive
sin. Christ has a spiritual kingdom, and does not want to punish; he
wants everything to be set free and counted free. Moses, however, wants
to punish and not forgive. Now this is their opinion: Whistle, let your
sermon be heard. This is what Moses says: He has commanded that they
should be stoned. And here they practice a mischievousness, asking him
for the right, which they knew well before; they do not want to learn
anything from him, but only ask because they wanted to see him. For who
commanded them, who told them to come to the Lord? But they sought that
he might err, and fall into their judgment and right. What was it to the
Lord Christ? If he is not a judge, nor a mayor, neither has he a sword.
Therefore, because he sees their deceitfulness, that they try him in a
matter that does not concern him and should be settled without him, but
they want to defile his doctrine and make him a rebellious man, he also
goes through that they must escape.

**V. 6. But JEsus stooped down and wrote with his finger on the ground
2c.**

He bent down and wrote on the ground for a while, answering nothing, as
if he did not hear them. For he knew well that it was not his place to
answer them, and so they were not worth answering, for this question was
none of his business. Just as if a judge wanted a verdict from me about
a theft, or someone else came to me and asked me what one should do with
a lewd woman, I would think he was tempting me. Therefore the Lord also
will say, What ask ye me? And will not give them his mouth, turning it
elsewhere; neither will he look at them, nor answer them. But they do
not let him go, and they want to disgrace him, and they insist that he
should make a judgment and say either yes or no. Then he seizes them
masterfully and speaks:

**V. 7. 8. When they stopped to ask him, he stood up and said to them:
Who among**

**Let him who is without sin cast the first stone at her; and stooping
down again, he wrote on the ground.**

007 So I also answered. Because they therefore go, and will not wait for
their office, and perform the same as they are commanded, and will tempt
him, and urge him, and compel him, he saith, If ye be not satisfied with
your office, and desire to hear how things are in my kingdom, and how I
judge, let him hear, He that is without sin among you, let him cast the
first stone at her. It has been done right to them. They do not want to
continue in their ministry, but to know his judgment, which is in his
kingdom, so they hear it now. This is his judgment: If one is pious,
then all the others are not sinners; and if one is worthy of punishment,
then all the others must be punished. But if the sin of one is forgiven
and remitted, it must be forgiven and remitted to all. But this is not
how it is called in the worldly realm; there it is called thus: If he is
an adulterer, he is guilty of death, and so is another. One is judged by
his own work and piece, that where the deed is, there also belongs the
punishment; otherwise, even if they are all wicked on earth, and one
alone is an adulterer in his heart, the sword does not judge him,
therefore he cannot be punished. Therefore, if you do not want peace,
but want to hear a judgment from my kingdom, there is an adulteress
standing before me, that is true; but there are many more adulterers in
my kingdom. He does not deprive them of their right, and leaves Moses
standing finely, saying neither no nor yes; but masterfully he tells
them both. Why do you not do what Moses commanded? But if ye will judge
according to my kingdom, let them stand. For my judgment is this: This
adulteress is not alone; there is none of you who is not also as bad and
wicked as this poor harlot may be. According to the law of Moses put her
away, but according to my law let her go. But that ye will not judge her
according to the law of Moses, I hear by this that ye ask me. So I say
that yours is none, for it is as wicked as this poor harlot.

\(8\) Now this is a sermon that belongs to the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, which says, \"There is not a man on earth who is not guilty of
sin\".

128 **Erl. 48, 2S8-2S0. Sermon on John 8, 1-11. W. VII, 2390-2393.** 129

No one is excluded, be he noble, learned, citizen or peasant, from the
youngest to the oldest \[Rom. 3:23\], all of them, all of them, have
been sold under sin and under the wrath of God, guilty of eternal death,
hell and eternal fire; before God no one is righteous, but all of them
have been sold under sin and are guilty of death, also eternally lost.
Thus one preaches in the kingdom of Christ; and when this sermon comes,
it raises up the sword, the judge, the chair of the magistrate, the town
hall, the lawyers, the executioner and everything. For if one is
righteous, they are all righteous; if one has sinned, they have all
sinned. Therefore, if they are all alike, and there is no difference,
there can be no judge: for she that sinneth is as pious as he that
judgeth. Therefore in Christ\'s kingdom and sight there is no worldly
kingdom or government, and no sword belongs to it; for they are already
condemned, and the sentence is passed, that they are under the wrath of
God, and under death, and could not be condemned any higher; there is
also much higher and sharper judgment than is otherwise in the world.

\(9\) This then is the difference, that in the spiritual kingdom of
Christ there is no executioner, nor law, nor authority; there they are
all equal. Therefore, whoever wants to hear this, let him go and ask
Christ, who says, \"Which of you is without sin\" 2c. That is, if ye
would deal rightly with this question in my kingdom, and have a judgment
of me, ye ask her that she may forgive you, and she ask you that ye may
also forgive her; and ye all afterward ask me also that I may also
forgive you. So are all of you beaten and pressed into one heap and
cake; saying, Thou Pharisee, if thou wilt hear my question and judgment
in my kingdom, which is spiritual, I say thus, If thou be clean and
without sin in the sight of God, look and cast them. Yes, yes!

\(10\) So with this sermon he has run down and torn through their
hearts. For these words are emphatic, especially when he speaks to their
hearts and reveals sin, that God speaks to them, their sins become so
great, and they become so afraid and anxious, and have so much to do
with their sins, that they forget others, and think to themselves that
they have sinned.

The other sinners are like saints to them. So they were startled with a
thunderclap, and like a thunderstorm they were struck in the heart with
lightning and lightning, and it became like hell; their whole heart was
open to them like a register; they forgot this woman, and thought that
their sin was written on their foreheads, and that what they had ever
done was seen in their noses, and no one was allowed to look at the
other. For they think that the stones look at them, and it has been a
long time for them until they hit the hole and trudge out the door; They
cannot lift up their eyes cheerfully, or look at a man, a house, the
sun, or a dog, rightly and cheerfully, for their hearts are so crushed
that they lose the five senses, and they can no longer suffer, nor look
at others, but have had to run away badly here, and have stolen away
from the temple, and have crept out, as a dog strolls out of the kitchen
when it has burned its mouth.

This is how it is in Christ\'s kingdom. When thou comest thither, thou
art as I, and I as thou, though we be not equal in the sight of the
world. If I am an adulterer, and have stolen, 2c. and you are not, there
is nothing in it; for I find much higher, greater knots in me, wherefore
I am so afraid that I know not whither to go; for in Christ\'s kingdom
it is said, \"Let him that is without sin cast the first stone.\"
Therefore, dear fellows, let the stones lie, I will not pick up any of
them; let them lie and one another unthrown, let the stones fall, say:
Dimitte nobis debita nostra, sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris
\[Matth. 6, 12. Luc. 11, 4.\]; they should say: Peccavi, pray God for
me. There it is well laid; but they rush along much differently. If the
rascals had remained in their regiment, they should not have heard this
answer. But because they reach into the kingdom of Christ, he also
shines forth as lightning.

12 In Mosi\'s kingdom and office it would have been different; there it
has its opinion. The office is there; whether he, the judge, already has
the same sin in him, that does not hurt; the laws, the law and office,
or sword,

[130 Erl. 4S, 2SÜ-S6S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII.
2383-2396. 131]{.underline}

Gallows and wheel is not man\'s and ours, but our Lord God\'s \[Rom. 13,
4\]. God\'s is the sword, fire, water and other punishments, he has said
so, he will have it so, he himself burns, executes and beheads the
evildoers. Whether you are a prince, mayor or judge, a villain or a
knave, I shall remember that God\'s sword is given into his hand. And if
I also have such an office, and am a wicked wretch, then say: Although I
have deserved to have my head cut off first, I must nevertheless judge,
and leave that in order. A wicked judge has God\'s gift, God\'s office,
or God\'s command, just as a pious judge has the sword; just as he has
body and soul, which is also God\'s creation. Item, he must eat and
drink, and God gives his creatures to the wicked as well as to the
pious. A wicked judge is a creature ordered by God, just as the sun and
moon are created. So the evil rulers have the sword as well as the pious
ones, and they should use it. Just as a wicked man should eat and drink
and clothe himself as well as a pious man, for he should not destroy his
body or kill himself.

\(13\) If the Pharisees had remained here in their nature and offices,
and had judged what their office required, they would have remained
content, and would not have been so snubbed. But if they want to be
holy, and crawl into God\'s kingdom, and ask what our Lord God says
about them, and how pious they are, and want to burn themselves white,
that they are not peelers, then they will be answered: \"Let him who is
without sin cast the first stone at them. As if the Lord Christ should
say: \"Before the world I let you be pious, and your ministry also be
right, even if you are a rogue and a knave; but here, in my kingdom,
come here, and lay down your ministry, right and sword, as a poor knave;
here you are condemned to hell. 2c.

14 Now this is that he says: \"He who is without sin\" 2c. It is a high,
great and excellent defiance, who wants to falsify this judgment to me?
In spite of one who now shows me such a saint as the Pharisees have
been, a

Core and Ausbund among all people. They were the most holy; still they
have to hear: \"He who is without sin\" 2c. How shameful is this spoken
of the most holy people? Fie on your mouth, always outside the door, and
do not come back when they blow your nose. If I want to be holy and
pure, and he gives me such a slap and says, \"He who is without sin\"
2c. With this he has opened their hearts, and unlocked the register and
the door, so that they forget other people. So they must be driven out
of the church, and blown out of the kingdom of Christ, who are so holy,
and with their works so rumpled in, he saith: I will soon blow you out.

\(15\) Now this is the difference between Christ\'s kingdom and the
kingdom of the world, that Christ makes all men sinners. But he does not
leave it at that, for it follows that he absolves them. The poor harlot
is in trouble; it is no joke with her, she is convinced of the crime,
and she is accused before the judge, and the sentence is passed and
pronounced according to her right, that she should be stoned to death:
This was not a song for her to dance to, her heart shall have boiled and
fried with fear, and she sees no more, but badly the bitter death there
before her eyes. The council and the witnesses are there, accuse and
judge her, also conclude that she is worthy of death. When the heart
falls away and says, \"I did it,\" and the external judges and witnesses
decide that she is guilty of death, she has already been dead in her
heart. There is pure death, she has not stood deep in life. She may have
had a hope, and sought a breeze from the man who wrote on the earth. For
at first he presents himself as if he did not know her. But what a great
comfort she hears from him, that he says, \"Let him who is without sin
cast the first stone at her.\" But she is still in it, and is wound
deeper and deeper into it.

16 And such sinners also belong to this kingdom. Christ does not want
lazy, shameful, loose sinners, who are sinners and do not want to be; or
who want to be sinners and are not sinners. For they would that sin were
not great, and they had no need of God; and yet would call upon and
worship God\'s grace, as if

132 Eri. 48, r\<-s-rss. Sermon on Joh. 8, 1-11. W. vn, Wss-Ws. 133

I had prayed enough, then I would be devout.

\(17\) And in former times I also did so in monasticism, saying: Today I
have done no evil, I have been obedient to my prior, I have fasted, I
have prayed; therefore, God have mercy on me! thought God should forgive
me the sins which I did not think were sins, even which were not sin.
And I still have this plague on me. These are called great sins, if one
thinks for oneself. But they should be called real sins. For God\'s
mercy is a mercy that does not deal with loose, half or imaginary sins
that are not sins, but they must be righteous sins that you feel; not to
fear God, not to trust, not to believe, not to love your neighbor, not
to pray, not to listen to the sermon, nor to do what the Law of Moses
commands, so that it all goes against the commandment of God, so that
you cannot pass by, so that a true forgiveness may take place, which is
not a joke, as is the case here with this woman. She is in adultery, she
is not in fictitious sins, but there is the act of adultery. With such
sins one must contend, and such sinners the gospel wants to fetch. And
all of us have sinned in this way, and are stuck in it, especially the
great knots that go against the first tablet, against the first, second
and third commandments, of which the world does not know much. The sins
dissolve one\'s spur drunkenness, and when the same come, they know how
to accuse one finely, much more than theft or adultery can do; for the
sins in the first table are much higher than the sins in the other
table.

\(18\) This is how the kingdom of Christ deals with sinners, who feel
sin, and are tormented, worried and tortured because of sin, so that the
heart feels death when the law and the conscience say, \"You have done
this, you deserve death. Otherwise the other sinners do not. For even if
they have the knowledge that they have sinned, they do not amend
themselves, they do not feel the sin, but joke about it, they remain
tomorrow as today. But whoever comes into it in such a way that it hits
him right when it happens to this little door, he will be very careful
another time.

19 Therefore Christ needs here the other piece of his preaching, namely,
the forgiveness of sins. For the first office of his kingdom is to make
all sinners. For the Holy Spirit is to punish the world because of sin
\[John 16:8..\] It is said to all, \"He that is without sin among you,
let him cast a stone at her.\" He says: No one is without merit of the
wrath of God and death, sin, hell and eternal damnation. Those who are
struck by it say: Awe, help, dear God! Who helps there? This adulteress
stands in the gates of hell, and looks in; but the Lord raises Himself
up again, and says: Woman, how art thou so free? Where are thy accusers,
and where is the judge? Have they rolled over? They are deeper in sins
than you; are you alone? That makes, they have nibbled at the kingdom of
Christ; they wanted to be pure and holy, then he poured a hot broth or
soup over their snout; as happens to the wet dogs in the kitchen. Then
the woman again gets a breath of fresh air or a little comfort, for he
speaks:

**V. 10. 11. Has no one condemned you? She said, Lord, no one. Jesus
said, Neither do I condemn thee.**

20\. the kingdom of Christ is not to condemn; I am not here to condemn
you, but to forgive the sin of those who are like you, since before
there was death, the devil, evil consciences, even since there were
accusers and judges, tormenting people. In my kingdom it is said: I
forgive your sin. For in my kingdom no one is without forgiveness of
sins; therefore you also must have forgiveness of sins. My kingdom must
not be desolate: all who are to come in, and are within, must be
sinners. If then they are sinners, they cannot live; they must have
forgiveness of sins. If I am a sinner, it does not remain so, the sins
must also be forgiven.

021 No man therefore entereth into this kingdom, but sinners. But say
not therefore, Let us now abide in sins. No, it means, learn to feel and
know your sin; as these were not allowed to become sinners, they were
before, and became much more so. For this was revealed to them: whoever
is without

[134 Eri. 48, Le°-2ös. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
W98-s4m. 135]{.underline}

sin among them, he should throw the first stone at them. That is, a
sinner who feels the sin. The Pharisees, the rogues, were not sinners,
but became sinners first of all, since he said: \"He who is without
sin\" 2c. They became sinners, but they despaired and staggered away,
hiding their sin, hopeful, not expecting the other word, when Christ
said, \"Neither do I condemn thee.\"

22 Therefore these sinners alone belong to the kingdom of Christ, who
know and feel their sin, and then catch the word of Christ when he
speaks here, saying, I do not condemn you; these are the ones, this is
the kingdom of Christ. He lets no saint in, he blows them all out, he
pushes out of the church what wants to be holy. But if sinners come in,
they do not remain sinners; he covers them with a mantle, saying, \"If
you have sinned, I forgive your sin and cover it up. It is true, sin is
there; but the Lord in this kingdom will not see it, but will cover it,
forgive it, and not impute it. So there is a living saint and member of
Christ, who came out of an adulteress, who was full of sin, and now her
sin is covered and forgiven. For even if sinners are evil-doers and
boys, and feel only sin, they shall be forgiven; but only let yourself
be seriously sorry, and ask God for forgiveness. If you have tasted what
the law and sin are, and know how painful sin is, then see here how
sweet God\'s grace, offered to us in the Gospel, tastes. This is the
absolution that the Lord Christ speaks to the adulteress here.

**The other sermon on the eighth capitet.**

Saturday after Michaelmas \[Sept. 30, 1531\]. 1)

Then Jesus spoke to them again, saying: I am the light of the world: he
that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light
of life.

In the beginning of the eighth chapter, we have the story of the
adulteress; a great and glorious example of how the Lord Christ is to be
seen in the world.

1\) In the original margin.

stus proves his mercy on the poor woman who was in adultery, and proves
by deed that the law, which is called stoning the adulteress, is under
his power; yet with the humility that he does not take the adulteress
from them by force, but when they went away and left her standing, he
gave her up, and let her regiment fall into his; so it happened that he
counted her free from her sin and free. Now follow these sermons, in
which we shall hear how the Lord Christ has exalted his ministry above
all the world\'s preaching, doctrine, and character, and has called to
himself all those who desire to be saved. Therefore this chapter is full
of heresy, and there is not a word of truth in it, but only doctrines of
the devil, according to the judgment of the world and of reason; for no
reason can suffer to be asked for counsel, that Christ speaketh rightly
here.

24\. the first proposition and saying must be the greatest heresy, that
he says, \"I am the light of the world.\" Then they say: What thinkest
thou of this word, Ego sum lux mundi totius? What else is this said,
but: Where I am not, there is darkness; where I go out, no one sees
anything? What does Moses and all other teachers and doctors do, while
he says: I am? He wants to be called Lux mundi alone, separates himself
from all other preachers, so that if it is not said, I am, then
everything is called darkness. If only he had said so moderately and
demurely, and had made it more reasonable than: I am the light of this
land, this kingdom, this house, this people, or this temple, then it
would have been fair; but to go forth and boast like this, and to take
the whole world in one mouthful, and to preach so low and heartily of
the whole world, as that without him it is all darkness, that is
preaching very high, and speaking after presumption, that he should shut
up all mouths, and call all to be silent, and that all wise men should
be called fools, and say: You know nothing, see nothing, are in
darkness, and if I do not shine, it is not shined.

25 The Jews did not like this, so they put lime in his cherries, saying,
What do you testify about yourself? Say

136 **Eri. 4S, SS8-27\". Sermon On Joh. 8, 12. W. VII, 2401-2404.** 137

to him: One\'s own praise likes to stink, and: He who has been wronged
by his neighbors must praise himself. Say: How could one speak more
foolishly than when he speaks of himself and praises himself because
others do not want to praise him? I do not hear your neighbors saying
it; they are all silent, and if you have done badly, you do as fools do
and praise yourself. Therefore it is a presumptuous and very annoying,
proud sermon that he may appear before the proud people and great
doctors and pretend that they should all be called blind fools and
darkness, and against this he says: \"I am the light of the world.

\(26\) Now there are such people still today who want to destroy the
gospel and even disgrace it; to them, too, one must first say these
annoying and heretical words: \"I am the light of the world,\" and say:
Dear bishops, popes, cardinals, princes, priests, and monks, you are all
in darkness with your doctrine, unless you preach as I preach, and as
Christ preaches. Such is not to be suffered, and is heretical and
shameful. Secondly: Even if it were true, and I can say it with a good
conscience, that Christ is right, and our preaching is also righteous,
and if kings, princes and lords do not accept it, they are all condemned
and lost, it is nevertheless out of all measure harsh and annoying that
one should boast of himself when St. Paul says, \"I am a Christian. Paul
says: \"I am an apostle and doctor of the Gentiles\", sent to be a
minister of the word in the whole world, and to be a light of the
Gentiles in the world, that they might be saved \[1 Tim. 2, 7. 2 Tim. 1,
11.\]. So he also boasts, defies and rumbles along. If it were true, it
is annoying to boast about oneself, the world cannot stand it; therefore
they say: Laudet te os alienum; and Cato the heathen says: Non te
laudaris, nec te culpaveris ipse etc., because it stinks in the eyes of
the world when someone praises or scolds himself; fools are in the habit
of doing this. If I am to be worthy of praise, honor should be held high
and made high by another origin. In himself it is damnable and heretical
to say that he is the light of the world; after that it is also foolish
before the world, and

is disgraceful, even if it is true; it should be done by someone else.

But it is still going on nowadays in this way. Everything must remain
both: Christ must say that he is the light of the world. There is also
truth in it, that apart from Christ all is darkness; and therefore he
must sing it of himself, and become a cuckoo, calling out his own name.
I must also do it, and every preacher. For if I do not praise myself, I
must wait a long time for another to praise me; they do not. I must be
sure that our teaching and preaching is right, that it is the Word of
God and the light of the world, and such light that without your light
everything else is darkness. Then I must boast that I am such a preacher
or pastor, a teacher of the truth. For if I cannot boast that I am such
a preacher, I am betrayed, and it would be better if I had never been
born. For if I am to preach to others, and lead them to Christianity, to
baptism and eternal life, I must first be sure of the matter myself,
that the teaching is right, and that I am a servant to it, that it is
the truth, and not my word, but Christ\'s word, and that I am a
righteous preacher. Now when I say this, it is soon said that I praise
myself. So a mayor can say and have the glory: I know that I am the
mayor here and the authority, which I do not doubt. Duke Hans of Saxony
can say and boast that he is ordained by God to be Prince of Saxony and
Lord over this city and country; he also does it, and must do it, and
write above in his letters: By the grace of God, John, Duke of Saxony.
For if he were not certain of this, and could boast of him, it would be
bad. The parents must also say that by God\'s grace they are the parents
of this son; and a child can also say: Father, by God\'s grace I am your
son. A householder can also say: I am master of the house, I am father
and mother, that is my name and glory.

28\. such boasting comes from God\'s command, since each one is sure
that by God\'s command he has the office, and that it is God\'s command.

[138 Erl. 48, p79-272. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vu,
2404-2407. 139]{.underline}

His sermon is God\'s word, his regiment is God\'s judgment. So he who
boasts does right. If one then says: Yes, they are fools who boast of
themselves. Well, it is true; but you know that I do not boast a
preacher of myself; item, I do not boast a prince of myself; but there
is another one behind who also boasts, namely our Lord God, who has
commanded me the office, and says that I should be a father, a preacher,
a prince, an earl, a nobleman, a citizen or a peasant. If he says so,
then I do not boast alone; but if I boast apart from God, then I would
be a fool. As if a spirit of the mob came and said, \"I have been sent
here to preach,\" I would say, \"Wait, you are boasting yourself, for
you come from yourself; you have no more witnesses than yourself alone;
I feel in my heart that your boast is not true, that your neighbors have
done you wrong. He boasteth himself alone, and hath not him in him that
saith, The Holy Ghost hath commanded me to preach. If anyone came to my
house and said, \"I am to be the host,\" I would say, \"No, brother, the
Holy Spirit has told me to be the master of my house. Holy Spirit go,
Holy Spirit come; go thou forth, and leave me my servants, my wife, my
children, and my goods. When did the Holy Spirit command you? I also
have the Holy Spirit, who has God\'s command, which is this: I am
commanded by God to rule this house and this household; I am the Lord,
and you know it.

29 So it is also in worldly matters and with the authorities. It does
not read annoying, but stands well, one may boast so, yes, one must
leave princes the glory that one writes: We Hans, Duke of Saxony. God\'s
testimony is there, besides the Scriptures, and if the world is so wise
that it knows that God\'s command is there, one can suffer it. But in
spiritual matters they cannot stand it when I say: I know what I am
preaching against the pope and the spirits of the pagans, namely, that
it is God\'s word, and that I am quite a light with my teachings, but
they are all darkness. The spiritual office does not want to sound like
this, but wants to have such an appearance as if we were boasting about
ourselves. This makes one focus solely on the person, and

does not look at the office; when a pastor preaches, one thinks it is
only Johannes Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, who nevertheless has the testimony
with him that he is pastor fei. No, Johannes nor Martinus shall not do
it to me; but they are parish lords, just as Duke Johannes is the prince
of Saxony, father and mother, the parents, are lords in the house; that
is then another man.

30 In the worldly government it is not so bad to boast and say: I am a
father, mother or mayor, because I know that the angels themselves say
so to me. But here it is ridiculous, if it wants to boast Christ, he is
the light of the world, there one says soon 7 Boast thou little herb,
thy father\'s cabbage would be gladly great; and it must be an evil
boast all there. Well, says Christ, it is a true glory, it stands before
your eyes: I know that I am the light of the world, and the Father has
commanded me, from whom I am sent, he gives me the testimony, I am it
not from myself. If I were a single person by myself, it would not be
possible; but now I am a common person, 1) and have come and been
ordained to be the light of the world; wherefore I justly boast. For if
a preacher came and was twenty-four times more learned than I am, I
would not let him preach here; and even if I were as learned as I am, I
would not preach at Leipzig, for there I am not commanded to preach;
they would not give anything to my fame there, for I would boast myself.
A father must also say, if another were to say: I am the child\'s father
or mother: Not yet, let only ask who was at the wedding, who was
watching when the bride was laid, and who led the bride to the church. I
and you, and each one must be certain of his office, the art we have,
that each one may be certain of his office, that he may know, in the
office I am, in the state I live, that pleases God well, he wants me to
be a father, mother, husband and wife.

1\) i.e., a public person, as opposed to a private person.

140 Erl. 48, S7S-S7S. Sermon on Joh. 8, 12. W. VII, 2407-240S. 141

\(31\) Earlier, we did not know this in the priesthood, but it was
thought that one could not serve God in this state if a husband and wife
begat children, or if one cultivated the field (2c). We did not know
about the certain vocation and glory that we have from the offices, but
we ignored it and thought that if we were to serve God, we would have to
become monks and nuns. But now I can say: I stand in this office; in
spite of the devil and the world, that he may rebuke this office to me!
I know that I am a preacher, an apostle or prince. Doctor Johann Pommer
can speak: I am a true pastor and preacher at Wittenberg. Duke Hans,
Elector, can say: I am a prince of Saxony. Here is a great difference
between boasting and vaunting. He who boasts of himself is a fool; he
who boasts of all his office is no fool; for to boast of the office is
not to boast of oneself. As the Jews here mean that the Lord Christ
boasts of himself. But he that boasteth his office boasteth not himself,
but he honoureth him that commanded him the office; he boasteth not
himself as his office, but as he that gave him the office, and commanded
him to boast of the office; the boast hurteth not, that he saith, \"I am
the light of the world.\"

With this teaching he overthrows everything else that is preached. For
there are many doctrines on earth. The highest teaching is Mosi\'s law,
the ten commandments, if they are well preached; yet they do not bring
man out of darkness into light. The law does not teach how man can live
forever and be saved. In this teaching one hears what one should do (as
the ten commandments preach about our works), but one cannot do them. If
this preaching remains alone, it does not bring man into the light; it
teaches how to do good works, but man cannot do them; he only has it
alone. Another teaching is needed, namely the gospel, which says: \"I\",
Christ, \"am the light\" 2c. For otherwise it is impossible for you to
be saved, for you are in sin and remain in it, stuck in darkness, and
the law leaves more than that.

1\) \"hats\" here stands for: has it, namely this sermon.

it helps. But the gospel says: If you believe in me and see that I,
Christ, died for you and took away your sin, then you are helped. Now if
you stand on this, this teaching does not teach you what you should do
to God, but what you should take and receive from Him 2c.

\(33\) This doctrine, or the first light, is the moon, which teaches the
fruits of a good tree, which we ought to do; the other light is the sun,
which teaches of the new man, of another tree, to receive the gospel
from Christ. Here we hear from where and how man becomes good, which is
through faith. So the gospel is a sermon, not about our works, but about
graces and gifts, what God does for us and gives us through Christ. The
Ten Commandments tell us what we should do to God. Now the moon shines
at night, but it does not make day, it still remains night. But Christ
is the true sun, who makes the morning and day dawn, and teaches us how
to attain salvation, to be delivered from sins and death. Therefore he
also says, \"I am the light,\" shining into the whole world; for he
alone saves from sins, the devil, death and hell.

\(34\) This honor and knowledge the Jews and the whole world did not
know; but now it begins again, and shines not only among the Jews, but
into the whole world, preaching that sin is condemned through Christ
alone, and we are freed from sins without works, without our glory or
our doing, through the death of Christ alone; this is the preaching of
the gospel, the light and right brightness of the sun shining through
the whole world.

35 Therefore the Lord Christ doeth right: for the doctrine of it is
right in itself: he is the light of the world. On the other hand, he
does right to boast of himself, not shying away, not remaining behind,
but saying, \"I am he,\" and drawing the whole world to himself, wanting
to be the only one, wanting to teach alone, wanting to be the world\'s
teacher, master and forerunner, the others to remain disciples, and all
to go to school with this man, professing this master, and saying that
they were in darkness, but now they see that they are the light of the
world.

[142 **Eri. \"s, S75-S77.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
vn, 2400-2412.** 143]{.underline}

the sun. Malachi also calls Christ the sun of righteousness; under his
wings shall be our salvation. As if to say, Christ our Lord is the sun
that rises in all the earth, and shines through the preaching, and shall
enlighten your hearts; for otherwise you would know nothing of him. He
shall shine upon you foolish and fainthearted hearts; they that are
under the wings shall gladly hear, see, and feel this brightness; and
whosoever believeth in him, and putteth his refuge under the mother hen,
the same shall be blessed. Under these wings alone shall be salvation,
and no other blessedness; but he that will not abide with her must
perish. He is a noble hen, a cockerel of his; whoever takes refuge under
him, he promises salvation and blessedness, eternal life and forgiveness
of sins; he shall not want, for the sun shall shine upon him.

Whoever follows me will not walk in darkness, but will have the light of
life.

Who can do this? It is done by works and by example. Although this also
means to follow Christ, Christ draws the disciples to himself, saying,
\"Follow me, keep my teaching. For to follow [Christ is to]{.underline}
obey his words, to preach that he suffered and died for us; that is, to
obey his words with faith. He who believes in me, who adheres to me, who
relies on me, who will be saved, who follows Christ with faith and
adheres to the light: he does not throw himself on saints, nor does he
follow heretics; for there one follows false men, erring lights,
fluttering spirits, who seduce people in the field at night; but this is
rightly followed, to follow in faith, to rely on him. After this there
is another consequence, to follow his example, to do his works, and to
suffer as he suffered. Now he says nothing special about this, but here
he wants people to see the doctrine and keep to it, and to depart from
all other doctrines that do not preach Christ, the light. For he that
believeth on Christ abideth not in darkness, but hath the light of life.

37\. now he transfigures what is, \"to follow him\"; that he will see a
following light, since

from which he lives. For he saith, He walketh not in darkness. Here you
see what the consequences are. For such light is not obtained by works,
since one lives by. The sun cannot be comprehended with the senses, but
is seen only with the eyes; and when the eyes are opened, the light and
the brightness soon follow. So Christ is not understood by good works,
but you must open your eyes of faith, recognize, hear, and let the word
shine into your heart and recognize it. By the light we shall live, the
light will not let us die, by the light we shall live forever.

\(38\) Now this is lying and heresy among the world and among the Jews.
Shall our forefathers and grandfathers, they say, all have been
eternally lost and eternally in darkness? Do you think they were all
fools? Now all who have come to Christ are blessed; by this light they
are all preserved; as the Lord Christ said \[John 8:52, 56\], \"Abraham
died,\" but \"he saw my day and was glad,\" that is, he saw my light, my
brightness, this sun shining upon him, which now also shines and glows
upon us. This is the truth preached, and the doctrine of the Gospel
extolled very highly; but it is all heresy in the eyes of the world. So
it is with us even today; we still have to hear such cries.

**The third sermon.**

Saturday after the 17th Sunday \[after\] Trinity \[October 7, 1531\]. 1)

\(39\) Now these are two teachings; the one is that Christ here
abolishes all the preaching and worship places that may be on earth,
even Moses himself with all his worship, which was given by God, and
calls all the disciples to himself, saying that he is the Master, so
that whoever intends to serve God without Christ, the Master, will walk
in darkness. The other teaching is comforting, that whoever follows him
shall have such light to lead him to life, and shall also have eternal
life. And these are mighty words, that he speaks: \"I am the light of
the

1\) In the original in the margin, but there erroneously the
[seventh]{.underline} instead of the seventeenth Sunday after Trinity.

144 Eri. \"s, 277-Wo. Sermon on John 8:12-15. W. vn, 2412-2114. 145

world.\" As if he were to say: No doctrine, no church service, be it
ever so great and beautiful, will be able to help men out of darkness;
everything is damned, everything must go to hell; for I alone am the
light. So tear us away from all lights, teachers and preachers, so that
we may stay with the preacher Christ alone and stick to him, or else
perish and be lost forever in darkness.

40 But the world has no desire to do this, but wants to be the devil\'s
martyr, and is well ridden by the devil, and runs as if it were mad and
foolish. When it enters into the devil\'s service, or into a false
worship, it works diligently, gives great alms, fasts, builds churches;
and yet it is all in vain, damned, and basically lost, as we, alas, have
tried to do in our classes. Has it not been a plague that one has
allowed oneself to be persuaded, and many a one has gone on pilgrimage
to St. Jacob in a cuirass, willing 1) and barefoot? (also some lurk in
the Grimmethal) and the whole night from not slept, and thus a soul from
the purgatory want to redeem. But now that the holy gospel, the right
light, is shining, people cannot be persuaded to give a penny to the
service, or to lift a finger in honor of God.

\(41\) But the world delighteth to abide in darkness, and to bear great
vexation; the devil also hath greater martyrs than Christ; hell is more
sourly deserved for them, than heaven for Christians: the ungodly do
greater, more rude work. But the Christians suffer, and have a peaceful,
quiet heart; whereas the wicked have no rest in conscience, and by heart
they torture themselves to it, and make them great heads with the lousy
caps; it will be more sour for them to go to hell, than heaven is for
Christians. They want to be masters and guide us, but do not tell us to
follow Christ. But it does not help them, no matter how well they mean
it and how much they put on them. What does it help that they say: Now I
have meant it so well, prayed so much, fasted so much? because the Turk
also says it.

1\) i.e. dressed in wool.

It does not help the Jews, as St. Paul says \[Rom. 10, 2\]: Habent
quidem zelum, sed non secundum scientiam. I myself am a witness of the
Jews, he says, that they serve God with greater earnestness and zeal;
but it does not help them, because they do not want to learn the art
that we can, since we know that the law of Moses does not help, good
opinion and their own worship do not help either; but look to the light,
cling to Christ, and follow his teaching; this I advise you, this is the
right good road that leads to eternal life. This is the road we are to
take, though it does not appear to the world; it is a vexatious
doctrine, and it is evil for us to go over it; but he does not deny it.
He says, \"Follow me, and I will teach you rightly and lead you to
eternal life, and that you may escape death, sin, the devil and hell,
and be saved. Whoever then does not like this comfort and this teaching,
let him always go.

\(43\) The Jews will not have it, and feel the vexation that is lifted
up at the boasting; but it must be boasted of. Humility is no guide; you
will not get to heaven unless you are proud and hopeful. But it does not
have to be an unchristian hopefulness. One should insist on this art and
defy it, and be hopeful in the Lord. Otherwise, whoever boasts and is
hopeful is a hopeful ass, and such boasting is forbidden when one boasts
of himself and what is his own; and what fools are, they are arrogant
and proud, and boasting of oneself is not right.

\(44\) Therefore there are two kinds of glory: One is glorying in
oneself, that one is rich and mighty, and has great friendship, and that
he is happy. The world defies this, and this is the world\'s stinking
glory, which has no good reason. After this there is another glory, of
which Christ says: \"I am the light of the world, whoever follows me\"
2c. This is such a light that otherwise there is darkness where this
light does not shine, and when it is extinguished, nothing shines. And
whoever follows me, to him I give life, showing him where life is, and
pointing out the way for you to get there; not by your good works, but
by my death and resurrection; that is the way,

[146 Erl. 48, \[so-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2414\^-2417. 147]{.underline}

so I shine. Now this is a great hope and glory, that a man should come
forth and say, I alone am all. Reason says, Be something; but let
another be something also; wilt thou be all? we will not suffer such
arrogance. Awe yes, thou art wise, wilt thou call all holy doctors
darkness, and be nothing at all and unjust? They are annoyed by that,
that is why they say:

**V. 13. Then the Pharisees said to him, \"You testify about yourself;
your testimony is nothing.**

\(45\) They say, Thou bearest witness of thyself, therefore it is false.
In the sight of the world it is certain that he who boasts and praises
himself is a fool; and this is rightly said; one should not believe such
a one, and God does not allow it to be true and that one should believe
him. Therefore they say to Christ, \"You praise yourself, your neighbors
have done you wrong, you sing a little song about yourself; it does not
sound good, both fame and doctrine are lies.

\(46\) So we also have to hear it said to us, \"You are stubborn fools,
stiff-necked, you will not listen to anyone. I have had half a shock of
such spirits accusing me of such things; but I thank God that I cannot
boast of my great art, holiness, or life; for I have lived in such a way
that I may not boast of it, with blasphemies and other things. But the
glory I have, so proud-headed and stiff-necked I am, God grant, if
emperors, popes and bishops, universities, doctors, or all angels meet,
I boast of the gospel, and will not depart from it; as St. Paul also
says to the Galatians in chapter 1, v. 8: \"Cursed be he that preacheth
any other gospel than I have preached.\" That is hopeful enough: he
stiffly defies all angels and men in heaven and on earth. I must have
hope, and no one shall take me from hope; and if I could only be
curmudgeonly and proud enough here, it would be well, for I stand not on
myself, but on one who is called Christ, into whom I have been baptized.

47\. then one cries out: Shall the

Pabst, don\'t you also want to hear the Concilia? No, 1) I don\'t want
to hear it, I don\'t want to do it, you must not persuade me to give up
a hair\'s breadth. Then say: Yes, you are hopeful. Yes, you answer, I
will be faithful. In the world, one may concede to another, and as for
me, you will find such a humble brother in me that I will even lie under
your feet. Do they then say: How hopeful art thou? Thou shalt say, \"It
will not be otherwise; call me trustworthy or not; I will be proud here,
and know it well. Separate Christ and me, and know what concerns me, I
will gladly humble myself, and let them trample on me; but do not
trample on Christ and his word; for if you will not have Christ, I will
not. So they blame the Lord Christ and his teachings, and they, our
enemies, want to be called peaceable and humble, but we are obstinate,
stiff-necked and stormy heads. Yes, we also want to be so in the piece
that is called Christ, in Christ no one seeks patience, \[no\] yielding
with me; but here I am stiff-necked, because it does not affect me. You
attack me in a place that is not mine; but if you attack me in my bodily
goods, body or neck, I will gladly yield to you. But the world does not
respect that I want to leave with my goods and my skirt, but gives
pellem per pellem. The devil says that he does not want to have the
unblemished shells of the nut, but he is looking for the kernel, Christ.
But do you hear? No, I will not give it to you, it is not yours if all
the devils on earth were there. This is our defiance, that we are in the
light, that is, in Christ, which brings me to eternal life; though it
grieves thee, yet let us be proud, and let us be called gross asses and
headless.

**V. 14. Jesus answered and said unto them, If I testify of myself, no
testimony is true.**

48 He will say, Ye say that my testimony is false, because I boast of
myself; but

1\) \"No\" taken by us from the altm edition. Erlanger: Well.

[148 **Erl. 48, LW-s8t. Sermon on John 8:12-15. W. vir, 2117-2420.**
149]{.underline}

I do right, and when I testify about myself, I tell the truth, it is not
a lie that I am the light of the world, I testify the truth purely and
honestly. It is not a false, carnal, but divine glory that I must do,
that I am the light of the world; otherwise I would not come to my
office, nor would I carry it out.

49 Therefore I am also a Christian, for I have been baptized, and
believe the gospel of Christ, that he died for me, and consider it that
he redeemed me with his blood, though I believe it weakly. Then I am a
living saint, and a teacher of the truth, and am lux mundi. For a priest
in his parish should be lux mundi. I cannot boast too highly, for I do
not boast of my own things, my art, stinking power, money and goods, but
of what I have received in the divine word and in baptism, that grace
has been given to me to believe, write and preach. Forasmuch then as
baptism, the death and resurrection of Christ, and the word of God and
blood of Christ are holy, that I may be sprinkled and daily bathed in
the baptism of Christ through faith, I have a sanctuary with me, which
also makes me holy for the sake of the bath. When we are bathed, we
should say, I am clean; as a clean body says, I am washed; and a bride
says that she is adorned, that everything around her smells and tastes
good; for there is the matter of which one boasts. So let us also boast
of this which we have received: It is not mine, but it is given unto me
in baptism: and if I deny it, I dishonor Christ my Lord, saying, My
baptism is filthiness, my doctrine and preaching are lies, and the
devil\'s doctrine: this I leave. But if Christ\'s teaching is righteous
and true, then I must say, \"I am a true teacher, and my pastor shows me
the right way and the true life; then I will die, for I know it is the
truth.

\(50\) So it is here also; when Christ speaks that he is the light of
the world, he does not boast carnally. Just as a Christian does not lie
when he boasts that he is holy, not through good orders and good works,
as the monks otherwise do.

but that he is holy and lives holy, because he was baptized and believes
in Christ, through whom he is cleansed and shines for me into eternal
life. So he does not boast carnally, but boasts of the truth, saying,
\"Therefore my testimony is true. It is the truth, for I know whence I
came and whither I go. I do not boast, like a Scharrhans, because there
is nothing behind it. They are not able to promise life to anyone for a
moment; or \[say\]: I have so much money, or so much I can harm someone,
or say: You will live so long. You are not safe for a moment. What then
does the fool boast of these goods, of which he is not powerful for a
moment? It is a vain glory to insist on honor, power and strength; one
must take hold of it, that it is a false glory, and say that one is not
powerful of it for a moment.

\(51\) And despite an emperor, king, prince and lord, that he may say
that he is mighty of his crown in a moment. I can boast that I am a
Turkish emperor at Constantinople, but it is not true. But the emperor
at Constantinople is just as little powerful of his life as I am, for he
does not have it in his hand for a moment, but God has it in his power;
he does not know how long he will live. But if I leap over and boast of
that which is not in my power, but is with me forever, which cannot be
taken away from me, then I cannot be uncertain of it; but there I cannot
be certain of it for a moment. Therefore I do not boast about what I
have received, nor about my life, which God has not promised me. He has
given me life; item, house and farm, wife and child shall be mine; but
he has not promised me that it should be mine for a moment. I am a king
or a prince, and have much wealth, money and goods; but I have it not
for a moment. But this I have from the first moment I received it until
the end of my life.

**For I know whence I came, and from whence I came, and whither I go:
but ye know not whence I came, and whither I go.**

**\
**150 Erl. 4S, SS4\^SS7. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2420-2423. 151

He is certain of his ministry beforehand, and of all that he speaks and
does, which the world otherwise does not do. This great certitude or
certainty makes him bold; he knows that what he does must remain, and he
also knows that he is a teacher and will remain so, and that God has
sent him to be the light of the world; he is certain of his profession,
nature and office; Therefore he also boasts of it, because he knows that
it cannot fail; for he who sent him has commanded it, and he does not
deny it, and he knows the beginning and end of his office and being, how
it is to go forth. I do not boast of myself, he will say, but I know who
sent me, and that it will be my own kingdom, and my rule will reach that
it will be an everlasting kingdom through my death, and go out that no
one shall prevent it. So must I also do; I know whence I come, and
whither I go, who sent me, and where I remain.

\(53\) The world does not know, but a Christian and a preacher knows who
sent him and where he is going. An emperor and king cannot say, Because
I wear this crown, I know where I am to stay. Neither can the pope say
that he knows where he is going or how long he will stay; he may well
stay in the hellish fire. But a Christian says: I know where I am going,
namely, to him who sent me. There is the beginning, that God gave me the
word of the forgiveness of sins, there I come, the command God gave me
to teach the word and ministry, and come again to him, and abide with
him forever. I am sent only to teach men in the world, and know where I
am going, that I may come again to the Father. This certitudo is a great
strong fortress, this security makes a praiseworthy man.

Every Christian is a light of the world, because he should know and be
sure what kind of man he is, and how he stands with God, and that he
comes from God, and comes out of Adam through the gate into Christ, into
a Christian state, has become a new man, and shall remain with God
forever. In this state I live and carry the cross; there I know where I
come from. A Carthusian or a Barefoot

monk comes from a colorful wammes into a gray robe, he comes from
himself, but not from God; but Christ comes into the world eternally
from God, and temporally through the Holy Spirit, and from the Virgin
Mary. So we can also say: I am sure that I am not a special one; I am no
more than the old Hans and Claus, born of Adam; but I am also a
Christian, I have a name common to all, with all those who are born
again with us from baptism, and after this life I have heaven open, that
I may go there with all the saints. I am sure of my things; my fame has
a good delicious reason. If I should boast of anything else, it would be
bad, and if I should stand up and preach and not be sure, it would be
very dangerous, and better that I had never seen or heard a sermon than
that I should stand up and not be sure that my sermon was God\'s word.
Therefore the mobs are in great danger, they do not know where they come
from, or where they are going, they are uncertain of their thing, and
walk as in a dream, and yet wash, and make the whole world full and mad
with their chatter; but they do not know from whom they are sent, or
where they are going, they are uncertain what they are doing 2c.

55 Thus saith Christ, Ye judge me according to the flesh, and look upon
me no other than as another man. You see no more in me than the face,
the skin, the hands and the feet; you think that I am a carpenter\'s
servant from Nazareth, who has nose, eyes and senses as another man, and
not one who has a command from God, who stands up for himself alone.
Yes, if I look at you in this way, I will not consider you a Christian,
and if you also look at me in this way, you will not consider me a
preacher.

\(56\) And so the fanciers, acting and judging with reason and their own
prudence, look at one another carnally, and judge one also carnally. Now
I am not sent nor come in the flesh, neither will I go out in the flesh;
I do not look upon thee that thou art black, or white, or rich, or poor,
or that thou hast this garment on, or that; but that thou art baptized,

152 Erl. 4S, LS7-sss. Sermon on John 8:12-15. W. VII, 242g-L42S. 153

and have been in this water, and hear the gospel. But they do not do
this, they do not look at a man in this way; they cannot obtain this,
they do not see baptism on the forehead; the eyes do not see it, but the
heart says: If he has been baptized, he is adorned and decorated with
the best sanctuary in the world, namely, with the innocent blood of the
Lamb of Christ. I think that this can make one holy, beautiful and
pious, and turn Adam\'s children into other people, and put them in a
different state.

When I thus look upon thee, and thou thus look upon me, 1) bathed,
baptized, washed in this baptism, then thou honorest the holy and
innocent blood of Christ, not flesh nor skin, but thou lookest upon me,
that I am washed in the blood of Christ, and that in me is holiness, the
gospel or divine word, which sanctifies and creates all creatures. I am
not looked upon as a cow, or as an unreasonable man; but he that is
bathed and cleansed with me, the same perceiveth that such holiness is
in me. The whole world does not see it, does not think what baptism is,
thinks that it has been gone for forty years, sees me only as a man who
has body and soul and reason alone. That is judging according to the
flesh, and rising no higher than a cow looks at a new gate.

58 Thus, the Lord says, I am also seen standing, having two eyes, and
being the son of a carpenter. But I do not have such a reputation; I am
considered the son of a poor carpenter, and should boast of power,
strength, goods and worldly wisdom according to the flesh, but it is not
there; but I boast that I have come from God and go to God again; this
you do not know and see, therefore you cannot like me; I must be a fool
and hopeful, but you are wise and holy people and humble.

\(59\) So it is also with the papists. When we say we are holy, they
cannot open their eyes and go into their hearts and see that baptism and
the gospel are thus

1\) Added by us.

is a mighty thing, of which we therefore boast. Yes, says the pope,
baptism and Christianity is a common thing; but he is holy who goes as a
Carthusian and sees sourly. Should the baptism help? Awe yes, a child in
the cradle would be as pious with it as I am! o you must seek much other
holiness. This is bad according to the flesh. But if I open my eyes and
say: Baptism is not a small thing, but a bath made of the blood of Jesus
Christ. What is lacking in the gospel, baptism and the blood of Christ?
Can they not do enough for sin? Is it not holy? Can it not make
righteous? But these are vain tales and dreams to them, they do not hear
them, they only shout about works, on which they look much more. This
judgment is according to the flesh alone.

**V. 15. I judge no one.**

\(60\) He hath thus begun his ministry, saying, Ye judge not
righteously, but I have righteous judgment; neither do I judge any man.
The world has its way of praising, judging, and avenging, as it is
written in Matt. 7:1 ff. but Christ came not to judge, but to make us
all equal, that one may be like another. To say, Though ye be all
condemned, yet am not I come to condemn; it is not my office to
pronounce judgment upon you, but I will abolish judgment, that ye all
may remain unjudged, unconvicted. So he boasts of his office, and
especially sets himself against the carnal judges, who soon go out and
judge, saying, \"I have not come to judge according to the flesh; I
judge no one. I have power to do it, I could do it, and I ought to do
it, but I do not do it; I did not come for this purpose, but I suspend
judgment, that I may bring others to myself also, and that they all may
be enlightened.

\(61\) It is a beautiful text that one does not take Christ as a judge;
as then the pope has imagined Christ to us, that he will judge on the
last day. They think that Christ sits above, that he alone will judge
and pass sentence; these have been my thoughts and your thoughts in the
papacy, too, you cannot deny that. And there-

[154 Eri. 48, 289-292. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2425-2428. 155]{.underline}

From there came the good works, all monasteries and orders, to make
atonement for the judge. Then Mariam was taken to help, who was to show
Christ the breasts; hence came all pilgrimage and all invocation of the
saints. Thus the gospel was thoroughly put down and eradicated, and we
became cordially hostile to Christ; I would have liked to see him gone
for all devils, everyone fled from him and became hostile to him. We had
this sermon, and the listeners heard it gladly; thus Christ became our
judge, from whom one fled. But Christ is not a judge, for the guilty
alone; as an evildoer must always fear a judge, executioner and gallows,
and hate him, since otherwise the judge should help everyone, and
everyone should seek comfort from him.

62 Now it is because of our great ingratitude that we have had such
preachers who have even turned Christ back, who have made darkness out
of light and a tyrant and judge out of a savior. On the last day he will
judge, but as a savior who will help me from my enemies and overthrow
all those who have harmed me. He will not be terrifying to me, but
comforting; for I have a good cause, whether we be afflicted with the
devil. A pious citizen who suffers hardship is not afraid of the mayor
or the judge, but calls on the authorities in times of need, seeking
help, advice and comfort. This friend is the judge and mayor; the judge
should be a fear and tyrant to the guilty, the wicked and the
wrongdoers, but not to the afflicted \[Rom. 13, 3\]. A prince or judge
is to the same as a father and sugar. So we also have the devil and the
world against us on earth, so we say: Is there no one who can help, who
can judge? Then saith he, Therefore I am a judge, and will save you at
the last day. Christ is a comfort to us, that he will judge us and our
enemies.

\(63\) But here on earth Christ is not a judge, but will leave everyone
unjudged unless he believes. He will not judge those who hear him and
believe in him, those who do not believe.

He does not want to be a judge, condemn them or cast them into hell
\[Joh. 3, 17. 18.\]. He says, \"I will not harm you; you must not be
afraid that sin and an evil conscience will condemn you; if you have
only the light, you are safe from my judgment. If thou hast enemies,
death, sin, an evil conscience, devils, and the world, which trouble
thee, hold thy peace, believe in me, I will counsel thee well in all
things, I will be thy judge, who will deliver thee from thine enemies,
that they hurt thee not; if thou only believe in me, I will well help
thee against sin, death, and devils.

64\. For this cause he says, \"I judge no one.\" With this he wants to
promise the whole world on earth until the last day that his word and
kingdom, or ministry, will be such that he will not judge anyone. Young
and old, to all he gives his help, saying, \"If thou wilt believe in me,
this is my office; I will not judge thee, for my office is to help and
to keep; it shall be all grace and forgiveness of sins. I am not a judge
\[Is. 49, 8. 2 Cor. 6, 2\], unless you would not accept me and believe
in me; otherwise I will be a helper. If you would not accept my help,
you would force me to be a judge, for which I could not stand.
Otherwise, in my office there is no judging, condemning or punishing;
when things go as they should, I do not want to be a judge. As he also
says to the woman in this chapter: \"I will not condemn you. Summa, he
does not want to be a judge, but to help.

\(65\) Therefore imagine Christ differently from what they have taught;
not as a judge, with whom you must do this and that, that you may make
atonement for him, but, if you have sinned, he is the light of the
world, he judges no one; he who follows him will not walk in darkness.
If thou feelest and confessest thy sin, be dismayed at it, only cleave
unto me, follow me, believe in me, hold me for the light; then shalt
thou not be afraid of judgment and sentence; 1) for I will preserve the
world. But the right

1\) to travel - to be in fear or anxiety about something.

[156 **Erl. 48,LSS-S94. Sermon On John 8:12-15. W. VII, 2428-24M.**
157]{.underline}

They do not want to receive my help, because they do not want to be
helped. Just as a physician says to a sick person, \"I have not come to
give you poison and death, but to help you \[Matt. 9:12\]. If thou wilt
follow me, there shall be no need; but if thou wilt not, and callest me
a villain or a prankster, and thinkest my medicine and apothecary to be
fools\' work, and wilt thyself wantonly cause death, and wilt not suffer
me for thee, nor know me, then the fault is thine. I will not give you
death by strangling you, but I must go away and leave you in death
because you reject and despise my medicine. It is the same here; he will
keep his word: I condemn or judge no one; only do not judge yourself;
before me you shall remain unjudged, for I am the light that shines to
eternal life and salvation.

**The fourth sermon.**

Saturday after the 18th Sunday \"nacht Trinitatis sl4. October 1531t. 1)

\(66\) What the Lord Christ said to the Jews is shown next (v. 13), when
they reproached him and said, \"You testify of yourself, your testimony
is false,\" and how he scolded them for judging him so carnally, and not
wanting to look at his ministry and preaching, but only on his person.
Then he says, \"He does not want to do as they do, and in short, he does
not want to be a judge, or to judge and condemn anyone. And it follows
that he gives an account of the occasion of his judgment.

**V. 16 But if I judge, my judgment is right, for I am not alone 2c.**

\(67\) He might have said, If I judge, I judge not according to the
flesh, as ye do, but according to the Spirit. But he says first, \"I
judge nothing. Nor did he come to judge. And Christ is not to be
preached nor believed to come as a judge, except to save and redeem his
own. But how does it rhyme that he now says, \"But if I judge, it is not
for me to judge.

1\) In the original margin.

And above \[v. 15\] he says: \"I judge no one\"? He has spoken a strong
judgment, saying, \"I am the light of the world\"; and he who speaks
this may also refrain from being a judge, not of any kingdom, two or
three cities alone, but of the whole world and of the devil. And he
speaks in addition: All the world is in blindness and darkness, under
sin, death and devils; but I alone am the light. Doesn\'t that mean
judged? Yes, indeed. The Jews were also annoyed by the fact that Christ
is so hopeful. He is not content to be a pastor of a bishopric, but of
the whole world. That means not only judged, but publicly condemned
everything. He condemns them not in the corner, but publicly in the
square; he does not submit to the office of judging in the corner, but
has come out into the light and condemns everything to death.

68 Now, Christ\'s ministry is not primarily directed and ordered to
judge, but rather to help, that is His ministry. We should learn this,
as it was said in the third chapter, v. 17, that Christ says: \"God did
not send His Son to judge the world, but that the world might be saved
through Him. This is to be the most noble office of the Lord Christ, and
for this reason He was also sent into the world. But he that will not
suffer this, and be among him that is pleased to help, how can he
\[Christ\] do otherwise, but that he that will not have life may have
death? for he \[the sinner\] is not come for the remission of sins. He
\[Christ\] says, \"Whoever does not want to follow me must feel that he
remains a sinner, and then comes the right judgment, that such a one
remains in his sins, if he does not want to have righteousness. If you
do not want our Lord God, then keep the devil; and the ministry, which
otherwise is not set to judge, but to help and comfort, is forced to
judge. So it is written of him in the first book of Moses \[Cap. 22,
18.\], \"In thy seed shall all nations be blessed.\" This is to be his
title and office, namely, to bless, to help, to counsel; there is the
sweet word \"bless,\" to help, it is to

[158 Erl. 48, 294-29.\" Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2430-\^233. 159]{.underline}

To be a comforting preacher, a kind man and a helper, who does this with
fist and hand, neither teaching nor working, but helping and blessing;
with him is all help and comfort. And yet in the words is also decided
the malediction or the judgment and verdict. For where there is
blessing, there is curse; he who will not have help and blessing must
have curse; he who will not have health may remain sick; he who will not
go to heaven must go to hell. Although it is not the office of the Lord
Christ to cast into hell, or to curse, or to judge, but to help, and to
draw out: yet it is also true, that whosoever will not have it, let him
abide in it.

69 Therefore saith he, If I must judge, I judge truly; if I lift up, I
will judge aright; for I am the light: he that followeth me abideth not
in darkness, but hath grace and mercy and help and comfort and life. For
he that followeth me hath all blessedness. This is his office. But if
thou wilt not follow, if thou wilt not have health, light, and blessing,
I will decree that whosoever will not have light and Me shall abide in
darkness. Otherwise, my office is not to judge or condemn, but to help,
comfort and advise people, and to do what is best for them. But if they
do not want God to help them, I say: If you do not like the word, you
must go to the devil; I do not force you to do this, and I would rather
see that you are not judged in this way, but that you accept the advice
and comfort and let yourself be helped; but I must do it. Just as a
physician says to a sick person, \"This would make you well; I do not
want to deprive you of life, but would gladly help you. But if he does
not want to, the physician says, \"I am talking to you as a physician,
but you force me to be a judge and tell you that you are going to die.
The physician should not speak like this, nor does he like to speak like
this as a physician; the sick person does not want to suffer him or
consider him a physician, so he may have it his way. So Christ also was
sent for his office, and came to save, and to help all them that trust
in him.

that they may be blessed. But they say, We will not have the light,
neither suffer this doctrine. So then it will also be said: He who will
not have the light will walk in darkness; and Christ will also be the
judge of the wicked.

\(70\) It will not help them to say, We will lead a different life, we
know a better way to heaven, I will become a Carthusian, or a barefoot
monk, do this and that. But the Lord says to you: Beware, I warn you, it
is against my office, you will fall short and not go to heaven, but to
the devil in hell. Is this not judged? And so it is in all classes. A
father saith unto his son, If thou wilt obey me, thou shalt be my heir;
I will not make thee a beggar. For the father\'s and mother\'s office is
not instituted to destroy the son, but for the correction, help, and
comfort of the children. If then the son runs away, and becomes a knave
and a rogue, and the daughter a whore, then the father punishes him for
it, and says: Well, if you will be given to the executioner, then it is
not my fault. So the father and the mother must do, and judge and punish
the son. Here the father judges when he scolds the children; but if the
children do not want it, the executioner must come and judge.

\(71\) So also the Lord Christ will say, It is not my office to judge;
but if ever I am to judge, I will judge aright. I know that I am the
light of the world; that is true; and whoever does not follow me, I will
shut him up and condemn him to eternal damnation and hell; not because
of my office, for there is my command that I should lead and bring
everyone to the light; but because of his wickedness, that he does not
want me, Christ, and my office, that I should help him; therefore he is
separated from me. If then he has no part with me, he is of the devil,
for apart from me there is no counsel, nor help, nor light, nor
salvation.

So God has given the Christian church the power of the keys: \"What will
bind them on earth\" 2c. \[Matth. 18, 18. Joh. 20, 23.\] This power is
not only to bind, but also to loose; for the ministry of preaching is to
preach forgiveness of sins.

160 Eri. 4\", \[ss-sss. Sermon on John 8:16-18. w. vn, 2433-243\". 161

Sins, and bring the souls to heaven. But this is also attached to it: If
an ungodly man does not hear you or the church, consider him to be a
heathen; then it must bind, since the dear Christian church would much
rather dissolve. Therefore both are true here, that first of all Christ
is such a preacher, namely, a Savior, who is not ordained to be a judge,
but to redeem and help, as he said above \[v. 11\] to the adulteress.
But if he judges, he does it for the sake of those who do not want him;
he must judge. For his own sake do not make him a judge, for he was sent
to be a blessed seed of the Gentiles; but that he must be a judge is not
for his own sake, but for the sake of others who despise him and force
him to judge.

I also preach about God\'s grace, but whoever does not want it, let him
have wrath. I shall not and cannot preach and teach otherwise than in
this way. I shall not 1) say: Will you have God\'s grace, or not have
it? One should not preach in this way, but say: Here you have the
gospel, which gives you forgiveness of sin, does not judge the evil
conscience, and you must not be afraid of sin and death. But if you do
not want to hear the gospel, nor accept the grace and mercy of God, then
I say to you: Here, dear pope, bishops, princes, and all together, I put
you under ban, you are of the devil with all your own. I do not
pronounce this sentence out of pleasure or pride, but I must do it. The
first office, which is to bless, does not want to be applied 2); I
should not say: Pope, you despise the word, you do not want to suffer
the gospel, you shall nevertheless be saved. Oh no! but I should say:
You will be damned into the abyss of hell. So we must judge them, and
gladly put the pope, bishops, under ban, saying, \"I am right in judging
you, for I have come to judge you rightly, and to say to you, \'You are
in darkness and are condemned. It is the truth that

1\) Erlanger: sollt.

2\) kin \-- related, friendly.

I have said that I am the light of the world; he that is without light
is in darkness; this is not a lie, but the right truth, and is rightly
judged, when I say, Ye are in darkness; this also shall remain right.

The world does not like to hear this judgment and sentence, and
considers it a lie, but it is rightly judged, and do not think
otherwise. If I say: You are condemned and in darkness, it remains
right, and so it shall stand, because I judge your guilt, and you will
know that it is true and right.

**For I am not alone, but I, and the Father who sent me,**

I do not speak this judgment as a single person, to whom I would have no
office, but one acts from another person. I am not speaking now as
Jesus, or Hans, but as one who is in office. I am not a single person,
but sent as a witness, as a public messenger and preacher, having good
reason. For this I have the testimony of John the Baptist, which he gave
me. Then God the heavenly Father also testifies of me; these are two
witnesses.

Otherwise, if a private person testifies about himself, that is not
right; but a public person who is in office, it is different with him. I
am not a preacher here from my own person and for myself, as the red
spirits are otherwise such preachers, and have not accepted the office
of preaching out of my own choice or thirst; but I have the testimony
that I am called, and required and asked to the office of preaching, I
preach by command and the command of others; otherwise the devil
preaches. Therefore I am not a single person, and because I am called
Martinus, therefore I am not a preacher; but if I am called D. Martinus,
or a preacher, I am another man. So also Hans is not a prince of Saxony;
but because he has the credentials, Duke Hans, it is something more than
Hans; there is another person, separate from the individual person, and
the same person may well testify. A mayor may testify and speak: I
testify that I am your mayor. He does not speak as a person who is of
the mother\'s origin.

[162 Erl. 1S, 29g-3ÜI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2438-2438. 163]{.underline}

but as a person appointed by the congregation. So I am also a preacher
here; not as I am from my mother\'s tradition, but I have the testimony
that I am called to it and am a skilled person for this common service;
I was not born for it, but made and ordained as a preacher.

This also Christ says in this place: I am a man in office, and certainly
have testimony that I, Jesus, am a preacher; not as I am born of Mary
the Virgin, that would be too small; but over that I am Mary\'s son, so
am I also in the preaching office. This person can testify of himself;
as Duke Hans can and shall say, I am a prince. A woman shall say, In the
house I am a woman; for she is not thereby become a woman, that she hath
secretly broken into the house; but she hath the testimony of the
church, that she hath had marriage; her testimony is true. Such a
person\'s testimony is right, because she does not stand there in her
individual person, as she was born of father and mother, but as a public
and common person. Therefore my testimony is right when I stand as a
common person, when I say something as a prince or preacher; for then my
individual testimony and word is as much as if a whole country said it,
or if the holy Christian church said it.

78 The Lord Christ also means that he is a mighty witness; then his
heavenly Father is also there, and testifies of him \[Matth. 17, 5.\]:
Hic est Filius meus dilectus, in quo est mihi beneplacitum; hunc audite.
So he can push his adversaries to the ground, saying: These two
witnesses are there; 1) whoever can muster these two witnesses has
enough. Our Junkers also say, Augustine put on Paulum as a witness; now
Paul, as born of the mother, is a citizen of Tarsus. Being born there is
nothing, I did not pay much attention to Paul. But when he says,
\"Called to the apostleship, a servant of Jesus Christ,\" it is no
longer Paul as he was before, but now he is another person, he has
another name.

1\) In the original: \"These two witnesses are not there.\" Like Walch,
we have omitted the \"not\".

skirt, and is a common person. 2) One must inter publicam et privatam
personam. Christ shuts them up by saying, \"I am a witness, and I
testify of myself, and I do right, for I am he; and I am not he alone,
for I have another witness with me, and he and my testimony stand.
Therefore what I judge is rightly judged; for the Father also judges,
and bears witness also with the works through Christ. You will see the
signs as raising the dead 2c. Our Lord God is not the man who bears
witness to lies, he does not confirm false miracles, he will not be able
to court the devil, but he does the contradiction and the devil is
displeased.

79 Now he says: I and the Father, ours are two; I am a publica persona,
as John testifies to me, and the miracles and my heavenly Father also
testify; I point you to this, the miracles confirm this about me.
Everything is said so that he will shut them up and confirm and defend
his office. As for my person, I will suffer what I can; but as for the
word and ministry, if they want to punish me and take it away, then I
should not give another the preaching chair and watch his preaching,
because I am the pastor and preacher, and I should put life and limb on
it; then he would have leave from me or from the pastor, otherwise you
must keep your mouth shut until you have received leave.

80 If therefore one said, I preach not rightly; I would say, The
ministry and the doctrine are right. And as for the faith and the
teaching of the divine word, God does not give us much patience, we will
not grant them anything; someone may strike me over it. Well, I shall
suffer it, but not strike again; but preach and do against the devil,
his doctrine and ministry; that belongs to me, and is commanded me. If
he wants to have a different faith and preach different words, I should
not suffer it, nor keep quiet about it. If it is a matter of life and
limb, he can take money and goods from you, but he shall not take them
from you, for I am publica persona,

2\) i.e. a public person, a person in office.

164 Eri. 4s, 3M-S04. Sermon on John 8:16-18. W. vn, 2is8-2441. 165

that is commanded me. What he has given me as life and limb, which is
mine, I may let take whoever will or can take it; but the ministry is
not mine, I cannot forgive it. I say, Thus shalt thou baptize, preach,
and administer the sacrament, and not otherwise; otherwise I may not.

A mother in the house shall not be so impatient as to say to a harlot,
This son is not mine; take him always, and commit fornication with him;
the mother shall not be brought thither; she may well say before, Wilt
thou take a skirt from me? take it; but leave me my son, I will not give
him unto thee; I have no patience. So also saith the Lord Christ, I have
a strong command, my judgment is right: though ye condemn me, though ye
judge me, yet is my office right, though I judge no man, yet shall no
man take away my judgment. So it is said in divine matters: if I have
not suffered, if I have not had patience, but have fought and quarreled,
then I shall leave my neck over it. In other things it may go as it may.
In the office of preaching, a foreign preacher should not preach
differently, as he himself wants and has in mind; because the command or
calling is with me, and I am to answer for it, you do not have to do it
as you want. Also, because there is a prince in Saxony, no one is to
rule in his chair, no one is to take his office and rule; unless one
comes out of office, then whoever comes in may rule. Now this is what
applies to the office and the publicas personas, but with individual
persons it is a different matter.

**The fifth sermon**

Saturday after the 19th Sunday \[after\] Trinity \[21 October 1531\]. 1)

82 We have next heard that the Lord Christ said that he was a judge, and
yet he was not a judge. And how he answered afterward, when they had
punished him, he testified of himself. This shows when one should
believe one who boasts and praises himself. But Christ says: I

1\) In the original margin.

and the father testify. With this answer, he is doing so much that they
are laughing and mocking him.

**V. 19. Then said they unto him, Where is thy father? JEsus answered:
You know neither me nor my father 2c.**

\(83\) Some would take from this, as if they doubted whether he had a
father, and as if he were an illegitimate child: but we leave them
alone, whether it be true or not. But the text is beautiful in that it
says: \"The Father and I bear witness, therefore you should believe me
while I am in the preaching ministry. The Father has commanded me to
preach and to praise; then the Father has also given me into his hand to
perform miracles. So I have a great testimony in baptism, when the Holy
Spirit in the form of a dove was seen above me, and the voice of the
heavenly Father was heard \[Matt. 17:5\]: \"This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; him you shall hear.\" So John the Baptist also
testifies about me.

84\. But the Jews say, \"Where is your Father?\" As if to say, \"We do
not hear the Father\'s testimony; the miracles you have performed, such
as raising the dead, are nothing. He shall set the Father before their
eyes, that they may take hold of him, and grope like the wall; otherwise
they will not believe, nor accept it. But Christ does not show the
Father\'s testimony so that they should see the Father and grope, but
believe him; he wants to lead them all into his word, and this is what
the testimony is for. The apostle Philip also says to Christ \[John
14:8\]:. \"Show us the Father.\" Christ does not show the Father to us
as I would have him, but the Father shows me to you. I will turn it
around and say: The Father points you to me, he shows Christ, he
testifies of me, you should have respect for me and see what I speak and
what my testimony is.

85This then is the whole strife, and the main thing, that we should
always have Christ before our eyes; for the devil is always tempting us
to fall away from Christ, and to seek the Father, and to think, This and
that pleases him; and then to leave Christ, whom the Father sent, that
one may

166 Eri. is, soi-gos. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2441-2444. 167

heard him alone. But we do as the Jews do, and will not have him; we
ask, \"Where is the Father?\" This is the question of the world. The
Turk also says, \"What is Christ? He is nothing, and died. What are
David and the prophets? Nothing; but saith, I will think after God the
Father, and so will live, baptizing and purifying myself; which is well
pleasing to God. Thus he will come to the Father. A Carthusian thinks:
If I run away to a monastery, live under the Father Provost, Prior or
Abbot, and am obedient to him, leave my goods and the world, then he
will please God. So they all want to ask: Where is the Father? and catch
God with their thoughts. But it will not do to leave the Son and despise
His word. They say here: \"Show us the Father.\" As if they wanted to
say: It is none of our business what you say, we believe nothing of you
and your word; show us the Father, if we would see him, then we would
have it all.

This is the highest challenge to faith. Let every man bind himself, and
be accustomed to keep the word of the Lord Christ, and let not that man
out of his sight; let him blind his eyes, his reason, and all things,
and shut them, and let him neither hear nor see anything but the one Man
Jesus Christ, and say, I will not know nor hear the other thoughts that
come into my mind concerning God, how I may seek the Father and Creator
of heaven and earth. That would be a man who could remain, who said: I
do not know any other God to meet, to seek, nor to find, but Christ. He
who knows this is flesh and blood, too wise for the world and the devil.
God has sent the Son, and hangs you on his neck, saying, Hear him; he
that hangs not on him, and heareth him, shall not find me. This was also
said above in the seventh chapter \[§ 54 ff.\], that apart from the man
and this man\'s word there is no God to be found. The pope, the Turk and
the Jew do not find this wisdom and art, if they torture themselves to
death over it, or whip themselves so that the blood flows afterwards. I
have seen women who beat themselves to death at night with wire.

1\) Erlanger: den.

and they wanted to reconcile God with it, to meet God and to find Him;
but it was all in vain, nothing came of it. For they say: Where is the
Father? seek God the Father, and leave Christ and His word in the queue.

Now it is a grievous devil, and a great error, when all the spirits of
the wicked come out; they are all of the opinion that one should leave
the man\'s word, and put it out of sight, and want to find something
else that pleases the world and God; but one should not do it. Let
whoever wants to preach something else, and let the man stand in line
and seek other ways to come to God, he will not find it. For this
reason, the Lord Christ answers correctly:

**You neither know me nor my father, and if you knew me, you would also
know my father.**

These are thunderbolts. As if he wanted to say: I will not let you come
to this point, that you want to know the Father before you know me, or
that you want to know the Father without me. This is a great text, that
he says: \"You want to go up to heaven and know God, but apart from and
without me you know nothing about it, nor can you know anything about
it, if you do not know me first. This is impossible, you will not know
God without me, you are as you wish; if you do not first learn to know
me and have me, do not think that you know God.

89\. But what is this said, and what is the meaning of these words, that
he thus implicates the whole world, saying, \"All that do not know me
know nothing of the Father, and all that do not have me have no God; for
how can anyone have God who does not know me? He then that hath not God,
nor knoweth Him, hath the devil, and goeth also to the devil; and all
the service which he should do unto God, he doeth unto the devil. So I
conclude that he has no God, yes, he persecutes God; and yet he walks in
great holiness, cannot drink wine, will not build houses, nor dress
beautifully, which is supposed to be great, excellent holiness; whereas
the poor Christians must be sinners, damned and cursed.

168 Eri. \"s, so6-sos. Sermon on Joh. 8, 19. W. vir, 2444-2446. 169

The Turks say, \"This is what mad Christians do,\" and the Turk is so
mad and foolish that he thinks this life is pleasing to God and does not
know that God does not respect it. The monks, the pope, and all the
clergy do likewise, saying: Christ does not do it alone; they do not
want to suffer Christ alone to be our comfort and savior, but we must
also do our works, live in a spiritual state, and be more perfect than
other people; they go about in works, and want to be holy people; and
yet they all go to the devil.

91 But who would believe that so much worship among the Jews, Turks and
Papists, which is done with such great seriousness in the world (as it
has not been a joke and a scandal to me in the Papacy), should all be in
vain? I was also a serious monk, lived demurely and chastely, I would
not have taken a penny without my prior\'s knowledge, I prayed
diligently day and night. So do many Jews, Turks and Papists, they are
very serious about their worship. Well, who believes that it should be
lost? That I should say: The twenty years, because I was in the
monastery, are gone and lost. I came to the monastery for the salvation
and blessedness of my soul and for the health of my body, and yet I
thought I knew God the Father very well, and it would be God\'s will
that I keep the rule and be obedient to the abbot, that would please
God, and that would be to know the Father and the Father\'s will.

92\. But the Lord Christ says here the antithesis, saying, If ye know me
not, neither know ye the Father. Therefore let us learn what we ought to
learn. It is a great, great challenge to doctrine and faith, that one
should remain with Christ and not teach anything higher, nor hear
anything else, than what comes and flows from the mouth of the Lord
Christ. And even if God Himself spoke to me, even if all the angels
spoke to me, as Muenzer praised that God spoke to him, in this matter
concerning my salvation I did not want to hear a word, and I wanted to
shed my ears with lead. Otherwise, in other worldly matters, I would
gladly believe, but in this matter I did not want to believe.

believe the voice of God, 1) even if it were to sound with drums and
pipes; for I have decided that I will believe nothing, nor hear
anything, except Christ alone; I will not consider all the other things
to be the voice of God; for God has decided that he will speak to no man
except through Christ alone. Therefore, for the sake of doctrine, no
angel shall appear to me, neither Gabriel nor Michael, and preach, for
they are not God, nor the Holy Spirit; but I have the word of God, who
has commanded me to believe in Christ, and to be baptized. For Christ\'s
blood is shed for me; outward things do not bring me my salvation. If
they told me whether a war would come, I would believe it; for if it
came, it would come; if not, it would remain. But for the sake of
doctrine, one should stay with the man Christ, for God will not make a
new Christ for us, nor will he speak to anyone, except with the voice
and speech of this man Christ; through Christ he will speak to us.

The spirits of the wicked say that the Holy Spirit has given it to them;
item, God has told it to them Himself; but say thou: The devil told you,
I don\'t want to hear it, I don\'t want to know about any other God,
even in this matter concerning salvation and eternal life; and say
without hesitation: This is the wretched devil. You say, \"The Holy
Spirit has told me, this is the way to live, this is the way to do, this
is the way to be saved. No, say, \"It is not true that one must be saved
by Christ alone, and by no one else; I have God\'s word and baptism,
heaven is open to me, through Christ God wants to speak to me; what
Christ commanded the apostles and the apostles commanded the church,
that is to be accepted. Christ has called me to be baptized, to take the
sacrament, to believe the gospel, to preach. Therefore, for the sake of
doctrine, one should not look at any mouth and believe, but only at the
man\'s mouth, and not listen to the fluttering spirits; there is only
one doctor, who is called Christ.

94\) Secondly, one should not only \[not\] follow other teachings, but
also not one\'s own teachings.

1\) i.e., claiming to be God\'s voice.

[170 Erl. 4S, 308-SI0. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2446-2449. 171]{.underline}

believe. For every one will feel that the devil will come with thoughts
which you will think as if they were divine thoughts; as if those who
come in despair, affliction, or in devotion would live contemplatively;
\[so\] that what they do is presumptuous or hopeful. \[If thou art
distressed or alarmed, do not do so. 1) But say thou, I believe it not
\[that these are divine thoughts\]. Go down into the man\'s word, and
leave off these thoughts, even as thou hast left off the doctrine which
is without Christ, and say to thy thoughts, Thou art not God, nor the
Holy Ghost, nor his word. If you have such thoughts that want to drive
you to despair, and it seems as if our Lord God is frightening me, then
say: Stop, let us go to the judge, and stand before the court, and hear
what Christ says; how does he speak to the hopeful, or to sinners and
the sick? He says \[Matth. 11, 28.\]: Venite ad me omnes, qui laboratis
et onerati estis, et ego reficiam vos. Then to the proud scribes he says
\[John 9:41\], \"If ye were blind, ye would have no sin.\" Item \[Joh.
15, 22.\]: If you say that you have no sin, you will die in your sins.
Thus he punishes the hopeful saints, saying \[Luc. 14:11\], \"They that
exalt themselves shall be abased.\" Item: I am hostile to hopeful
sinners, and count them great sinners.

So the false doctrine and the devil\'s thoughts would fall out if one
were frightened with the thoughts of presumption or despair and
unbelief; but few people know this art; and when these thoughts occur to
one, they come so that all men must say that these thoughts are spoken
by God Himself, and that they are not human thoughts or the devil\'s
thoughts, but God\'s and of a good angel. If a man thus concludes, he is
gone and lost; for he must despair.

1\) We have not been able to extract a suitable meaning from the words
as they are found in Walch and in the Erlanger, and have therefore added
the bracketed words. The preceding also seems to us to need improvement,
and would read something like this: \"as, that those who are in despair
or affliction, come into devotion, they would like to live
contemplatively\" 2c.

feln. Therefore let such a one know that he does not know God; but let
him cast himself about, and hear what Christ says, and judge, and
conclude with the afflicted and affrighted, or with the secure and
proud. To the afflicted he saith \[Matt. 11:28.\], \"Come, ye that labor
2c., and I will refresh you.\" But unto the proud he saith, Trollet
yourselves from me, ye proud.

Then I can judge and conclude that the thought was wrong and of the
devil; therefore one must run to the man, Christ, and with the doctrine,
faith, hearts and thoughts of his mouth bind ourselves and let us hang,
and shut our eyes; otherwise you will not avoid the snares and nets of
the devil. Unless you do this to him, when something of the sermon, of
the word of God, or of your thoughts occurs to you, that you say: I do
not want to know anything, except the word of God and the voice of
Christ; I will go to Christ, see and hear; what he says, that I will
accept. So you could escape from the devil and be safe from him, if you
keep Christ before your eyes; but if you lose sight of him, that\'s it.
Otherwise you should close your eyes, ears and heart, and believe only
what he says.

97 St. Anthony saw at one time that the world was full of cords, and
they were being laid one after another; then he sighed deeply and said,
\"Who will escape from all the cords? Then was he answered: He who is
humble. This is darkly spoken, if it were spoken by God. It is too weak,
for the world is full of snares, not only full of carnal sins, but full
of misbelief, despair and other vices. But he cannot get rid of the
devil, nor escape from him, who does not know Christ. Therefore say, I
know nothing but Christ; I alone will hear what he saith; then all cords
must break. But if I want to have humility, I will fall on my works,
become a monk; they humble themselves before the people. As for a
barefoot monk, he humbles himself before men, even before God, and yet
makes of himself a rogue; but if I say to him, Thou art a rogue, he
becomes angry, mad and foolish.

98 Therefore, it is a dark word \"de-

[172 **Erl. 48, sio-3IS. Sermon on John 8:19. W. VII, 244g-24SI.**
173]{.underline}

If he meant it that way, he meant that one should only despair. But it
is not enough to do as Judas did. But if you let go of your humility,
hold on and trust in the one man Christ, that will do it. Therefore it
is to be done; as he says \[v. 19\], \"If ye know me, ye know the Father
also.\" Do not start from behind, nor from above, that you would know
the Father beforehand; it will come to nothing; but so do to him, close
your eyes, and say, I know nothing of God nor of the Father, I come
hither then, and hear what Christ says. For whatever else is preached or
thought of outside this man\'s word, however high it may be and whatever
it may be, is not the Father, but remains blindness, error, and the
devil himself. \"If ye knew me, ye knew the Father: but if ye know me
not, neither know ye of the Father: for the Father hath said that he
will be known by the Son. And takes us out of all high schools, out of
all wise men\'s law, out of all holy men\'s lives, out of all religions,
faiths and doctrines, out of monastery caps and plates, and says:
Whoever wants to know who I, God the Father, am, let him hear Christ the
Son.

This is our Christian teaching. We do not want to know it from the pope,
nor learn it, nor let our necks be covered, if he wants to lead us to
heaven; for he does not know the Father; we do not want his faith, it is
the Turkish, Jewish and papist faith almost one thing. But say: Teach me
to know Christ beforehand, and lead me to the man; if the man has said
it, if it is his word, if it comes from his mouth, then I will accept
it, and I will kiss your feet, and I will do you even more honor. But if
thou wilt put it out of my sight, I will not hear thee; yea, I will let
thee trample under foot. And if thou wilt preach thy deeds unto me
alone, then will I not kiss thy hands and feet, but smear thy mouth full
of filth. Your life and doctrine shall be founded and established on
Christ\'s word and doctrine, that it proceed out of the man\'s mouth and
word. I am to be baptized and believe in Christ,

then I will be blessed by his death and bloodshed. So I believe and
live; all this comes from the man\'s mouth, and not from the pope\'s,
the Turk\'s or the Jew\'s mouth.

\(100\) After this we love one another, and judge our profession and
offices; all this proceedeth out of the mouth of man. Then I know whom I
hear and whom I follow. Then God says, \"When you hear the man Christ,
you hear me; and when you have heard me, what you do afterward in your
state and profession is fine and right, for my Son has so ordered and
commanded. This is what he says: \"If you knew me.\" As if he should
say, Ye know not what else he wills, or how he is minded; but by me ye
shall know, who am sent unto you, who am to preach unto you. If ye
receive me, and hear me, and cleave unto my mouth, ye shall learn all
things. But if ye turn aside, and say, as the Jews say, Where is thy
father? then be it known that ye know not the father, because ye hear
the pope, and the Turk, and the monk. Then it is said: If ye will not
hear me, neither know ye me nor the Father, neither know ye of God nor
of Christ; for he came to tell us.

For this reason, everything must be done so that Christ is known, and a
Christian knows nothing of God without Christ, and what else is
necessary for his salvation, and otherwise closes his eyes to all
preachers and thoughts and says: I hear no preacher, nor do I accept any
thought; if they come to me, I drop them again: I hear Christ, what he
says to me. Against all the others I stop my ears and say, \"It is all
idle talk; wash to and fro, I do not hear it; but bring me this man\'s
thoughts and sayings, and I will hear you; the rest may be tumbled away.
This is the conclusion of the sermon before the God box at Jerusalem.
And now they also want to know who he is; before they were with the
Father. Let us now leave this in order, and save it until another time.

174 Eri. 48, 313-315. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2451-2454. 175

**The sixth sermon.**

On the 28th day \[of October \[1531\]. 1)

From the previous sermon we learned how the Lord answered the Jews when
they asked, \"Where is your Father?\" that he would not let them go on
fluttering about with their thoughts and going astray, and that he would
turn them around and say, \"He who wants to know the Father will not
come to this, for he has me; in short, I will not let you go about with
your thoughts; he who does not know me does not know the Father either.
He will not let them climb around to seek the Father with their
thoughts, but hits the track, will not let them be led out, wants them
to hear the oral word. Whoever does not want to hear, learn and believe
this, shall never have anything. Follows in the text:

**V. 20. And no one took hold of him, for his hour had not yet come.**

103 He says that the Lord was so bold and audacious that he could preach
it before the chief priests, even in the temple at Jerusalem, when they
ruled and wanted to kill him, but were not allowed to. If he had
preached it in the wilderness or secretly to good friends, it would not
have been a great wonder; but that he should preach it here, in the
temple at Jerusalem, in the capital, where the Pharisees and scribes
ruled, that was a great boldness; especially that he should preach that
he was Lux mundi, and that apart from him all was darkness; item,
subject to the devil and death.

\(104\) Now to say such things, and so to reproach themselves with them,
hath hurt them, and is very grievous unto them, that he should condemn
and curse them, and destroy all their things, the temple, and the law,
and all the service of God, which was in Judaism. They should have torn
him to pieces with their teeth, and they would have gladly done it, but
they must let it be, nevertheless they suffer and hear that their thing
with the temple and the law is nothing. Let him who is bold go to Rome
and do it.

1\) In the original margin.

**But they did not grab him.**

With this John shows that our Lord holds God above His word, and above
His preachers, although the world is sorry for them, as long as it
pleases Him, until the hour comes; but if the hour is not here, let them
be put there with a peg and set in defiance, that they may harm Him.
Here Christ preaches in the temple, and God says: \"Silence, you
scribes, and let him be satisfied. This is what God can do, and proves
that he will and can do it, and save his own from all misfortune.

**V. 21. I go away, and you will seek me.**

This is a terrible sermon, and a shameful *valete,* which is horrible;
and you can see that the man was serious, who preached with great
diligence and faithfulness. But one may shout to the death, and if one
would take a thousand mouths to it and use them as one pleases, the
world is deaf and does not hear, it is all in vain. But if the world
does not want to hear, let it be condemned; who can help it? God sends
His Son to the Jews, who preached so diligently in this city of
Jerusalem; and John the Baptist also preached: yet the Jews would not
hear them, but persecuted them, and slew them, and would not have them;
therefore they are cheaply condemned. So now we also preach, but no
preaching helps; the world does not want to hear, it wants to know and
not believe. But for the sake of the elect, and those who hear and think
to be saved, one must preach and say it. Let the spirits of the wicked
and others hear what the Lord prophesies here: \"I will go away, and you
will seek me.

In the seventh chapter, v. 33, he also said: \"I am still with you a
little while, you will look for me and will not find me. These are
excellent words, and we have also dealt with them above \[Cap. 7, § 154
ff\]. He wants to say: I am going away to the Father; I have been here,
and have preached my word, and offered to all what the Father has
commanded me, namely, eternal life, forgiveness of sins, and salvation
from death and eternal damnation; I am a preacher among you.

176 **Erl. 48, 3IS-3I7. Sermon on John 8:20-23. W. vn, 2454-2457.** 177

and I have told you. If ye will not, therefore, tarry; I will go away;
tarry as ye are, and I will tarry as I am.

But this is terrible when he goes away, for he takes with him eternal
life and blessedness, and all that God wants to give to His own, and
leaves behind him death, the devil, sin and all misfortune. This can now
be seen in the Jews, who missed this sermon and killed the comforting
preachers that God sent them. There is not one among them who could tell
how to live or what to do, for Christ has departed. Among the Turks also
it is gone; there is none among them that could say how one should live,
that one might be saved. As in the papacy, he is also gone; there is not
one who could save a soul. Just as our red spirits and the Anabaptists
cannot learn it either. Thus, with our great ingratitude and contempt
for the divine word, we are also on the way; and when the little group
is gone that now sighs, has desire and love for the gospel, and the
kernel is peeled away, then there will also be preachers who will not be
able to preserve, teach, or comfort one soul. It is frightening when he
says, \"I am going away.\" For when he departs, the knowledge of God,
the understanding of baptism and the Lord\'s Supper, that one does not
know what God is, what life, righteousness and blessedness are, or how
one should be freed from sin and death, departs with him. Everything
goes away with it, and becomes worse, or ever as bad, as it was before.

109\] This is more grievous, that he saith, Ye shall seek me, and shall
not find. Yes, that one should seek him and not find him is strange; for
he is so merciful and gracious, and promises \[Matt. 7:7, 8\], \"He that
seeketh shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you\"; how then
should one not find him and come upon him if he sought him? It is quite
contrary to one another that he should say, \"Ye shall seek me, and
shall not find.\" It is a miserable bargain and a wretched thing when he
goes away, that one seeks him, and has a desire for him, and one would
gladly have him, but yet one cannot find him, or one will not get him.
One can in the

Holy Scripture preach nothing more abominable. He says, \"Now that I am
here, and I offer it to you, and you have the fair at your door, you
will not have me, crucify me, and thrust me out of the city; but when I
come away, you will dig me out of the earth a hundred cubits deep, but
you will not find me a hair\'s breadth.

Now \"to seek Christ\" is to seek help, grace, life, comfort, salvation,
blessedness, redemption from death, sin, the devil and hell, to want to
have Christ as a redeemer, yes, to seek all that Christ is, and that is
why he came into the world. And now the Jews seek him. For how they
fast, pray, read, preach, give, and do, and strive exceedingly hard,
seeking how they may be saved; but all such labor shall be in vain and
lost. This is terrible, that this great effort before God, with all its
services, should be completely lost. He does not say, \"I will go away,
and you will seek the devil, do evil deeds, and lead a life of whoredom
and wickedness. No; but ye shall begin to obtain that which I am, with
excellent works; but all labor and toil shall be lost.

We have seen this in the Jews, and also in the papacy. I have been a
monk, and have watched at night, fasted, prayed, and chastised and
tortured my body, so that we kept obedience and lived chastely; more of
these have been found among priests, nuns and monks. I am talking about
the pious and righteous monks, who were serious in the world, and not
about the whores and boys, who were stuck in the lewd, loose life, but
who made it sour for them, as \[I\] did for me, and toiled and toiled,
wanting to attain what is Christ, so that they would be blessed. What
have they done with it? Have they found him? Christ says: You will be
stuck in your sin and die. That is what they have obtained.

\(112\) This is a terrible judgment, to throw such great labor and works
away, and that he says, \"When I go away, run, give, build, establish
whatever you want, even fast to death; know that it is all in vain. We
see it also in the re

[178 Eri. 4s, si7-W°. Interpretations about the evangelist John- W. vn,
2457-24ss. 179]{.underline}

Anabaptists. We could not muster such obedience among ourselves, nor
have such devotion, nor let ourselves cost and confess so much, nor
cling so hard to our preachers, as the Anabaptists do, and have faith in
their 1) \[preachers\]. They leave their wives and children, money,
property, house and farm, abandon everything, and act as if they were
insane and mad. The sacrament lovers also do everything so stiff-necked,
and are thus firm, because it is said: You are looking for me. But
nothing comes of it. They say, \"You will not find me.\" The pope also
works and searches for what I, Christ, am, but he will not find it.

Now God has given His grace that every village and town has the gospel
and its own pastors, and they have it for free; one may not give them
\[that is, the preachers\] much, but if one could now let the preachers
die of hunger, one would do it. Citizens, peasants and the nobility help
faithfully; they do not want to have the gospel anymore. Now Christ
says: \"I am going away\"; if you do not want me, I will provide you
with other preachers and pastors who will serve for you. So also, when
we shall have died, you will one day want to get a pious preacher in
Rome, and will find none; yes, one will want to dig those ten cubits
deep out of the earth, and carry them over one\'s back, whom one now
cannot stand, and does not like to give them a piece of bread; since a
nobleman, a citizen and a farmer exercises his courage, one will then
run after him, seek him, want to give him gladly, work beyond all
measure, but find no one. I have often said it, and I will say it again,
so that you will not forget it. This city of Wittenberg has given more
than a thousand guilders annually to the monks, without what has been
given to the priests. There is no village so poor that 2) one to the
other, would not have given five, six, eight or ten florins to the monks
and priests. Item, what did it cost to keep the mass and to go on
pilgrimage to St. Jacob. That was all Christ sought, but he was gone.

1\) Erlanger: hers.

2\) Erlanger: da.

\(114\) Now Christ is still present, but the nobles say, \"What do I
ask? if there were no more preachers, I know that one can be saved and
justified through Christ; I do not need a preacher, I know how to be
saved and call upon Christ. Well, you will see how useful and necessary
a preacher will be. It will be said, \"You will seek me\" 2c. If he
alone said, \"I go away,\" that would still be to suffer; but he does
not say, \"I go away, and ye shall have rest and be satisfied;\" but he
adds, that when he is gone, we first of all begin to seek him. This is
the most fearful thing: when the gospel is gone, seeking follows; and
when the present dear teachers and world are gone, pastors will come who
will afflict them a hundred times more, whom they will obey and follow
even with great works and expense, but it will be in vain.

Now they will not have their blessedness and life in vain, since the Son
of God says, \"It cost me my own body, life, blood and death; if you do
not want me to buy you with my death and bloodshed, go and buy the devil
for a hundred thousand guilders, so that he may preach. Because thou
wilt not have life given thee in vain, go and buy death; and whosoever
will not inherit heaven by me, let him obtain and have hell with hellish
fire and great torment by money. That is right then. How can God do
otherwise? They have wept and lamented; their lamenting and weeping may
be over; always go to the devil. That is to say, to prepare many ways,
and to do many works, to handle great works, which shall help you to
eternal life, and that you may seek me; but it will come to nothing. And
speaks on it:

**You will die in your sins.**

\(116\) Ye shall die in your sins, and must die: it is an abomination
that many seek, and find ways of life, and die. For here it is foretold,
that he saith, Ye shall abide in your sins, and die, and not find me. If
there remain not

180 Eri. is, \[so-WL. Sermon on John 8:20-23. W. vn, 24M-24S2. 181

Christ\'s word, but it is taken away, then great holiness will begin,
and such works will be done, which have a semblance of holiness and
delicious life; but the delicious life will create so much that you will
not want to put away one sin with it, or come out of death, but will be
deeper in death and be. You may well believe this, and so take it for
that. It is the truth.

The Jews and the Turks say: Do you think that God is such a cruel tyrant
that he should push such a bunch of people away from him and let them
die? 1) We seek Christ, want to be saved, are baptized, live chastely,
are blameless according to the outward nature; the nature shall redeem
us from sins, make us blessed, and lead us to heaven. But the text says:
No; and the man, Christ, does not deny. The one man esteems his word so
great that he takes so many people in one mouthful, and does not take
into account so many hundreds of thousands of Turks, Jews, papists, and
red spirits, making himself useless, speaking of them in few words,
saying, \"You are like chaff, but my word is as a rock. So he makes
himself great against so many mighty people who do not recognize him.
For the word is mighty and powerful; he that will not believe it may
know how true it is, what I say.

118\. He that will not know Christ, let him go; he \[Christ\] also shall
say one day, Thou also thinkest that the world and the spirits of the
wicked are greater than my word; but I say no to this. This is hopefully
preached, that he says, \"I go away, and ye shall seek me, but shall not
find me, and shall die in your sins.\" These are simple words, but they
apply to the world past, present, and future, that it is all in the
word, \"Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me, and shall die in your
sins\"; there are great, excellent, and many people from the world\'s
beginning beaten to it. It is spoken lightly, and they are esteemed as a
speck is against a great fire, and as a droplet is against the sea, or
as a penny is against the earth.

1\) Added by us.

I want to be a small stick against the sun or against a big mountain.

\(119\) But the world turneth back, and thinketh, Who art thou, Christ?
thou art a little speck or a little rod; but we Jews are a great nation.
The whole tribe of the Gentiles, the Turks and the Jews, should not the
multitude be as much as the Christians? Shall we not be as much as thou
Christ that preachest? He who believes has it; he who does not believe
will know it; item, he who believes in Christ will have eternal life.
For if otherwise Christ is gone, it is determined that there is only
judgment. Now, apart from faith in Christ, great services, great
endowments, and great works take place; many more excellent, learned men
become monks, and greater things are accomplished in them that fall away
from Christ than Christians themselves do; so that they will seek the
man, Christ, but will not find him apart from faith, but will remain in
judgment, and the least sin, or a vain word, cannot blot out.

This is what Christ says here, that not one sin, yours or another\'s,
shall reconcile them, but they shall die in their sins, and not escape
eternal death and destruction. Who has been allowed to preach this in
the papacy and say that a Carthusian cannot make atonement for sin with
his great works? Yes, they not only sold their works, but also did more,
and shared their other works with others. But Christ here abolishes all
these brotherhoods, and says that they cannot and shall not make
reconciliation for one sin, yours or another\'s, nor save for a moment
from death, but all shall be condemned.

This is a twofold punishment, and it is right that one should be
tortured and tormented here on earth with hard and yet futile holiness,
so that the devil\'s martyrs torture themselves with it, and then have
to be the devil\'s for eternity. For we will not accept the Lord Christ
with thanksgiving and a glad heart, so that we may live peacefully and
be holy and blessed: so then we have trouble with the holy life, so that
we torture ourselves to death, when otherwise we could walk along in
peace, so that each one in his own position does what he has to do.

182 Erl. 48, gss-g-4. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
24W-24W, 183

But it does not help, and the dove is sung a song, and must then have
the eternal, hellish fire in addition to the physical plague. A monk has
hurt him in the monastery, but when he dies, he is damned here and
there.

**Where I go, you cannot come.**

You will seek me and seek to go where I am going, but you cannot come,
for the door is closed, all you undertake is rejected, your chosen works
are worthless; you may live as holy as you want, but it will not help at
all.

This is a terrible and horrible sermon, but the world has an art for it;
it has put on an adamantine head, and has a fervent and stony heart, and
is blinded and obdurate, and does not hear all this, saying: Where has
Christ gone? Well, he is delivered from this temporal and mortal life,
from death and all misfortunes and concerns, and brought from sin into
righteousness, from hell into heaven, and led from damnation into
eternal life, and brought from all evil into all good, and now sits at
the right hand of his heavenly Father. The Jews will also strive and
want to go there and seek Christ, but they will not be able to get
there. That is too harsh. The pope should banish this gospel of John.
For he cannot suffer it to be said to him, that it is impossible for a
man to attain eternal life by good works, and to enter heaven. But they
do not believe it, but insist on their good works, so that they
themselves not only want to be saved by them, but they also want to have
superior works, which they sell to the world, so that they also become
saved by them.

Against this Christ says not only that it is difficult, but also that it
is impossible. Therefore beware of flesh and blood, of unbelief, and of
the spirits of the wicked; and let every man diligently know Christ, and
hear the preaching of the gospel, and receive Christ. But he sees little
of them doing so; therefore he must have such thunderbolts, that he may
break the hearts, yea, the whole world and people. The Jews had the
temple, and the great God\'s temple.

This was not a joke, and it had a great testimony from the Scriptures.
Therefore, if you hold it against one another that the toil and labor,
since they have served God day and night, and have also studied and
worked themselves to pieces, should not only be in vain, but also be
impossible that one might be saved by it, who would not be frightened by
this? And to whom it has been a serious matter in the ministry, as we
have been in it, it seems strange that all our great work should be in
vain, since we have so run, donated and given, and everything should be
called a lost and impossible thing.

But it is true that one is lost if God has not come to one\'s aid in the
end, and if one has not died believing in Christ. I believe that many
people in the monasteries and elsewhere have believed and taken hold of
Christ, and have come to say: Oh my dear Lord Jesus Christ, you are my
Savior; and have despaired of their holy life and good works; so that
much has been obtained for them. And it was a good way to hold up a
wooden crucifix to the dying, or to put it in their hands, so that they
could remember and be comforted by the suffering and death of Christ;
but the others, who insisted on their good works and were proud, went to
such a heaven where it hisses and burns, because they were drawn away
from Christ, and did not imagine that they should live through his death
and suffering. Then the text became true, that it is not possible for
them to come where he is.

**V.22. Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself?**

To such an earnest sermon belongs such an answer. The whole world,
including heaven and earth, should be terrified, trembling and pitying
at these words, 1) that it is said here that when the Lord Christ is
gone, it is certain that everything else will be lost. Christ is gone,
it is certain that everything else will be lost. At least men,
unreasonable animals and the earth should tremble at this. But they
throw against it the

1\) i.e. earthquake.

184 Erl. 48, 3St-SS7. Sermon on John 8, 20-23. W. VII, 2463-2467. 185

They still open their mouths and mock our Lord Christ in their noses. It
still goes on like this with the dear God to this day: if one still
tells the papists, Jews, Turks and the world, then they whistle at us,
also say, as these do: Where does he want to go? Egg, how scornful and
pointed are these boys at such frightful words, that Christ says, \"Ye
shall die in your sins\"; item, \"Whither I go, ye cannot come.\" O,
they say, who knows where he will go. It is just as if we were to say to
our peasants, \"You should not be so stingy, and so steal;\" that is a
ridiculous sermon to them; or if we were to punish the squires and the
scoundrels, they would throw it all to the winds, just as they do here,
saying, \"Where is he going? does he want to kill himself?

Augustine mocks the Jews and says: \"They have spoken it out of mockery,
they have not spoken it out of seriousness. For it is no art to kill
oneself; the way would be to hit it; and alas! too many hit it. But it
is spoken and answered scornfully and mockingly, and is thus: How far is
it to grace, or where is the way to heaven, where he wants to go? we
also want to come there. So bitterly and poisonously have they mocked
him in his teeth. It belongs to this, that if one preaches most
vehemently and faithfully, Christ with his faithful servants must
neither deserve nor have thanks.

It is the same for us: When we warn the pope and say: Beware, beware, it
will rain dirt, it is ridiculous and mocking to them. If one threatens
the nobility, burghers and peasants with God\'s Zom, they say: Can one
preach nothing else, but of the law? Well, if we wanted to have good
days, we would only preach that all their things were right, they would
gladly listen to us; but if we preach to them about God\'s urging, they
say that they want to be ruled; they insist and defy, they turn a deaf
ear to it. Well, dear brothers and nobles, see who defies and deceives
the others; see what the Turk and the Pabst achieve with his mockery. I
will live to see, or others after me, that the burghers, peasants and
noblemen with their pointed words shall gain that which the

The lace shall be so dull to thee, that neither skin nor hair shall
remain of thee. Let them mock you forever, and say to a rich builder,
prince or pope, \"What is this fool preaching to us? Shall we do what he
wills? We want to get to heaven as easily as he does; we also know the
way to heaven. Yes, on cushions, and since the way is paved with silk,
they want to roll up, yes, a hundred years earlier come to heaven, than
their pastors and preachers. The pope wants to get to heaven before we
do.

But the Jews have learned it; where are they now? Christ tells them:
\"You will die in your sins. They also knew at that time where he was
going, and could answer him pointedly enough, and stick out their
tongues. I mean, the point fei become blunt and broken; for the Jews are
scattered throughout the world, and Jerusalem to ashes and even ruined,
they are the most miserable people in the world. What have the Jews
earned and gained, since they mocked the prophets? But it did not help.
So it is now, it is lost; the harsher one punishes, and more vehement
one preaches and exhorts, the more proud the people become.

I have often thought that I would like to stop preaching, because the
people become harder, more pointed and more poisonous every day, they
think that they want to penetrate and seize them by force, they go, they
are proud and defiant. Now go, you shall meet it. Dear brother, drink so
that you spit, and that your throat cracks, yes, your belly, body and
life crack, you will not deceive Christ. Cato speaks: Non me doctorem,
sed te deceperis ipsum. It applies a good point or redoubt. O it is a
bad thing, they say, where is he going? So they have mocked and jeered
one against another. But Christ is seated at the right hand of his
heavenly Father, and his kingdom endures forever; but they are
destroyed, they have flown away, they have mocked, and can no longer
speak pointed theides.

**V. 23. I am from above.**

It is ridiculously spoken, but answered quite kindly; I could not answer
so amicably. Well, he looks further, to another place, and does not take
on her pointed speeches.

186 **Erl. 48, 327-3L9.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
V4U 2467-2470.** 187°

**The seventh sermon.**

Saturday after the 21st Sunday \[after\] Trinity \[Nov. 4, 1531\]. 1)

132 Our next sermon was how the Lord said to the Jews that he would go
away and they would seek him, but they would not come to where he was
going, and they would answer, \"Will he kill himself? Well, that was a
mocking answer which they gave to such an earnest sermon, when he said,
\"Ye shall seek me, and die in your sins.\" It is easy to say that they
should remain in their sins and in death, and it is simple to look at
it; but it is spoken in such a horrible and frightening way that it
could not be more horrible that one should remain in sins and death.
Item, so one could not answer more ridiculous and scornful, than that
they say, \"Will he kill himself?\" But so it shall be, when one
preaches to the world, warns it, and holds up to it the prophecy of God
that \[it\] will go evil for it, they say: God will protect us from
preaching and forewarning, for there is no need. If one preaches, they
laugh; if one promises, they do not believe and do not care. Christ
could not preach higher here, so they throw it around and say, \"Oh,
there is no sin here, nor death: Will he kill himself? We say and warn,
dear lords, dear people, princes, bishops, believe the gospel, be pious,
our Lord God will strike, and send pestilence or war, also let heretics
and false doctrine come; so they say, Let come who would have money
enough to count; hell is not so hot as you make it. Such an answer has
also been given to the Lord Christ. Whether such an answer also happens
to us is no wonder; it need not hurt. Those who have done this and
mocked the Lord Christ have experienced what they have gained from it,
and those who still mock will also experience it later. But they shall
not believe it, till they know it, and their faith come into their hand,
and they swim in blood: then shall they seek counsel and help, but there
shall be no counsel, it shall not help.

1\) In the original margin.

**You are from below.**

He comforts himself and wants to say: Even if I preach sweet or sour,
sharp or bitter, it is of no use, you do not ask for it. It does not add
up; you are from below, and I come down from God above, and tell you the
truth, but you despise it. Now so be it. You are born evil by nature, so
mock enough, are wantonly even full, whore and bubet, rob and steal; you
shall find it. There will be a reckoning one day, when I and you will
also be there; you are boys, and you will remain so.

\(134\) These words Christ alone saith, and he that is a Christian saith
also thus, I am from above. He who is to preach in the world, and make
others godly, and is persecuted, that he must say: Where shall I go? let
him say, This alone is my defiance and arrogance, that I am sent from
God, item, my ministry also is from God; but ye speak and do no
otherwise, but as ye are born of the earth, where men do not decide
kindly with one another, and Christ and his own also get along here. But
it would be better, and it would also be better, if Christ would present
himself in a friendly way, saying: I am your preacher, you are my
disciples; and that they would say: We want to hear you. But he saith,
We will part one from another: for ye will always pass with your lives
and reason, as ye have it in mind.

So the pope, the monks and bishops also want to pass through, as they
have it in mind, and say: The gospel does not do it. But the Lord Christ
speaks here: Well, you do not want it, and want to remain on earth, yet
you will not be able to overthrow what I preach, I will remain well
before you, me, Christ, and the gospel you shall let remain; let see who
bangs the other. \"Ye are from beneath,\" and I am not of the world, but
from GOD and above. These words separate us finely, as summer and
winter, and gives one short leave to the other. He offers them heaven
and eternal life; if they do not want it, he threatens them with death,
sin and hellish fire.

[188 Erl. 48, 329-332. Sermon on John 8, 24-27. W. vn, 2470-2473.
189]{.underline}

and give it to them. But they answered him so scornfully and pointedly,
gave him such an impolite, poisonous answer, that I myself said: \"Go
on, it\'s all the same to me, let\'s see who it\'s regret, and who
deceives the other; you are of the world, and I am not. It is true that
we will soon see it, and even if it turns out to be true, it will still
be found. So the Lord Christ separates Himself from His supposed
disciples, and from the people, who are then terrified, and says, \"You
are here, and I am here; and when it comes to pass, I have said unto
you, Ye shall die in your sins.\" This is the conclusion of the same
sermon. Now a new sermon begins, that the Lord speaks:

**V. 24. If you do not believe that I am He, you will die in your
sins.**

136 And John the Evangelist says that they have not understood this
word, that he has touched the preaching of the Father. He speaks so
vehemently, so defiantly, that he cannot say it enough, that he says:
\"You must believe that I am from the Father, or you will die. It is a
hopeful word that he says: I am the man, it is all up to me; where I am
not, there is nothing; and you shall know to whom you have thus
ridiculously and mockingly answered and touched. I do not want to die
much, nor to kill, but to be undied. The pointed words annoyed him, and
the Lord Christ was secretly angry, saying, \"Do you want to know who I
am? I am God, and even with one another; do what you will; if you do not
believe that I am God, you are nothing, and must die in your sins. So no
prophet, apostle or evangelist may preach and say, Believe in God, and
believe also in me that I am God; or if you do not, all is lost with
you.

The Jews could say: \"Do you think that there is not another who can
save from death and sin than you, that we should believe in you? do you
think that we must die if we do not believe in you? as if there were no
God besides you. To whom does it belong that people are saved from sins,
death and hell, but to God? And you

saying that you are the same God 2c.? Then saith the Lord Christ, I am
he that am: if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.
Otherwise, if you seek God to and fro, there is no life but with me
alone; therefore, if you do not abide here, you are in death.

This is preached in the most violent way to the pointed, mocking words
they give him in answer, that he says: I will tell you who I am, and
that you must believe in me, or none of you will remain alive forever.
These words they must rub together and eat into themselves, so that he
says: \"If you will not have life from me and be saved from sins through
me, you are dead. Now Christ is God, that is what John preaches about
him, because no other creature can say it. The word is too high, neither
can the angel Gabriel say it, that he may speak: It is I, but must say:
I am sent to you by God. Item, he says: I stand before God and serve Him
\[Luc. 1, 19.\]. But the Lord Christ says: You must not only say that I
am sent, but that I am. What does it mean: I am? That is: I will be, and
I shall be, I am, and it is up to me? Your law, Moses and worship,
Sabbath 2c. is nothing against me; but I am it, it is all in me; I am
not only an apostle, prophet, messenger and emissary; but I am it, the
essence of all things is in me. To these high words belongs faith.

139\. With these words Christ recently refers to Moses, the worship in
the temple, altar, sacrifice, priests, monks, mass, organ and casel, and
whatever holiness and wisdom there may be on earth, and says: The
wisdom, power and authority of the world are nothing; and though we have
all the things that were to be had in Jerusalem in the city and in the
temple, when men lived according to the law of Moses, or that men do
what the world can do with all its powers, yet all these things are
nothing; they are all of the devil and of death; there is no life,
righteousness or salvation to be obtained, except by me. That means to
throw away in a moment everything that means: He who does not believe in
me, that I am he; for with me it is written-.

190 Erl. \"s, SSL-SS4. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2473-247S. 191

life and death, sin and righteousness, God and devil, heaven and hell.
With this he throws everything under Christ, and separates from each
other what is of holiness and wisdom in this life, from the Lord Christ,
and says: We must have something else than the law of Moses and our good
works, and says: \"I am it. But the Jews are truly displeased that he
exalts himself so excellently. Before he scornfully rejected them; but
now he saith, It is all in me. And \[there\] shall be no God, and
nothing else shall help me \[i.e., a man\] in the world, unless I
believe in him. Then they say: Will\"?

**V. 25. Who are you?**

\(140\) They are very vexed that no God should help where He is not, he
\[i.e., this God\] being called what he wills; and they answer again,
\"Who then art thou?\" It is spoken very pointedly, as if they were
speaking: Awe yes, it should be true? Who are you, dear Squire JEsus?
Where do you come from? Are you not from Nazareth? born of Mary and
Joseph. A 1) holy corpse! What a high man you are! Tell us, if you only
say that you are, you are, then we will know that you are.

But the Lord Christ sums it up, and gives them a secret, hidden answer.
And it is also a right answer to them: for they did not know at that
time that he speaks of God the Father; he preaches that he is truly God,
and says: \"It seems ridiculous to you that I should say who I am; as
follows:

**And JEsus said, First of all he that I speak with you.**

They should know that he is from the Father and is truly God; so he
says, \"Do you ask who I am? I say unto you, First of all, he that
talketh with you.\" He will not do them the honor of saying who he is.
For neither shall it be said to the Jews, nor to the sharp-witted, when
they try to comprehend, to imagine, to understand, and to know God, and
what God is, with their subtle thoughts; there shall be nothing.

1\) Shouldn\'t it perhaps read \"egg\"?

He does not want to be known by reason, but only by his word. No one
should have anything to do with our Lord God by mere thoughts, for that
is certainly the devil, and so are all the spirits of the wicked. A
Carthusian paints God off him, whom he loves in his hairy garment; a
barefoot man thinks that he loves his rope. But you will not notice God
there. For, as he saith here, If thou wilt know who he is, I have said,
I am the first that speaketh unto you. But so you will not seize me, I
will be uncaptured.

143\. He saith, \"I am first of all he that speaketh unto you.\" These
words also have an em- pliasin: I am not only your Creator, but also
your preacher; ye shall be satisfied that I am your preacher; I am come
and sent unto you according to the promises in the prophets, to preach
unto you; the same am I. Now if ye will hearken unto my preaching, and
hear me, ye shall know who I am: but if ye will not hear me, ye shall
not know; if ye have heard me, ye have known me. But they say, Where is
your father? and who are you? He will not let them flutter with their
thoughts apart from the divine word, but they must first hear him and
grasp his word; for apart from and without the word they shall know
nothing, and shall not know the Father. He says: It is I, it is all up
to me, you will not know God and the Father, nor will you have them,
unless you hear my word.

\(144\) Therefore he says, \"I urge you to stay with the word; if you
fall away from the word, the devil will come and make such beautiful,
lovely ways and thoughts as the Anabaptists and all the enthusiasts
have. But it is vain error and blindness. For they seize and take hold
of our Lord God with their conceit and thoughts. It is said, \"You shall
know nothing of God, nor know Him, unless you first hear this man and
accept his preaching; then you will learn finely by this man\'s word
that God the Father sent His Son, Jesus Christ, into the world, who died
for you. He therefore that is received into the word, and abideth in the
word, is he-

192 **Erl. \"s, SS4-3SS. Sermon on John 8:24-27. W. VII, 247S-L47S.**
193

and know Christ rightly; but he who falls from the word is lost.
Recently he will say this much: You shall not know who I am, unless it
is a matter that you recognize me for your preacher; for I am your
preacher. I have the command and the office to preach unto you. I have
said unto you, If ye hear me not, ye shall die in your sins: but if ye
believe on me, ye shall have eternal life. Keep to these words, let what
I tell you be true; then you will know who I am when you grasp my words
and believe what I tell you, that I am your preacher; then the Holy
Spirit will come through my words and teach you. Otherwise you will mock
me and say: Grace Jesus, 1) dear Jesus, have mercy on us! we want to
meet and find God without you. But he wants to say: You will be missing.
That is, I am who I am, and you will die in your sins where you do not
believe in me. Enough has been said that you know who I am. Now that you
continue to ask who I am, I say, I am your preacher. If you will not
hear me, let it be; I must be heard, or you are of the devil.

So we preachers can also say. Not that we speak: It is I; but to say who
Christ is, and how our preaching is to be believed. If any man will not
do this, let him not do it. And say further, If ye believe not what we
preach unto you, ye shall die in your sins. No one believes in me, but
in Christ, whom we preach, one must believe. Therefore we can also
endure the defiance and anger, and say, \"You who are so pointed,
\[hear,\] we are preachers, and preach from him who says, \'It is I.\' I
cannot say of myself, If ye believe not on me, ye shall die: but I
preach of him that said thus unto the Jews; me ye shall not hear, nor
know. If ye will not hear him, depart.

**V. 26. I have much to say and judge about you, but he who sent me is
true.**

1\) \"Grace\" here stands for: gracious, as in \"grace junker\".

146\. He comforts himself against this great wickedness, saying, I have
much to say, to preach, and to judge of you, and must preach many a
great sermon, and speak of great things, and judge. It is a secret
answer, which he gives to the reproaches, that he may comfort himself of
his office; as if I said, Christ is sent, and a preacher cometh among a
great people, which hath a great privilege; which hath God renowned in
the holy scriptures, and a divine service established by Moses and the
prophets, confirmed also by miracles; and yet he will overthrow all
these things. As if he were saying, \"How will I destroy you? I will
destroy and overthrow everything; I have power to overthrow and cast
away everything; I will overthrow many things, cause displeasure, and
put away not only the doves and the merchants before the church, but
also the temple, sacrifices, sanctuary, priests, kings, princes, and
even Moses himself, and all that you have, and judge and condemn them.

147 So the Lord Christ makes them the more angry with their mocking,
that they may become the more thirsty and defiant, saying, \"I will
preach that neither Jerusalem, nor some wall, nor one stone upon
another, nor some sticks, shall remain anything in all. So I will preach
with you scoffers, that my preaching shall be called much and great
things done. And I also think that he has done it: he has preached
himself through his apostles that not one stone, not one hair, not one
little stick remains of the city of Jerusalem, of the priesthood, of the
kings, of the kingdom, of the service, of the temple and of the people.
Although this service was gloriously confirmed, and God gave great
people to it, as Eliam, Jeremiah, Isaiah and other prophets more, and
pardoned them with great miracles, that this people only had a very
great advantage, and they also praised it highly, and the Jews boasted
about it very much, it has nevertheless decayed. Therefore Christ says:
\"I will preach in such a way that these pieces will not remain.

So I say also to the pope: O what have I still to preach and to speak,
that the pope with his triple crown, and the cardinals and bishops,
priests and monks,

[194 Eri. 48, \[ss-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2478-2481. 195]{.underline}

so follow him, with the princes, Mainz, Heinz, Duke Georgen, everything
should go down to the devil in the abyss of hell. I will not only preach
this and stick to the word, but I will also judge. What do I ask for
your contempt and mockery? Nevertheless, you shall not shut my mouth; it
shall not remain as you have it in mind, but you shall fail and fall to
the ground. I will not, saith the Lord Christ, turn away from the fact
that the temple, the prophets, and the government are at Jerusalem, and
that ye therefore have a goodly kingdom; but if ye believe not, then
will I preach of you, judge, and be judged, that your glory, honor, and
service shall all be overthrown.

They could not believe this, it was impossible for them. So it still
goes on; only that Christ has an advantage, and says, \"It is I.\" We do
not say the same, as he speaks; but we only say: We are your preachers,
therefore your mass, indulgences, purgatory, and the other charms of the
pope shall all perish. That is what we say, that is what we judge, but
they mock us. Go ahead, laugh freely; Christ answers:

**He who sent me is true, and what I have heard from him I speak before
the world.**

It had no appearance and was ridiculous that poor Jesus submitted to
such preaching. As it is still ridiculous to this day that such great
kings, the Turk and so many learned people should humble themselves
against the Gospel and fall for the word of God; it is mocking. But it
is said, \"He that sent me is true.\" That is the seal, so Christ
presses on it and comforts himself with it. So we can also say, \"Well,
dear pope, bishops, citizens and peasants, we have preached to you and
judged you, we have much to say about you, let us not afflict you in
vain; what does it matter? it is the truth, it shall nevertheless be
done, and no one will be able to prevent it. For he that sent me, the
Father, he hath spoken it, he hath given me his word; I will see whether
he that is above shall become a liar against you. I take comfort in
this.

and insist upon it; if ye be angry, and despise the preaching as ye
will, mock, and let us mourn: but if ye give no heed, it shall come to
pass, though it were a sorrow to you all: I will see whether he that
sent me will become a liar, or ye.

151\. So I also say. Be it angry pope, bishop or emperor, let us see
what they will do; what can they do? Let us see if they will make a liar
of him who sent us. But let him remain to me; ye are burghers or
peasants, yea, princes and ruffians in all the devils\' names. And say,
He that will not laugh, let him laugh; let him see, he that sent us, the
Father, is true. We say, there is no harm, mock, smile, despise, scoff,
make yourselves useless enough; you will not make God a liar. The time
will come when you will laugh no more; we know that it is God\'s word.
It is shameful for us, we have to suffer their mocking, smiling and
scoffing. When someone sees this, he would say, \"Let the devil preach,
I will let the preaching have heartache; but we gain nothing from it,
because they only mock us, and leave a forum against it. If one is very
proud, they will strike a cliff against it. But say thou: Dear pabst and
scornful mocker, he that sent me is no liar; what matter, it shall come
into thy hand what we say! For he that gave us the word, and besouled
us, is true. But there they will not inquire until GOD comes, and they
lie over a heap. Then they will cry out; but GOD will say, I said this
before and warned, but it did not help \[Proverbs 1:28\]. May God
protect us, we pray, so that we do not become such mockers and have to
experience God\'s wrath.

Now, when we preach God\'s word, and God comforts us, He is despised,
but they will know it too. And I can say: I came in God\'s name and
comforted you, but you despised it, so now you may suffer in the
devil\'s name. He will not lie, I know him so well; so he will not let
my word and sermon become lies. He is faithful, honest and true.

196 **Erl. 4\", S3g-Sti. Sermon on John 8:24-27. W. VII, 2481-2483.**
197

What he has in mind he will do, and no one will look at it, I know.
Because he hath called me to preach, he will not let me be put to shame:
it is his word, and he hath sent me; he will not let me be a liar, or
else I should be left in heaven: but now he hath commanded me his word,
and hath sent me; therefore he will keep his word, and will do according
to the word.

**V. 27. But they did not hear that he told them about the Father.**

They were mad and foolish, they hear that he is truly the Son of God,
sent by the Father as a man to preach to them; but what he preaches and
says, that the Son is sent by the Father, they have not understood, it
is unacceptable to them, they despise it. So Christ the Lord, and John
the Evangelist also, comfort themselves that they have not understood.

So, even though I preach and shout, I must also ultimately conclude,
\"They do not hear,\" and ask nothing about it. But shall one stop
preaching for that reason? No, let them go and say, \"If you will make
God a liar, and overthrow the word of God, and snatch away Christ, I
will gladly be overthrown with him, and afterward fall and be lost. I
have been baptized into Christ and called to the gospel through him; if
the bishops are now so strong that they tear Christ away and he must
fall, then I will gladly fall with Christ into the abyss of hell and
perish with him, and the devil may remain on earth. We will gladly go
with him \[Christ\], even if he leads to hell. But if Christ go to
heaven, we will go with him: and the Father hath not said that he should
go into the pit of hell: but Christ saith, If ye believe not that I am
the Lord which sit in heaven, ye shall all die and fall. Then let us see
if they will overthrow him there; but he will remain there, for the
Father is true. So let us not be vexed and offended, because now they
put their heads together, and the whole world rages against us; it is
harmful.

not. Defy one another until judgment comes. It is a candelabra of beer,
it shall come to pass, and eternal life shall be given to the
Christians, as the Father has promised them, and eternal death and
damnation shall come to the wicked at home, as they have been
threatened. Now the world would gladly make this word false, so that
Christ would have to become a liar; but they will not be able to do it.
Let this be done; let him who does not want to accept it, let him do so.
It is said: \"They heard nothing of all this.

**The eighth sermon.**

Saturday after the 22nd (or 23rd) Sunday after Trinity \[Nov. 11 (or
18), 1531\]. 1)

155\. we have heard how the Lord said to the Jews \[vv. 26, 27\], \"I
have many things to say and to judge concerning you; but he that sent me
is true. And they heard it not that he told them of the\^ Father.\" And
what this text intends has also been acted, namely, that he prophesies
and reaches in, that he wants to push all Judaism and worship to the
ground, that he has much to judge, and will have to do much differently,
to order and confirm. This applies to the whole worship and kingdom of
the Jews. But it is a great thing that a single person should not be
afraid to overthrow such great, excellent things, which had stood for so
long, and were instituted by God Himself; for Moses had instituted the
priestly office, and the kingdom, by God\'s command. But Christ speaks
here: If they will not believe in him, he will strike them with his
fists, and even drive them into their boots, and knock everything to the
ground.

For the judgment must go: He that believeth not in me is damned and
lost, as high as he will. Therefore let Moses and the prophets, and
other your teachers and masters go, otherwise I will let many a judgment
go over you 2c. Now, it is a great thing for which a single person is a
terror and a fear.

1\) In the original in the margin, but there the \"29th\" Sunday after
Trinity, which cannot exist. The previous sermon was preached on
November 4, the following one on Nov. 25, from which our time
determination results.

198 Erl. 4S, S4I-S44. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2483-2488. 199

horror should have. For Christ comforts himself with this and says:
Nevertheless it must be true and happen, and I must cause this noise and
destruction, because \"the Father who sent me is true\", my Father will
not lie; because what I speak, I do not speak from myself; the Father
has told me, therefore I also speak thus. We can also say the same thing
when everything wants to become dull and despondent, that we say, \"It
is God\'s word that what will not stand should fall, and what will not
stay should always go; there is nothing to it. It is a great thing that
for the sake of the young man this Jewish kingdom and the service of
God, which was so wonderfully established and ordered, should fall to
the ground. St. Paul was also deeply concerned about the downfall of the
Jewish people, and yet he had to say, as the Lord Christ says here:
\"The word is true, or all things must come to ruin; for he who sent me
and commanded me to preach will not lie.

157 Thus, he even speaks of the great distress and terror, yes, of the
great change of the kingdom and of the Jewish people. It is very
frightening; but it cannot be otherwise, that has recently been decided.
If one does not believe, he will be lost; for, says the Lord Christ, he
who sent me, and of whom I have heard, and who also told me to preach,
does not deny. So now also they say, If the pope fall, Germany shall
perish, go to ruins and fail; what can I do about it? I cannot preserve
it; what is the fault? Well, they say, if Luther had not come and had
not preached, the papacy would still be standing on good legs, and there
would be good peace. I can\'t help that. They also said to Rome: Because
St. Peter and Paul have come to this city, everything goes to ruin;
otherwise, when we worshipped the idols before, we were fine. This cry
is still going on, so that people say: If the gospel had not been
preached, it would never have happened like this, but everything would
have remained peaceful. Nay, journeyman, it shall be better still, for
Christ saith, I have yet more to speak and to judge. The cause is that
you should let this preaching go, or you should not

keep one stick, neither shall one stone be left upon another. And say,
This word have I not devised; it is the Father\'s word: if ye will not
believe it, and suffer the word, but continue in your own nature, and
carry it away, I will see whether the word of God shall perish, or
whether ye shall win, or whether God shall win: nevertheless I must
preach it, and not hold my peace; and I must run and tread the barriers,
and watch you both. So they ran against each other.

**V. 28. Then Jesus said to them: When ye shall have lifted up the Son
of man, then shall ye know that I am he.**

This sermon is directed, that he saith unto them, If ye believe not on
me, ye shall perish, and die in sins: it is determined. And I will make
the judgment more broad, saith he, and will do so unto you, and act so
much, that ye shall see that it is I; I will judge you, and have
pronounced a great true judgment upon you. But ye shall not know me; ye
must first exalt me, that is, hang me on the gallows, and crucify me,
that is, exalt me; upon the cross ye shall smite me, and see that I am
another man than he that walketh upon the earth.

They understood this well, for otherwise the Lord also said above:
\"When you exalt the Son of Man, then I will draw all after me \[John
3:14, 12:32\]. They have heard that Christ should abide forever, and yet
be strangled in the air on the wood; and here he says, \"If the Son of
man be lifted up, ye shall know that it is I.\" This is strangely
spoken; he threatened them that he would tear them apart, and if they
did not believe in him, they would die in their sins; but now he says,
you will not know me, because I was lifted up, died and perished before.
As if he should say that by his death he should overcome all things,
that is, the devil, sin and death, and also all righteousness, wisdom,
power and all good things; item, all evil on earth should be put under
his feet, and he should become a Lord over it. And therefore the Holy
Spirit could not be given

200 **Eri. 4s, 344-34\". Sermon on John 8, 28. w. vn, 2488\^2439.** 201

He would have overcome it in his own body, and before that he would have
achieved victory. For on the cross the highest power, the greatest
wisdom, holiness, riches and strength, indeed everything that was high
in the world, was laid against him. Item, our own sin, the law, death,
the devil, Moses with all his people, everything rebels against the man,
everything good and evil is laid against him, as sin, death, the devil
and hell; and these must first be drowned in his blood, caught and
overcome. Death attacked him, sin also attacked him as the worst
offender on earth; but death could not devour him, for he rose again
from the dead. Sin also seized him, but it could not overcome him. So
all the great lords and prelates set themselves against him, but they
could not obtain \[victory against\] him; he rose again from the dead on
the third day. Therefore saith the Lord Christ, Ye believe not now, but
I must shortly come into my kingdom, and first enter into my government.
I am but a preacher, a single man, and am in the preaching ministry; but
when I have done this, that I am come out of the preaching ministry, and
am delivered from the service which I have had to perform and conduct in
this flesh and blood, then afterward ye shall hear me from heaven with
miraculous signs, and see me, and know that I am the man.

\(160\) Otherwise it is so in the world, that he who dislikes and
despises what is small, dislikes what is great. They would not believe
in Christ when he performed great miraculous signs; that was the wisdom
of God; so they had to believe in him when he was crucified. They did
not want to believe, since he was presented to them in the highest
wisdom; afterwards they must accept him, since he was presented to them
in the highest foolishness. God becomes even foolish and says: Now
believe in him. At first Christ let himself be seen as a preacher, he
went about simple-mindedly, and proved himself with great miracles; but
they would not have him; after that they had to believe in Christ
crucified.

161 Thus the papists did not want John Hus; now they hear something
else. Item, now they do not want to suffer a hundred books, so

we write, who are full of wisdom and godliness; afterwards they will
gladly want to read a sheet full, or that they might have a letter from
our writings, and will not get it. Therefore he says, \"Nothing will
come of it while I am here; I must pass through and overcome everything,
and become the Lord of them all. When I come through death into my
kingdom, I will make it known that I am the Lord, and I will send the
Holy Spirit, and strengthen the church, and perform miraculous signs;
and then I shall be known and preached in all the world; and ye shall
not hinder it. And if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall perish and
die in your sins.

He does not say this of his humanity, but indicates that he is also
truly God, as John the Evangelist indicates, saying: \"They did not
understand him to speak of the Father, that is, that he was God and sent
by the Father. 2c. But I have often said that when Christ says that they
cannot live, but must all die, who do not believe in him, that good heed
should be paid to this, because it is indicated that he is God. For it
would be impossible for him not to be God, because the work shows it;
the work praises the Master. For to save from death is not the work of
man, nor the work of some angel, nor the work of any creature, but the
work of the Creator alone, who out of nothing makes everything, and out
of death makes life, and for sin righteousness, and out of hell makes
heaven. Therefore, when he teaches that they must believe in him, accept
him to be him, if they want to be preserved or all die, he is certainly
God; otherwise it would be a lie, and Moses might well say: You must
believe that I am he; believe in me that I am he, or you will die. But
Moses nor any prophet says it, but St. Paul says: I am an apostle and I
am sent. In contrast, Christ speaks here: Believe not only that I am
sent from the Father, but that I myself am sent. Both words indicate it:
It is I myself in whom you must believe, or you will die; I am a higher
person, I am something more than that I am sent to you in human form.

202 Erl. 48, 34V-349. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2489-2491. 203

I am not yet in the flesh, since you can hear and see me, but I am
something more, namely also God. This will not yet come in, you will not
yet know it, until I have established it, and until I will give the Holy
Spirit; you do not yet understand it, because I have not yet taken my
kingdom.

But such a sermon does not enter into reason; the Holy Spirit must come,
and he must say, This is Christ; for the Holy Spirit testifies of Christ
that he is a true God and a natural man; and not only must the preachers
testify it, but he must also write it in the hearts of the hearers. For
if reason should get into it, it says: It is nothing that he who is born
of the Virgin Mary should be a god, but he is only a bad man. It is
ridiculous to her. Although the Turks preach Christ very highly, they do
not believe that he is God. The papists also praise him with their
mouths, but it is nothing. For no one can grasp this article, which
says: \"Will you not know that I am He?\" 2c., unless Christ has first
defeated, cut off and subdued the devil, death and the wisdom of the
world. And where in a man worldly wisdom and holiness have not first
been brought low and suppressed, it is not heard, nor is he recognized.
Christ did it once on the cross, but still daily he makes reason fall by
the Holy Spirit and the Word. For if I think about him otherwise, and
want to understand with my reason that God is born of a woman, man, I
soon become a Turk, my faith disappears, and becomes water under my
hands; for I think that there is only one God; if I want to make many
gods, and God should die, it is not suitable.

164 Therefore it is necessary first of all that he be exalted, that he
subdue and put to death sin and death and the devil with all his wisdom,
and give us the Holy Spirit, who makes people believe in the word
preached by the apostles; this same Holy Spirit teaches them and tells
them, so that they may know that I have it; that is, it is such a
doctrine that cannot be invented nor grasped by reason, otherwise the
Romans and the Apostles would have it.

The Greeks also found it; yes, the papists would also have invented it,
but they are hostile to this teaching and consider it a mockery and
foolishness. But Christ says: God, \"who sent me,\" has given me the
ministry of preaching, and I am he myself; reason does not understand
it, but the Holy Spirit belongs to it.

**Then you will know that it is I 2c.**

It was difficult for them to believe, and even more frightening to
think, that for the sake of one man the Jewish kingdom and worship
should fall and be destroyed. St. Paul works in this, that he sweats, in
his epistles, before he takes this from the Jews. For they had the
promise that they were God\'s people, and children of the prophets, it
was all especially God\'s that they had. And now all this is to be taken
from them and destroyed, and they are to be punished with lies, but
preach against it that the gospel alone is true. There have been few of
you who have believed it, but have said, Jesus to, apostles to. Dearly
beloved, ye are yet Gentiles, but we are God\'s people, and have the
worship of God; ye have idols, we have the right worship of God; ye have
sects and the poets, but we have the prophets, Moses, the temple, the
holy city Jerusalem, the holy land, and are God\'s people, Abraham\'s
flower 2c. Do you think that our Lord God will overthrow the kingdom and
pull you Gentiles out, or the apostles and pull you loose fishermen out?
You want to be everything, and we are to be nothing; that is also what
he is talking about; it is not believable and to be assumed that such a
thing should be God\'s word or happen from God.

166 So does the pope, and the one from Mainz now: Should we therefore go
in, and let all their things be right? We sit in God\'s stead, in the
apostles\' chairs; we have baptism, mass, the fathers, concilia, the
power of the keys, the teachers of the church. You fool (they say), do
you think that all this has to fail, and this is started by little
people, by loose fishermen, and they should be believed? Then the
papists truly stand up and rely on it like a goat on its horns; then
they leave

204 **Erl. \"8, s4g-ssi. Sermon on John 8, 28. w. vu, 2191-2491.** 205

and say, Ecclesia, ecclesia dixit; who will tear this? It is impossible
that anyone should tear this apart. But the Jews stood on it much more
firmly, and were much more wicked. He said he would tear them asunder,
judge and condemn them, so they say, Let us be undivided and undamned,
for we are God\'s people, Abraham\'s seed, and we have the prophets and
the holy scriptures. So also when we say: You popes, bishops, beware; if
your gospel is not right, you will be scattered and torn. Yes, he says,
spare us, we are popes, bishops, have the apostles\' office, and are the
Christian church. When they have beheaded us and shed our blood, let
them see that what we have said is true and the word of God. Just as the
Jews also saw that it was true when Christ was crucified. For he saith,
Then shall ye know it: for now think ye that I speak it out of my own
head, and look upon me as a man that speaketh and keepeth it thus unto
you to your vexation. But when the Holy Spirit comes, and you lie in
ashes, you will say, \"We thought it was a dream; but now you see and
understand that it is not a fiction or a lie, but it was God\'s word,
and as he said, so it goes.

This is now our consolation; we also speak in the name of God: He who
will not believe, let him leave it; he who follows, let him follow; I am
excused; if it comes to pass, as we have now preached, then remember us,
that we have spoken true. If the pope will bring the divine word and the
church to the ground, then God has not spoken it, and we have lied. But
if the gospel is true, and God has spoken through us, let them know it.
Therefore we shall be satisfied; for there is no doubt about it, that
two things they must try, that either what we have said will come true,
and that God\'s word, which we have preached, will remain forever, or we
will lie; they must perish, or we will be liars. And after our death
they will sing thus: Now we know that it was not the word of man, but of
God.

Word, and that God has said it. For I do nothing of myself, says the
Lord Christ here, but as the Father has taught me; and you will know
that I have not spoken it of myself. Well then, we must leave it at
that; we cannot go any further, we have tried enough, and so much has
been written and preached to them, nothing has been slackened in
pleading and begging; so much blood has been shed, and our teaching
confirmed with much suffering; but they will not stop nor believe it
until they learn it. Now also they shall know at last, that I do not do
the work for myself. This is what he says: You will see.

It is a hopeful, proud and arrogant sermon that Christ should stand out
and say that he is the one; and if anyone does not believe that he is
the one, all should be lost, regardless of whether it was instituted by
God. For God will have me, Christ, alone, in whom to believe; only do
not resist, it will not do. So now it is also proudly preached that a
Christian must believe in Christ alone if he wants to be saved, and we
stand up and say to the pope, bishops and princes: Believe in the
preaching of the Gospel, or you are eternally lost and shall all perish.
It is proudly preached that I say: If you, King of Bohemia or King of
France, do not believe that I am, then be as stiff and proud as you
want, and I will condemn you, and you will find out that this word is
true, and you will lose everything you have. It means that either you
believe with good, because then the Holy Spirit tells you and teaches
you, or you must experience it with evil and lose everything.

Our Lord God does not care that you say you sit in the apostles\'
chairs, or even in the Christian church, but that they hear the Son and
believe in him, as it says in the other Psalm, v. 4 ff. For if they do
not honor the Son and believe in him, because he speaks what is
commanded and commanded by God, he will greet them once so that they
will say, \"We did not mean it to be true. \"He shall smite them in his
wrath with an iron

206 **Erl. 48, W1-WS.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VII, 2494-2497.** 207

Scepter like pots smash.\" For it is nothing to him that one is a
prince, emperor, king, pope or bishop. If they do not believe Christ, he
will tear the pope and the bishops apart.

God help us that we may be sure that it is the truth when it comes to
the meeting, since it cannot be otherwise, that Germany will fall into
one another like Jerusalem, that we then hold fast by the Holy Spirit,
which He will also give us, as He gave it to the apostles, since
Jerusalem has fallen and been destroyed. But our Germans do not want to
listen now. But will the popes, bishops, princes and emperors once be
knocked on the mouth (as it also happened to Jerusalem), that they
remember it and say: It has been said to us sufficiently before. For God
will have decided it this way: either he loved the Son and believed in
him, or he died in sins and became corrupt. We must therefore be certain
of this, and say: \"I did not speak, dream or do this of myself, but I
heard it from the Father. Now if there is war, destruction, devastation
and evil, it is their own fault, for we told them beforehand to believe
in the Son and accept his word or perish. But after that they say that
the guilt is ours and of the gospel, and so they lay the guilt on us. So
the Jews also laid it on the apostles. But they will one day learn what
we told them before, saying \[Ps. 2:11, 12\]: Honor the Son, let his
gospel be preached to you, and do not rely on your good works, or you
will perish.

Whether it be a grievous affliction that such a noise should arise and
be made for the sake of the gospel, how shall it be done? It also hurt
Paul and the Lord Christ that he wept over it when he looked at
Jerusalem; but he says: \"The fault is not mine, but yours; you did not
want to recognize the time of your visitation \[Luc. 19, 41. ff\]. Yes,
they say, if Christ had not come and preached thus, Jerusalem would not
have been destroyed. I know that well. So now they also say, \"If I had
not taught, the plague would have remained.

outside. Item, if you teach as the pope would have it, the devil would
be silent, would not rage and would not rage so, but faith would be
lost; then you would have peace, and the devil would laugh when you
preach what the pope likes to hear.

But Christ wants to be preached in such a way that people believe in
him. If one teaches then, bloodshed and murder come. Do they say: If
anyone says, \"What is it to you?\" and asks me to be silent, say, \"I
will not; we preach to you about God\'s grace and good deeds; if you do
not want the word of our Lord God, and resist it, our Lord God will
strike you on the head, and you will have deserved it. The Jews and
Romans have well deserved the punishment; none has yet remained, they
have all been beaten who have condemned this Son. For God wants us to
believe in Christ, that is His command, and we must act in accordance
with it, so that what Christ does and teaches may be observed and
followed, or if we do not believe in Him, then we must find out about it
and fall to the ground.

**The ninth sermon.**

Saturday after the 24th Sunday \[nachi Trinitatis \[November 25, 1531\].
1

By this text, that the Lord Christ said to the Jews, \"When ye shall
have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that it is I,\" the
Lord means to say that nothing would come of it, because he would preach
in the flesh, and stand and walk before the eyes and noses; but it must
come to pass that he should be crucified first, and then they would know
who he was, though they were torn asunder at it. But it is not otherwise
in the world: if the good is there, one does not respect it, but if it
is gone, one seeks it: Minuit praesentia famam, et vilescunt quotidiana.
So Christ also says: \"I see that my preaching is of no value while I am
alive, I am of no use; therefore it is best that I should be crucified.
When I am gone, then you will look for me, and then you will know that
nothing has been done by me, but I preach as I was told by the

1\) In the original margin.

208 **Erl. ts, \[ss-sss. Sermon on John 8:28. w. vn, 2497-2499.** 209

Father commanded and taught me, for he who sent me is with me.

According to reason it is true that God is the greatest fool of all
fools, that he does his work with the word and with preaching, and that
he refrains from leading the people with preaching, for reason is
immediately opposed to the word and to preaching. If only they felt it,
they would be different; if only he would strike as the world does. But
because the fist is not there, the tongue will do nothing. Now they mock
him, because he will do it with his tongue; therefore it serves him
right: the world quickly throws in its fists and steps in with its feet.
Now Christ wants to make men godly, preaches well, and uses his tongue,
but he does nothing; and it serves him right, why does he not attack it
differently? If I were our Lord God, I would do it with my fist. I would
advise him to throw his hand in; although he does it sometimes,
especially with tyrants. He does not need to be taught or mastered, but
now he has sent Christ and wants him to preach, warn, and tell them what
to do or not to do; if not, he will find counsel. Yes, he is wiser than
I. Otherwise, if I had been present and had given him advice, I would
have wiped it with my fist and force and would have said, \"What is the
use of your preaching? The more you say, the less happens; they only
laugh and mock at you. But if you struck them with your fist, they would
feel it.

But he does not follow the advice and says, \"I will take hold of it
with my fist, it should be unjoking, I cannot do as the mad reason does,
which throws in quickly, I do not want to take them by surprise or
hurry; but he preaches to them, warns them, and lets them know
beforehand. He knows well that he has a strong, heavy hand, and that his
arm has such strength and power that he soon throws down a kingdom;
therefore he will not use his power, but first preaches and says,
\"Convert, hear me. But when he speaks and it does not come to us, his
tongue and word are despised, as reason despises everything, then he has

He has two rights to punish us; one is that he strikes with his fist;
the other is that he warned us with the word beforehand, and we did not
take it seriously.

This is one reason why he magnifies his preaching so much; but it will
not help until the Lord Christ is crucified, then the Jews will be in a
heap. So we also know that Christ will strike in three, throwing pope
and bishops over one heap; but while we are preaching now, it is
ridiculous. If we say: You are stingy, unchaste; ei, what a ridiculous
thing it is. The words do nothing to me, they say; that is why I do not
see the fist or a thunderclap, but only hear the bad words, which do
nothing to me for a long time. But God lets the words precede, after
which he also says: \"Then you will know that I do nothing of myself\"
2c.

177 This is the other thing he says: You will know that it is not I, but
God who has preached and done these things, and that the punishment will
finally come, and will not remain outside. He comforts himself with this
speech, because he sees that it is despised, and the world says, \"Oh,
if I had money to count so long before the punishment comes, someone
might become unhappy, and say to anyone who hears this, \"Now the devil
is preaching to you; if you thus despise these great things, God may
also punish you and throw you away. It hurts when they are so sure, and
think they have a \"reason and argument\" for themselves, that they sit
tight, and someone may think, \"Perhaps my sermon is lost. Then someone
must comfort himself and say, \"Even if the whole world does not
believe, and would still sit so firmly and surely, what does it matter,
sit firmly, hold firmly, it will still work out that way. If it does not
work out that way, I will gladly be a liar and become a prisoner; but
you will see that it will work out that way.

178 Therefore the sermon is of great importance. The world despises it
and says of preaching, \"It is a matter of judgment,\" and has always
resisted preaching. But now he has neither sword nor fist; therefore he
comforts himself, saying, \"That I preach, create, make, speak, and do
this, I do it because of the Father who commanded me.

210 Eri. 18, \[ss-SS8. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2199-2502. 211

He will not let me go, for no one else knows why he says this. It looks
like cold words, but he says it to comfort and strengthen himself.
Nevertheless, it must happen this way. He sees further than we do, and
we must follow him, what objecta and circumstantias he has, and why he
speaks thus, namely, against the Jewish people, who were so bound up
with the kingdom and priesthood that they could not rebel against it. In
spite of the fact that you would have said that this kingdom or
priesthood is of the devil. Just as if someone preached today and said
that the Christian church must go to ruin, I myself would take sword,
wood, straw and fire and burn such a one. I would kill such a one
myself, and sanctify myself in his blood. If anyone should say, \"The
Christian church is nothing; it is perishing,\" it is my imagination
that it should remain and not fall. If anyone says that the church is
wrong and must fall, and I know the contradiction, I take the sword from
the scabbard and the arrow from the quiver, and I strike and shoot him
dead, and I have consecrated my hands in the blood of this shalk.

It was also difficult that the man, Christ, should say: You Jews must
worship me, and if you do not hear me, you will perish. This was an
unmistakable, unpleasant sermon to the Jews, that their priesthood,
established by God, and their kingdom, ordered by God, should perish
because of the man, that they did not worship him. Therefore he says:
You must judge everything there, and either hear me, or go to ruin. They
thought, the song is started too high, he will not sing it out. Then he
said, \"One of these things must happen: either you must hear me or
perish, and you will know that God speaks these things.

Now he praises his preaching that it is right and pleases our Lord God,
saying, \"You will know and experience that when I am crucified and rise
again from the dead, then I will teach you that my words and my
preaching are the right truth. Now you do not believe it, but I will
teach you later with my fist, I do nothing of myself.

and I know well that this sermon is not wrong. Even if on earth the
kingdom, priesthood, or whatever else it may be, is against it, yet my
speech and preaching is right and pleases God. Therefore he defies his
father and says: \"I tell you, if you do not believe in me, you will all
perish. This I speak not of myself, neither have I devised it out of my
heart: but the Father saith it, he hath taught me, and commanded me to
speak thus: and he that sent me is with me, and not with you: therefore
beware.

This is strongly preached, and at that time it went very much to the
hearts of the people. We do not see it now as it was then, it seems to
us now to be a cold thing; therefore the words do not go so to our
hearts that he says: My word is from God, and I preach as he has taught
me. If I had spoken in this way, I would have lost a thousand necks;
nevertheless, someone must say it. This is the way it is with us now,
too: It can take a wheel off the wagon and frighten you that the pope
and his people boast that they are the Christian church. The word sancta
ecclesia frightens one; then they stand up and say: Preach and do what
you want, and as you can, nevertheless here is ecclesia christiana. Here
is the ship of St. Peter, which may wobble on the sea, but it shall not
sink and drown; we are the right people of God, the Christian church,
what will you do? Whoever preaches against it is of the devil. What
should I do? And how should I console myself? If someone were to poke me
under the eyes and hold up the glorious name of the Christian church in
front of my nose, I would not stay there myself. Before I would anger
the Christian church and speak a word against it, I would rather lose
ten necks over it and be dead ten times over.

Nevertheless, I must do as the Lord Christ does here, preaching against
those who are called God\'s kingdom and God\'s priesthood, and must take
upon himself a great work, that he must preach against those who boast
that they are God\'s people, saying in short: Either you Jews hear my
word, or you are not God\'s people, for God has not given his people to
me.

212 **Eri. 48, \[ss-Söl. Sermon on Joh. 8, 28. W. VII, 2SV2-2SUS.** 213

not so founded as you think that all those who have the kingdom and
priesthood must be his people; not all of you are Abraham\'s seed, born
of Abraham. You may have a kingdom and priesthood that is ordered and
established by God, but you are not all God\'s children. God created an
apple, the Elbe, an item, a tree; they are all creatures, but for that
reason they cannot go to heaven and be saved. And even though you have
the priesthood, the law, the temporal and spiritual kingdoms, you are
not God\'s people. You are indeed God\'s people, but externally; just as
the river Elbe and the earth of our Lord are God\'s creatures, so you
are also his people. You are the physical kingdom and people of God, but
if you will not hear me, then the kingdom and priesthood shall perish,
and only those who hear my word shall have and keep them.

183\] So also they say against us, The Christian church is under the
papacy, and the people of God and the pope sit within; but no, saith
Christ, let my speech go, and be obedient unto me, and hear me only; and
if ye be senseless, mad, and foolish about it. Yea, ye sit in
government, have a kingdom and priesthood, and an office, and are the
church, as the Jews were; but so it shall be, that where this doctrine
of Christ is not, neither is it accepted, there is not the people of
God. I must leave them the glory, and I will not take it from them. They
have baptism, the sacrament, the name of the Christian church, the
Lord\'s Prayer, faith, the gospel, the item of God, Christ and the Holy
Scriptures, and have everything with us, sitting in the ministry; just
as Christ could not cast down the Levites. But there I separate them,
and with that I cast them down, and pass through, that Christ says,
Either the priesthood is lost, or the gospel believed, and obeyed it. So
it is also said to the pope and his bishops who say: We are God\'s
people. You say: There I ask nothing; ye shall obey the gospel, if not,
go to destruction; ye may obey the gospel, or be all lost, plates and
priests; as it is said here

the Jews, too. This is the opinion of it: You popes, bishops and
priests, if you want to be and remain the Christian church, hear the
gospel. So he must speak to them.

I am not talking about myself. I have not made it up that I speak thus.
You shall believe in me, or all your things will come to naught. This
teaching is ridiculous to you, you will crucify me; but go ahead,
nevertheless we want to talk to each other. You will know that I did not
speak it, but he who sent me. So he comforts himself, that he may be
sure and certain that his word is the word of our Lord God. Although it
is a great thing that Christ weeps over Jerusalem, and grieves greatly
that it should perish; so also it is a great thing that we should
presume to preach that the pope and bishops should keep the divine word,
or they shall all perish and perish. This is ridiculous to them, and is
called vain heresy, and must be called preaching against the Christian
church; but if any of them should perish, it is better that they perish
than that our preaching and word perish, for we are sure that we preach
as his word teaches, and as his word reads.

On the other hand, he himself is there. I know that it is not only his
word that I speak and that it is the truth that you will go down to
failure, but he will also press on. I know that the word shall be
followed by the fist, that it must go as I preach, that you shall
perish; for he is there and helps, that it must go as I preach. The work
follows the words; as God is in the way, so it happens. The world thinks
I will perish, but I shall remain; and they want to remain, but they
must perish.

This is how it has been from the beginning. The word of God does not
attack chanterelles, sponges or water bladders, but kingdoms, great
kings and nations on earth, as the other Psalm, v. 2, says. For what is
great and mighty in the earth is set against Christ, so his word attacks
no small thing. But it is a ridiculous, miserable sermon, that it should
lie down.

[214 Eri. 4S, SSI-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2S0S-250S. 215]{.underline}

against all authority, wisdom and holiness, principality, emperorship
and priesthood, which it wants to have; the gospel has to do with the
emperorship of Assyria, Babylon. Through Jeremiah Babylon perished;
afterwards Rome was destroyed by St. Paul\'s preaching; through the Lord
Christ Jerusalem perished; now the pope also perishes when we preach;
the gospel takes much in one bite. But this is ridiculous and strange,
that it attacks in words alone; it is laughed at that he says, \"If ye
exalt me, ye shall know that I am.\" If they throb and defy for a long
time, they still perish.

But we must have the consolation that if emperors, kings, princes,
popes, and bishops fall in a heap, and the kingdoms lie one upon
another, we shall not be dismayed. When they say, What good is come of
it? then say thou: That Babylon, Jerusalem, Rome, Germany, and the
papacy fall in one heap, that is good; for they would not have the
gospel, nor believe it. So he says, \"If you do not believe in me,
perish. Now that they cry out, there is nothing in it. The Jews cry out
against the apostles, the Romans cry out against the Christians. St.
Augustine, in the book de civitate Dei, has enough to write against and
to create that Christ was born among the Jews and not among the
Gentiles; and the Romans complained, after the gospel had been preached
in Rome by St. Paul and Peter, and had been made Christians, that it was
now worse with them than before, when they were Gentiles and idolaters.
Then he answered that it was not the fault of the gospel, but their
fault that they would not accept the gospel. Therefore let them cry out
as they will; it is said to them. Before, when they had the word, they
would not believe it; but believe it now, when Christ is crucified and
lifted up, and when the stones are laid in heaps. The Romans also would
not believe while the apostles were present; but they had to believe
afterward, since Rome lay in a heap, and was disturbed by the Goths and
the Turners 1). Well, God has preached it, but

1\) i.e. the Vandals.

they asked nothing about it. So now emperor, king and pope do not
believe either, until they lie over a heap. And it does not hurt,
although war, rebellion, and that it all falls in heaps; why do you not
believe in me? therefore go to ruin. Pabst, emperor, let me tell you; if
not, you will perish. And even if we go along (as Christ was crucified
and exalted; item, one drives out the pious preachers, and one sheds
innocent blood, burns the Christians), it does not hurt, that is all
\"exalted\"; after that they shall well know it.

Now this is what you are supposed to learn. I myself also learn from
what I teach you. If we could come to the point where we did not doubt
that Christ was our Savior, sent by God, and our righteousness, and let
that be certain, and look no further in the accident than the word of
God, then we could always say: It is the word of God, I have preached
it, I take comfort in it. I have taught forgiveness of sin, and advised
peace, love, and unity; now if any harm comes of it, it is your fault,
and not of the teaching. But they will cry out, Before this preaching
came we had a good time; as the Jews also lamented and cried out at the
preaching of Jeremiah the prophet, and the Jews else cried out, O if the
gospel and Christ had not come, Jerusalem would still be standing. And
this would certainly be true; if Christ had not come, it would still be
standing. So, if Peter and Paul had not come, Rome would still be
standing, but because they have come, the kingdoms fall into one
another. But Christ says: The Father is with me, and not with you; we
have indeed preached to you, but whatever misfortune befalls you now,
you blame it all on the gospel, you lay it on the neck of the gospel,
but it is your fault, because you do not want the gospel, crucify and
exalt me, and persecute me over it. Now you excuse yourselves as if you
were innocent, saying, Yes, if it had not been for the gospel; and it is
all the gospel\'s fault. If Christ had not governed the consciences, you
would have governed them well; he would not have comforted the poor
consciences, you alone would have consoled them.

216 **Eri, is, gsg-sss. Sermon on John 8:28, W. vn, 2508-2510.** 217

You wanted to serve God alone, and to preserve, defend, protect and
protect the right service of God; if he now also wants to rule, you do
not want to suffer it. So now you also have this to reward: Cry out, cry
out, and he will take you away all the same. And now we also say to the
papists: God lets you cry out, and yet He sweeps you away. It will
happen to you as it happened to the Jews. He also made the Jews, Rome
and Babylon cry out, but He still overthrew them. The Father is with me,
he will not lie, he will stand by me.

All in all, they are all words of comfort and consolation, so that he
consoles himself and his people. He takes pity that such a glorious
people should perish, and says: \"God\'s mercy, what have I preached!
This people, kingdom and priesthood is perishing; that is a great
annoyance; but I must make a difference. I know that everything I do is
pleasing to God. This word is set against all the trouble, and against
that which they cry out. He says: I ask nothing of it, I am not alone,
my sermon is not my poem. If I knew that the word and the preaching were
mine and not God\'s, I would not take the whole world to stand up and
preach; and whoever believes me for my service and honor, or for my
sake, the wretched devil thanks him. Christ says: \"I am not alone\",
and I should also say so. For if I were alone, my cause would be
nothing. For I must say, I do not speak this of myself, for otherwise I
would be a liar. But this I know, that what I preach, the Father hath
given me, and it is his word and doctrine; there it is. If I can say
this, then I say, \"Now let the whole world fall into one another and
burn with fire, and bloodshed will follow, or whatever, what do I ask?
The Lord is God, and to our Lord God the world shall be obedient, and he
can strike when it deserves it and does not want to obey him. God is
with me, and not with them. And let them cry out for it: O great sorrow!
I ask nothing of it.

190 Therefore Christ praises those who magnify his word, because he
knows that this word is more important than the whole world.

world. It is a great glory that he can come here and say, \"My doctrine
is so great, and is such a thing, and has so much to do with it, that
the whole world is nothing against it; my doctrine is right. On the
other hand, the world says, \"Our kingdom, our armor, our horses, our
horses, our servants, our chariots and our walls are such a great thing
that the preaching of the gospel is nothing and filthy. And according to
reason, the preaching of the divine word has a low standing compared to
kings and princes. But again, what is a prince and emperor, indeed the
whole world, heaven and earth, and all creatures, compared to the Word?
They are dirt. For, saith Christ, who is with me, and calleth me to
preach, he is greater than all these. This poor Jesus speaks in the
temple, and God takes care of his little word, and has such great
respect for his mouth and his word that he esteems it greater than the
whole world; indeed, he despises the whole world above it. He has his
word preached from the mouth of the Lord Christ in Jerusalem, and has
made the word of God so great that he has torn apart all Judaism over
it, and Jerusalem lies in ashes. And God still has His eyes fixed on
this man\'s mouth, that He considers everything against it as nothing.
What is Jerusalem, Rome and all great kingdoms against the Word? It is
nothing, and esteemed as dirt. But who would believe that so great a
thing should be attached to the word, that the whole Roman empire is as
nothing against the word? But our adversaries say that all we preach is
nothing; St. Paul\'s doctrine is as a small stick against the Roman
Empire; therefore the Romans did not respect such beggar\'s preaching at
all. And today we are also despised in the same way.

But if our gospel of Christ and of our Lord God is the word of God, then
our Lord God will say, \"I am more interested in the word than in the
whole papacy or empire. And if we are sure of this, then the papacy, the
empire and the Turkish empire will be no different to us than a poppy
leaf, even though they regard us as little. That is our defiance. There
is no need before our Lord God, who does not ask much about the kings,
popes and

218 Erl. ts, S65-S6L Interpretations about the evangelist John. W. VII,
2SW-2SV! 219

Bishops; he has other princes and lords in heaven. One angel can do more
than ten Turkish emperors or popes; they are like gnats, fleas and lice
against the angels; but this is the greatest, to believe his word and to
keep it.

192 But thus says the Lord Christ, \"I know that everything I preach
will come to pass, I trust in it, and it is pleasing to God; therefore,
if the whole world beats it, ask nothing of it, how great a kingdom it
may be. Therefore let us be sure that the doctrine is right and the word
of God, then we can defy it and say: Let him who wants to laugh laugh;
let him who wants to be angry be angry. Whether it be flesh and blood,
the world, my sin, or the devil my mortal enemy, I ask nothing of it; I
will see who will harm us; the man whose word we preach is with us, and
we know that our preaching pleases God.

**The tenth sermon.**

Saturday after Andreä l2. Dec. 1531\] 1)

193 The fact that the Lord said to the Jews: \"The Father does not leave
me alone, because I do what pleases him\" was a very high sermon. For it
was to bring down the whole Jewish kingdom and priesthood to the ground,
so that the whole land and city of Jerusalem would also perish. That was
a high sermon. Therefore he consoles himself that it is not he who does
it, but it is another who does it, namely, the word of God. And he
speaks further:

**V. 29, 30: The Father does not leave me alone, for I always do what
pleases him. When he spoke these things, many believed in him.**

194 As if to say: What I have preached, that shall and must go, and what
I do and undertake. In spite of that one would refuse. It is simple
talk, with bad words, but it is hopeful and defiant enough that he may
say, \"What I do, say and preach is valid and has been done. On the
other hand, one must say: \"If your doing and preaching alone are valid,
then we are dead and lost. It speaks Chri-

1\) In the original margin.

stus: It will go like this, whoever does not want to hear me and follow
me, what I say, create and order, let him know that his thing does not
please God, because God is with me, otherwise I beggar should not appear
and preach so high. For it is a great thing for a beggar to stand up (as
he has been) and say, What I preach is done; what I do not preach is not
done; and what I will and do, all must follow, or be damned. Whoever
does not want as I want, and believe my word, and follow what I create,
let him know and have knowledge that he is lost, and that God has
rejected him, and is an enemy to him. Now this is a great enemy, and it
would be better to let him be a friend, and do what he says, and forbid
what he forbids, and believe what he preaches.

195\. Thus says the Lord Christ: All that I do is pleasing to God; and
you should know that whoever is against me is against God and attacks
God, and whoever is against God has God for an enemy, but what he gains
he may have and grease his shoes with it. So many kingdoms have gone
against God, but what have they gained? they are all in the mud. And so
it goes now. They do not want to hear Christ, and everyone is against
the man; it should be nothing what he says and does, otherwise the world
wants to please God, and not have what he has decreed; but Christ says:
What I do and preach pleases God. \"I am not alone\" 2c. This we will
look upon with faint faith, what ye do, and what ye are, who now oppose,
saying, What we do is pleasing to GOD, and it is done. Well, we will
leave them together, we will say: It was the fellows who said, What we
do, that shall be; where are they now? they have become ashes and
powder, and God has kept the field.

So Christ says here: I do always until the last day what pleases God; my
word, preaching, baptism, sacrament shall remain, and. Despite 2c. He
has put it out in better words than I can put it out. That is why the
evangelist says, \"Many people believed in him.\" For they thought that
he spoke so powerfully, just as if

220 \' **Erl.\", SS8-S70. Sermon on John 8:29-33. W. VII, 2LI3-Löie.**
221

he would have God in his hands, and hear his preaching. These are the
same fellows who think, \"When he comes up and becomes a lord, we will
join him, he will do it, we will become his officials and chancellors.

**V. 31, 32. Then said Jesus unto the Jews which believed on him, If ye
continue in my sayings, then are ye my true disciples, and ye shall know
the truth.**

197 This is an evil thing, that he saith unto them which began to
believe, saying, We will abide with thee, and add unto it, and risk life
and limb; and looketh upon them with squinting eyes, and saith, Yea, if
ye were in earnest, and that it were true that ye believed on me; but it
looketh upon me, as though ye would not so abide. And lift up, and
preach a sermon of the false and true disciples of the divine word,
saying, Many hear the gospel, and abide in it, because it profiteth them
to have money, and goods, and honour of it; yea. Dear, who would not
like that? Say therefore, \"If ye abide in my speech and doctrine, ye
are my true disciples.\" For I have two kinds of disciples: the first
believe on me, boast, and hear the gospel, saying, This is the right
truth; and I count them great excellent Christians; but it is in
abiding. Then there are others who hear it; but when it comes to the
meeting, they say: I know not my soul, shall I leave this and that for
the gospel\'s sake? There are few of these who persevere in the cross
and persecution; where are they found who persevere? Then saith the Lord
Christ, If ye continue in my doctrine, then are ye my true disciples. If
my doctrine pleases you, you are well taught, and you know all things;
if you abide by the doctrine in the cross and suffering, you are my
disciples. But my doctrine is not of this kind, that one should begin to
believe alone, and boast much of the gospel; and I also believe it, that
it is soon begun; but where do you find those who remain and persevere,
that one should endure it, and think: \"Well, it is with me, as God
wills: if I am not well, then I shall be ill;

If I am not rich, I remain poor; if I die or live, I remain with Christ.

198 But one would gladly believe in Christ, if one could thereby become
Lord and obtain a kingdom; but if one is to suffer something over it, it
is over and done with faith. Therefore he says, \"Truly you will not
abide in my doctrine. It seldom happens that one sticks to his doctrine,
especially when a sour wind blows. Many become Christians, and hold fast
to the gospel in the beginning; but afterward they fall away again, and
go away as good fellows. Just as the parable of the Gospel tells of the
seed that fell on a rock, and when the sun shone hot on it, it withered
and withered away. \[But those who remain with the gospel are true
disciples; the others are false Christians and false brethren.

**If you abide in my speech, you are my true disciples, and you will
know the truth, and the truth will make you free.**

\(199\) Then he goes from other thoughts, for otherwise they would think
that he would bring great glory to the world and give great honor and
riches to everyone, so that they would all be great princes and divide
the world among themselves. But he says: You will know the truth, that
is, he will truly redeem you. As if he wanted to say: You have thoughts,
as if he wanted to lead you into a bodily kingdom, where you will float
high above; but your mind and thoughts are not right, it is not the
truth, it is only a larva and a loud carnival play; but I wanted to lead
you well into a kingdom and being, where truth is inside, and where the
right being is. He wants to drive them, that they do not go after the
outward life, that they become kings, princes and great lords on earth,
but that they become great lords, right kings and mighty princes in
heaven, because he says here: \"If you learn to abide in me, the same
truth will set you free.

200 He stirred up their thoughts. For they were immediately imprisoned
under the Romans, and were evil afflicted by them, and had no

[222 Erl. 48, S70-S7S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2SIS-SLIS. 223]{.underline}

They all lamented that they would have liked to be free and have their
own king. But now he says, \"If you want to be free and have your own
king, and be free and free from all bondage and imprisonment, believe in
the Son. My kingdom is not the kingdom of the world, neither is my
kingdom the kingdom of Caesar, but a kingdom of truth, the right
kingdom, where one should live rightly inwardly. This is a different
life from this temporal life, where the truth will set you all right.
But not so that you may not give bullets, interest and rent. Just as the
peasants would like it even today, so that they may not suffer nor be
obedient to anyone, and that no prince nor emperor, no count nor lord
may be, and that the servants may be lords, and that a maid may become a
wife, and a subject may be a prince; so you Jews would like it also. So
now he wants to say here: I do not preach now about a worldly kingdom, I
let them all remain; if they are tyrants, let them remain so, and let
them answer for it; if they torture and devour their poor people, what
is it to me, they will have to suffer punishment for it. But I will lead
you into a kingdom where you will be truly free, kings, princes and
lords. This will happen if you abide by my word and believe my sermon,
and it is certain that it will be easy for you to become a king; but you
must believe the word.

This is ridiculous, that I should be lord over the pope, over the
emperor and king and all princes. By what? By believing in Christ alone.
For here he says, \"He who believes my word knows the truth and will be
set free and become my disciple. The word may seem ridiculous to reason,
and must be wrong in the eyes of the world, but it is true. Christ will
have his kingdom, and it must remain; the king and his people must
remain. Whether they suffer the same in the world, it does no harm, for
our life is not to be here, but there in that world, and all popes,
bishops, princes, citizens, noblemen, and also the wicked peasants must
let Christ remain. Christ wants to and shall rule; do they want the

If they do not like it, then he shall send them a ruler also in time,
who shall teach them morality; 1) for he also has the hearts of the
people in his hand, that they may know what they ought to believe, and
do that which is pleasing to our Lord God. No one shall take away his
rule, nor shall anyone else know his government. Secular emperors alone
shall know how to build, sow and plant; but this rule of Christ, how to
live before God, no one else knows; it is also above all emperors and
popes. The truth shall make you free, then you are rightly free, and no
one shall rule you. And here he gains cause to transfigure his speech.

**V.33. Then they answered him, \"We are Abraham\'s seed, and have never
been servants; how then do you say that you shall go free?**

That is a shameful answer. Thou sayest, he that believeth on thee shall
be free; yet are we not servants, but masters of the world, never having
been bondmen and bondwomen. We are Abraham\'s seed, who have the saying
\[Gen. 22:18.\], \"In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be
blessed.\" This promise made the Jews proud, just as the Pope became
proud over the name of the church, over St. Peter\'s chair in Rome.
Abraham is called a lord of the whole world, and we are Abraham\'s seed;
therefore, in short, we are to rule in the whole world; and you say that
we are to become free first of all through you. Do you take us for
servants? So you see how the Jews deal with carnal thoughts. Christ
saith, Ye shall be kings, lords, and free, not only there, but also
here; but poor miserable kings and princes. For the world shall have
glory, and money, and goods, and power; and yet ye also shall rule; but
not over the body, nor over goods, nor over lands, but over consciences,
that they must obey the word, or die. As you preach, so will their
hearts follow; if not, they are of the devil. This is what the Jews
understand here in the flesh.

This text is too good and too rich to act at once. Christ interprets the
text to them that they are Abraham\'s seed and children.

1\) Erlanger: learn.

224 **Erl. 48, S7S-S7S. Sermon on John 8:29-33. W. VII. 2SIS-252I.** 225

are. It is a great text and mighty argument of the Jews against us. They
could boast that they were Abraham\'s children; this cannot be denied;
and Abraham\'s seed has the promise that he shall be ruler in the world.
These two things (as, we are Abraham\'s children, item, Abraham\'s seed
rules over the world) cannot be taken away from them; therefore, they
say, it follows that we must be subject to no one in the world, but
everyone must serve us, for we are Abraham\'s seed. Therefore, if we are
masters, we are not servants. If this falls on a man\'s head, it pushes
him back. For thus they said: All the world is subject unto us, and are
our servants: the Messiah shall come by our seed, that we may be masters
of all the earth: we never were servants. The argument he salvirt. And
(this argument) goes to the pope, who also says: We are the Christian
church and holy, we cannot err 2c.

**The eleventh sermon.**

Saturday after the 1st Sunday of Advent \[9 Dec. 1531.\] 1)

The Lord Christ said to the Jews that they would not know his preaching
until he was crucified and exalted by them; meanwhile he consoled
himself that what he had preached he had learned from the Father, and
what he did was pleasing to God and must remain. This is the comfort of
every Christian, when the world cannot stand his works and words, and
what he says must be lies, and he must be persecuted for saying: I know
that my teachings and works are God\'s word and work; so I will be angry
with him who will not let it go. May God help us to stand firm in this
way. With this sermon he angered many, as follows. But out of all this
beautiful sermon that the Lord preaches to the Jews (when he says, \"If
you continue in my word, you are my disciples, and you will know the
truth, and you will be free\"), they do not grasp a word, except that
which makes them free; the rest they leave alone.

1\) In the original margin.

**Jesus answered them and said, \"Truly, truly, I say to you, he who
commits sin is the servant of sin. But the servant does not remain in
the house forever; the Son remains forever. If therefore the Son shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye are Abraham\'s
seed: but ye seek to kill me, because my words are not seen among you. I
speak that which I have seen of my Father; so do ye that which ye have
seen of your Father.**

205\. therefore there ariseth a new fire, and great vexation, that the
people stumble at his doctrine, as if they should be free by his
doctrine, or by the truth, as if they were captives and bondmen, saying,
We are not bondmen, therefore we are free, because we are Abraham\'s
seed, which people had the promise of God, that it should be the head,
yea, the head, and not the tail, which should hover above in the world,
and not sit below; as it was said unto Rebekah \[Gen. 25, 23.): Major
serviet minori. They have grasped this language, and it has gone through
their hearts, as if the whole world should be nothing to them, and all
men should serve them. Therefore, even when the prophets come and say:
You will be carried away captive to Babylon or to Assyria, you will know
it; so they did not believe it, and the prophets had to be heretics,
they lived and did what they wanted, and the prophets had to hear this:
We are Abraham\'s seed. Just as they have also put this under the eyes
of the Lord Christ, saying, \"Yes, he can do it, but he may put a line
through it. To Abraham\'s seed belongs blessing, kingdom, authority and
inheritance, to rule and reign; and you stand up and also want to become
a heretic, and with the false prophets take away our freedom, and make
many of them also fall into this heresy, and deny that we are not
Abraham\'s seed, and just as if the promise of Abraham\'s seed belonged
to us nothing at all. They only want to teach that they are free;
therefore, since he does not want to preach this, they are soon offended
at him, especially those who had great authority, and fall away from him
again, since they believed in him before.

This is how it works. In the beginning hang

226 Erl. 4S, S7S-S77. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2521-2S24. 227

They all believe in the gospel and think that they want to become great
popes, bishops, princes and lords, and give nothing to anyone, and want
to be free from the law. But when they recognize the truth, one after
the other falls away. Therefore these are shameful disciples or pupils
who come to the gospel, that they now want to have and seek their carnal
freedom and benefit from it. If they do not find it, they let it go. So,
our peasants now despise the gospel, because they have learned that the
gospel does not bring or give worldly goods. That is why the nobles also
go and trample the priests under their feet, drive them out of their
houses; so have the citizens also learned that they are thus ungrateful
to the gospel. But the Lord Christ speaks here: \"If ye abide in my
word,\" 2c. and separates his disciples from other hearers of the
gospel, saying, If ye believe on me, ye are my disciples. Truly, now you
believe in me, I have received disciples, it will become a delicious
thing, as John also says in the 6th chapter, v. 26: You believe in me so
far, not because you have seen signs, but because you have eaten; it is
a good thing. So, he wants to say, I am now also a great magister, and
have many disciples; but where will it remain with them? Ah, Lord God,
your little will endure, you have no good reason, it has no continuance
with you, you will seek in me that you will not find with me, and if you
do not find it, then it is all over.

It is as if all the branches of the trees were full of blossoms in the
spring, so that one thinks where one wants to go with all the apples and
pears; but when a rain or wind comes into the blossoms, they fall off in
heaps, so that the ninth part falls off, and only the tenth part hardly
ripens, and some also become wormy. This is also the case with the
gospel. First of all, everyone hears it, and it is a delicious thing; it
has many disciples; but if it does not go as they want, and if one does
not speak what they like to hear, they say, \"All misfortune comes from
the gospel.

For this reason the Lord Christ says, \"You are my disciples, but you
are husks. Who

But if ye continue in my speech, then are ye my true disciples. It is
not a matter of persevering, but of persevering in the word. I would be
a Christian, and have the gospel, if there were no danger in it, but
only to have good days: for hatred, envy, contempt, and ingratitude in
the world, are not every man\'s doings. Therefore, when it comes to
becoming a disciple of the man, the devil and everyone oppose it. Then
stand firm, hold fast, do not flinch, do not retreat; if you have begun
to believe, then lead it out. There are many of them that hold fast, and
shed their blood, and go up, and dare even: these are the true
disciples, and they also abide. But ten times as many are those who
began to believe with us, and who at first were well pleased with our
teaching, but now not the tenth part has remained constant. But it does
no harm; what stands, let it stand; what will not stand, let it always
fall away; yet there will be some who will remain; and those who remain
steadfast, these are my true disciples, and they also may let go over
them what can go. The others, who seek only the liberty of the flesh,
and that which is for their own profit, are vain muzzlers, liars, false
disciples, or unrighteous children.

So the Jews also would have liked the gospel, but sine cruce, and that
they might live in the house and be free, and give nothing to anyone,
nor be subject to anyone, nor be their own. But if the gospel were such
a doctrine, I would convert the whole world in one hour. If Christ had
given each one a sack of gold florins, a castle or a city, who would not
have remained his disciple? They would all have run to him if he had
only given one thousand florins, yes, if he had only given one florin to
each one, and had let him use it peacefully, and given a free rein to
fornication and adultery, to usury, rob and steal, and that they should
suffer no danger because of it, nor have to fear death; then he would
have been a fine king. But that he saith, They shall be enemies unto
thee

228 **Erl. 4S, S77-SS0. Sermon On John 8:34-38. W. VII, 2S24-WL7.** 229

and you must be hated for my sake, the world will blaspheme you,
desecrate you, and also kill you for my sake, and will not grant the
morsel of bread you eat, or that you may live a moment, and all these
things will happen to you for my sake: therefore flesh and blood says,
Let the devil be a Christian in my stead, you go and be a Christian; it
stinks too much here, it costs much, and belongs and goes much to stay,
that everything should be put in the redoubt. They say, \"I will start,
but I will not stay. Whoever then has great courage here, and is a
daring man, the Lord Christ will say, he shall be called my true
disciple.

What reward and comfort will they have? They will find the right God,
and will have strength and power to abide by God\'s word, so they will
be Christ\'s disciples and know the truth. For he says, \"I will reveal
to you the true, pure truth, so that you will not only see how the first
disciples fell away, but you will also experience it; you will see that
my promise, which was made to you and my disciples, will happen to you
and will be true.

The false disciples and the true disciples are separated. The false ones
hear the word of God, which promises and says: \"If you believe in me, I
will not leave you; you shall be a ruler and free from death, the devil
and sin, and I will give you eternal life. This is our promise, that
whosoever believeth in him shall have a good conscience, and shall also
be saved, and have a gracious God, and no hurt shall come unto him. You
should not hear this alone, as the beginning disciples, and as the
newcomers, who do not come to know that God is a good man who can help
them out of their spiritual and physical needs. They do not stay there,
and do not endure the danger; they fear their goods, their peace and
their good chamber; they are too short-sighted, and do not want to
suffer anything; therefore they do not experience spiritual comfort, and
do not recognize what God truly is, and how great a comfort it is, even
how it tastes. These are the false Christians, who hear and learn many
things, but they do not know.

They never come to the knowledge of the truth, they do not understand
it; they learn to speak the words as a parrot or parakeet speaks the
words of men, but their heart does not know it, they remain as they are,
they do not taste and feel how faithful and true God is. Therefore the
tenth part of men belong; the ninth part begins to believe, but they do
not remain. For it is so narrow and difficult to remain steadfast that
it has no support; for the divine word alone is the foundation stone, or
the beam and support, the pillar and support, that one can stand on, so
that one can remain steadfast. Therefore, one must hold on to the mere
word of God and hang on to the speech of Christ, then one will
experience the help of our Lord in danger, and it will go over and over
in a moment.

212 And we have also experienced the miracle in ourselves. When, a year
ago, at the Diet of Augsburg, it was thought that in four weeks
everything would go over and over, all of Germany would perish; one
could neither see nor feel where it wanted to go, where help or counsel
would be, it was too high for all senses, it was taken beyond all
wisdom, so that one had to say: It stands alone in God\'s power, and it
is set on His word. It must be brought to this point, that one may say:
God has promised it. If we hold fast to the word, we shall not be in
trouble; though we see nothing else, yet we shall know that God will
remember and let us see that his word is true, for he promises that
whoever trusts in him will not be put to shame. This is how it will be
in all temptations. But the false hypocrites will not know it, but those
who hold to the word will know that God is true. Notice this in all
temptations, in poverty and other tribulations, that where one abandons
the word, it is groundless and bottomless, and one sinks completely, so
that he must despair. Therefore Christ wants to say here: If you can
stand by my word, then hold fast; for then you remain my righteous
disciple, if one holds fast to the word; for this makes you a righteous
disciple, if you do not alone know, 1) learn, read

1\) Erlanger: wissest.

[230 Erl. 48, \[so-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
W27-2SM. 231]{.underline}

and hear, but that you have also experienced it. So Abraham also had
God\'s word that God said to him \[Gen. 17, 1.\]: \"I am your Lord and
your God.\" Now in Egypt his wife is taken from him by the king \[Gen.
20, 1. ff.\], where was the proteetor? Item, where was there counsel and
help? He wept more than he laughed. Sarah, his wife, was in great danger
of her honor and chastity, he saw no power nor art how to find counsel
in this distress; he could do nothing more, but clung to the word, \"The
Lord is my protection.\" Then he learned and recognized the truth. For
God smote Pharaoh so that he was glad to give Abraham back his wife, and
in addition he honored him with great gifts.

This is why the disciples of Christ are separated here. The false ones
rise, but fall away again; the righteous ones remain in the narrow way
and gate, or on the narrow path, namely, at the word of God, saying: I
know not counsel; God may help, it is in his hand alone, he has
promised, and says: Hold fast, I will also hold. Now when it comes to
the trains and narrow gaps, you will learn to hold fast to the divine
word, and it will make you a righteous disciple and set you free. False
disciples do not learn this; they do not know what it means to know the
truth. For truth is not only to hear Christ or to be able to wash much
of him, but also to believe in the heart that Christ wants to make us
free and liberated, so that this can be experienced in the heart; this
is what makes a true Christian.

Now this is a true disputation, that there are two kinds of freedom; the
first is a false freedom of false disciples, who seek a carnal freedom,
and who therefore become Christians; as here the Jews became Christians,
because they heard that Christians are pious, kind, patient, gentle
people, not revengeful, and give alms gladly, are free of cost; item,
they have a gracious, and not angry God. They hear this and like it,
that one should give and serve others; therefore they say: I will gladly
give and be served, and also be forgiven; item, our Lord GOD shall also
forgive me of the

They want to give to sinners and help them to heaven; they want to take
gladly and let them give and have gladly. But they are and always will
be peelers, and do not want to leave their abominations and idolatry,
and give something to someone, they want to lead a whore and knave life
and being, as before, and still want to be evangelical. These are the
false disciples who seek only the freedom of the flesh. For they only
boast much about the Gospel, and seek it first with great earnestness;
after that there is nothing behind it, for they do what they want,
follow their evil lusts and wills, and become worse than before, are
much more lewd and secure, wilder, stingier, thieving, and more
predatory than other people. Just as our peasants, burghers, and nobles
are now more miserly and lewd than they were under the papacy, they are
much worse than they were before, they do not want to repent, so that
they might be converted; therefore this must also happen to them, that
they are cast into the abyss of hell.

But the rest, who abide in the word of God, and endure, suffer, bear,
and dare what they ought, are saved, and grow stronger the longer, and
know the truth that Christ will save them. That part does not understand
what truth is, and thus give cause to the Lord to explain better what he
means by it. For it is blunt and cut short that they did not understand
the truth. For by reason these things shall not be known, but shall
continue their days as they were before, and shall be seven times worse.
All this is a false thing, what they do, they go about in a false,
drunken delusion; all that they believe is a fictitious thing; for they
have not tasted Christ, they do not know what Christ is, neither have
they suffered anything for Christ\'s sake, therefore they are no
different than drunkards, who do not know where they are at home; all
that they believe is false and nothing, are not capable of any good
work, and, if they do any good, they do it for their own sake, that they
may have honor, money, and goods from it. So, if a prince, nobleman or
peasant does something good, he wants to seek his honor and benefit from
it; but if this escapes, then

> 232 **Erl. 4S, SSS-S84. Sermon on John 8:34-38. W. VII, 2SM-2W2.** 233

Sermon on John 8:34-38.

he becomes mad and foolish about it, and lets it stand, does no more
good. Therefore, there is no truth, no true word, nor right work is
found in their throat and fists; they are all concerned with good and
honor, as we see in the pope and his bishops to this day.

But here is the truth, Christ will truly make you free, not in a carnal
way, but from sins. And I want to say here: I am not a party preacher,
who preaches of the begging-stick, as of temporal riches, honor, power
and pleasure; for that is vain dung and dung, which is thrown by sows
into the straw; riches are the bones and legs, which remain and fall
from the master\'s table, and are given to the dogs; as we usually cut
off the crusts from the bread. Such a sermon, which belongs to the
bodily belly, we command the lawyers; but Christ speaks here of the
right, eternal and spiritual redemption, that the Jews do not yet
understand, and say: We are Abraham\'s children, therefore we are not
servants.

217 He does not mean servants, as they are called among us Germans, for
it is not the custom with us as it is with them, but he speaks of serfs,
since a lord has a servant or man who is his own, with body and goods,
and would put him out of his goods and push him away if he wanted to.
This was very strict at that time. If the lord gave a servant a wife,
the servant\'s children were also the lord\'s, the lord took them to
himself; also all the goods they acquired were not theirs but the
lord\'s. So it was strictly kept in the same lands. Just as milk is not
the cow\'s, nor the calf the cow\'s, nor the piglets the sow\'s, but the
woman of the house takes it to herself, so were the people at the same
time; what a servant man and wife with the children acquired and earned,
that was all the lord\'s; a strict lord kept it all together, and gave
the servant, his wife and children no more of it than only the food, as
food and drink, clothes and shoes. The Turk still holds it this way
today, that the people are his serfs, and with all possessions and goods
subservient to him. Like

Just as a cow is still in bondage; if it gives a lot of milk to the
maid, then the milk is the woman\'s and not the cow\'s. A sow, a horse
or a cow is also in bondage; what it works for is all its master\'s; the
master gives the horse only its fodder, food and drink 2c., and that
sparsely enough. So in those days the servants (who, as unreasonable
animals, were serfs) were also given food and drink, and scanty, torn
clothes, and were then driven hard. Our servants are now masters, and
the maids are only women in our time; they should only be called
squires, masters and women now, because they are called servants and
maids; but the Turk still makes serfs and servants now.

218 Therefore say the Jews, Thou wilt make us free, and speakest of us
as if we were bondmen, when we are not bondmen. In Egypt they were not
far from it, since they were captives under Pharaoh, where often a poor
man and his wife, sons and daughters, sold themselves for six years, so
that he and they had only food and drink during these years; this was
the custom of that country, as Moses says. During these six years they
had food and drink and clothing from the Lord, but what they earned
during this time with their work was all their masters\'. As well as
what a horse earns with his work, that is his master\'s, the horse gets
only fodder and litter from the master for it; one does not give the six
pennies to the horse, so it earns during the day. So they also sold
themselves for six years, and served with their own bodies for food and
sustenance. Do the Jews here say, \"You do not have to preach to us,
because we are Abraham\'s seed, and you want to make us serfs, and that
all our goods should be of the Gentiles; yes, you see, we still want to
make the Gentiles our serfs and our servants. Therefore the Lord must
expound and declare himself, and gives a gloss, signifying what his
liberty is, saying, I say not of liberty, as ye think of it, and would
gladly be masters, and fear lest ye should become bondmen; it shall be
done unto you: and he saith:

[234 **Erl. 4S, S8S-S87.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VII, 2SW-2S3S.** 235]{.underline}

Truly, he who commits sin is a servant of sin.

219 This will be a text and a sermon on true Christian freedom, what it
is. Christ does not want to change the worldly kingdoms, nor does he
want to take away serfdom; what does he ask about how princes and lords
rule? It is none of his business how one plows, sows, makes shoes,
builds houses, gives interest or rent. Such a right is ordered in
Genesis 1:28, where God creates the world, that we should beget
children, and have the world and build it; but here Christ speaks
nothing of this outward being, but he deals with a freedom that is apart
from and above this outward being and life, dealing with how one may be
delivered from sins, death, God\'s wrath, devil and hell, or eternal
damnation. A cow can be set free from giving milk to her master and
wife; a bonded servant can be set free from serving the master by
counting him free.

\(220\) This Christian freedom can happen both to the one who is free
and to the one who is in bondage; item, to the one who is a prisoner or
who takes others prisoner, or to a woman as well as to a man, to a
servant and maidservant as well as to the master and women. We speak of
freedom before God, since God sets us free from sins, which freedom is
granted to every man. Thus the Lord leads Christ away from the carnal
mind, because of which they are even angry, that he does not want to
lead them to a bodily freedom of the flesh, and thus wants to imprison
the people, so that they will not be set free. For this reason they call
the Lord Christ a heretic, and say that the devil preaches from him and
wants to seduce and imprison the people.

**The twelfth sermon.**

Saturday after Dorothea \[Feb. 10\] 1532. 1)

I had planned to preach about the dear and holy baptism, so that it
might also be recognized and practiced among us.

1\) In the original in the margin. Also added there: Ouna ilsrnra
rsvatuissst Imtüsrus, Hui atiq uanaäiu gravitsr asM-otavorat. Right at
the beginning of this sermon, Luther also mentions his illness.

But we have been prevented by weakness of body, therefore we will save
it until tomorrow, or when we can preach again; now we will continue
again in John, wherein the Lord Christ teaches about Christian freedom,
and says v. 32: If you keep my words, the truth will make you free.

222 As if to say, I know that ye are Abraham\'s seed: but because ye
mock at it, saith he, sow not my word in you. I have forgotten what I
then preached about Christian freedom, but the text will bring us back
to what freedom is, where it goes and how far it goes. The Jews boasted
of their freedom, that they wanted to have their own king and kingdom,
and not be subject to any emperor on earth, but wanted to be a free
people for themselves, with their worship and laws, given to them by
Moses. God also promised them and said: If you keep my law, you shall be
above and not below, you shall be the head and not the tail, a people of
your own, God\'s own, my priesthood 2c. I will be over you Lord alone,
despite another who shall rule you. But it was written: Si servaveritis
mandata mea. Now they had noticed this, and stood on it, that was their
defiance; but the Lord says beside it, Si servaveritis, quae dixi vobis,
so shall ye be my people. So they looked at one thing, but they did not
look at what was said about keeping the law. 2) Christ interprets the
text to them in such a way that the Jews are even annoyed. If you are
obedient and do what God says, you will be His people and His own; if
not, God will scatter you from time to time, as far as the whole world
is. Now, this is why they look at the property and think that they want
to be free, and put it aside, since God says: Si obe- dieritis mihi, et
facietis, quae jubeo \[if you will obey me and do what I command\], then
you shall be my property; nevertheless, they do not want to do what our
Lord God wants.

2\) In the original, this sentence is Latin: 86 6 illuä äs iaeisnäa IsZs
non oonsiäsradant.

[236 **Erl. 48, 387-SS\". Sermon on John 8:34-38. W. VII, LW-LAS.**
237]{.underline}

223\. They have fallen out over this, and this is also the defect of
this freedom, that they think they have a spiritual kingdom, and do not
want to look at anyone; and yet they do not do what is called by God.
Therefore Christ speaks:

**V. 34: He who commits sin is the servant of sin.**

This is where the freedmen and freedwomen part company. Moses said they
should do what he told them to do, and then they should be lords and
free. But they wanted to be peelers and knaves; item, disobey God, and
still want to be a free people. This will not happen. Therefore Christ
says: You are servants of sin, and yet you want to be lords and free;
nothing will come of it. Then learn to understand the true freedom that
Moses meant. For if ye be godly, and sin not, nor disobey, but do that
which God saith, ye may be free. But that ye will sin, and yet be free,
this is not said; but ye are the servants of sin, and thereby also
subject to punishment, and have become the servants of the Gentiles, and
the tail; ye have lost the head, and have lost God also.

This cannot be other than that he who sins and remains in sin has all
the punishments of sin that the law imposes, such as death and all other
misfortunes. St. Paul says \[Rom. 6, 23.\]: \"Death is the wages of
sin,\" that is, the wages; therefore he that serveth sin, and liveth in
a sinful nature, serveth death also, and hath this wages of it, even
hell fire; Death devours him, therefore the emperor, king, and other
enemies devour him, as the pestilence, hunger, dear time; and everything
that belongs to death, that has only teeth and a mouth, that can eat,
choke, and consume, and is evil, that may devour the sinner. Therefore,
if you want to be free, first of all remember to get rid of sins; then
you can take away the sting, right and power of death, and then you can
also get rid of sins.

They all hear this sermon, but no one here knows how to understand it,
for it is also a sermon that no one understands.

unless the Holy Spirit puts such teaching into one\'s heart. That is why
it is preached, and it is necessary to start there, if we want to be
free, so that we can get rid of sins. For since sin is and remains,
there is no freedom. If I do not want to leave sin and become godly, I
may well strive to be a lord, and to become God\'s own and free; but
nothing will come of it, you must first think that you will be freed
where you are bound hardest and deepest, that is, that you will be freed
from sin and set free. For the first freedom is: \[from\] sin. For he
that hath sin is the servant of sin: whereupon it followeth that the
same servant dwelleth not in the house for ever, neither abideth with
the Lord. Now ye also are servants, and abide or dwell in the house for
a season: then will I give you place to repent and amend, and say unto
you, that ye may become godly, and also be freed from sin, and be
loosed. If you do, you will remain; but if you will not, I will tolerate
you until Caesar comes, overcomes you and overthrows you; then I will
expel you, not only from the physical government, from the house in the
world, but also from the priesthood, from the house of God, and from the
kingdom of heaven, so that you will no longer remain God\'s people. Even
though God tolerated for a time that they remained in the kingdom and
priesthood, they had to leave.

226 So it will be with us Germans. We sin, and are servants of sin; we
live in carnal lusts, and use freedom up to our ears; we want to do what
we want, and what serves the devil, and want to be free to do what we
want. Few are they that think after the right knots, how they may be
free from sin. They are satisfied that they have been freed from the
pope, officials, and other laws, but they do not think about how they
might serve Christ and become free from sin. Therefore it will also
happen that we will not remain in the house, as the servants do not
remain in it forever, but must be cast out, and again lose the gospel
and freedom.

227\. what does it matter where we Germans do not

[238 Erl. \"8, S8S-SSL. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2S38-2S40. 239]{.underline}

and lose our worldly rule and gospel, and come under worse devils than
the pope has been, and be imprisoned among them, who then will deceive
us as blind men and fools, and scatter us throughout the world, just as
the Jews were scattered. For this is the rule of our Lord God, which he
has used with the Jews, and will use with all the despisers of his word;
he has scattered the Jews, and taken away their kingdom and synagogue.
If we will not take hold of the right head, as we get rid of our sins,
he will also scatter us, so that we will not know where there will be
true Christians. For there will come a spirit of the mob, there will
arise a sect, and all the corners will be full of heretics and fickle
spirits. Then they will say, \"Oh, these are the fruits of the gospel.
That is where the devil strikes; why do they not believe? The Jews also
blamed St. Paul and the other apostles, saying, \"What good has come
from the teaching of the Gospel? But it serves them right, it is your
fault. If thou wilt not be godly and free from sin, thou shalt not abide
in the house, but shalt be cast out. If then thou goest astray from time
to time, and hast as many pastors as thou hast faith, it shall be even
so with thee. For so it is, when our Lord God begins to scatter the
people, there is a scattering, and afterward there are many sects and
divisions.

Just as the pope has made the whole world full of groups, but the devil
has adorned them so that they are not called groups, but monasteries,
convents, altars, mass, faith, pilgrimage, etc., and yet they have not
been one with each other, they have not come together. No one has called
it dispersed or atomized, but in truth it has been so. And it cannot be
otherwise; if thou wilt not be godly, thou shalt be cast out. He will
bear with us for a time, and be patient with us, if we are not godly;
but if we do not mend our ways, he will cast us out of the house. Just
as a servant who has been driven from his

But the son, and the servant, if he be devout, abideth in the kingdom of
Christ, in the house, in the priesthood, in the faith, in the right
understanding and knowledge of Christ, and is well kept.

This is the main thing you must strive for, if you want to become free,
not only from the laws and compulsion of the pope, the monks, bishops
and priests, that will find itself; you must strive further. For if you
get rid of the pope right away, I (says God) will soon create other
groups that shall take away the freedom of the heart, as the pope has
also done. For I still have great saints, wise, sensible people, lawyers
and other great minds, who shall still advise how you may be dispersed.
Therefore remember that you reach higher and farther, and seek a freedom
other than that of being freed from sin, but that you stand according to
the freedom of the flesh; as here also the Jews. Do not ask, Christ
says, how you may eat meat on Friday, that will be found, but think
here, it must be the main thing. Think not how you may be free
outwardly, but how you may be righteous and just before God, and be free
from sin.

But how is this done? how is it done to him? So it goes: \"If the Son
sets you free\" 2c. It depends on it, and as it is said above \[v. 31.
f.\]: \"If you continue in my speech, you will be my disciples, and the
truth will make you free.\" There it all lies. But they say, Should we
not be free, be godly, and be rid of sins? Do you not see what a
spiritual office we have, how we serve God, sacrifice, wear hard shirts,
fast, tithe, are Pharisees and priests? No, this does not get rid of
sins; this is only serving Moses\' priesthood and foundation. He had
given the law to the Jews, just as the pope had ordered special clothes,
caps, mass and other things; but all this does not mean the truth, nor
God\'s son, nor God\'s word and words. For the Son of God is higher than
all pens, monasteries, caps, and plates; the Son of God and His Word
must teach me that there is something higher and better.

240 **Erl. 48, SSL-zgt. Sermon On John 8:34-38. W. VII, W40-W4S.** 241

It must be something better than the monks, pope and bishops 2c. For
what is not called the Son of God will not make me free. This must be
preached often, if it is to come to pass by the grace of God.

This is the freedom you must learn, that you must be free from sins; if
not, the temple at Jerusalem is of no help to you, nor the pope with all
that he has, whether it be indulgences, bulls, fasts, rosaries, prayers,
or whatever. The Jews nor the Pope will not set us free, but only the
Son. How does this happen? When one hears his word, that Christ was born
of Mary, suffered, crucified, died and was buried, and on the third day
rose again from the dead 2c. O, says one, I can do that very well; it is
an old sermon; the pope, cardinals and bishops know it too. Yes, they
know it well. This lesson of the children learns, in these words, how we
are redeemed and made free. Yes, they say, it is a mean speech and word,
that is why it does not work. But it is a great virtue that the children
pray it and understand it before they do; but we old fools, the more
learned and clever we want to be, 1) the less we know and understand
about it. The freeing must be done in such a way that you think of
something other than that which is in you, or in the papacy, or in the
saints, or in Moses; but that there is something higher than all this,
namely, the Son of God. Who is he? In the Symbolo we say: Conceived by
the Holy Spirit, born of Mary, died 2c. Know then that if Christ sets me
free, that he dies for me, and sheds his blood, and rises from the dead,
and sits down at the right hand of God.

The play and the speeches point me to the Son, who sets me free. Whoever
does not believe or learn this, and clings to the Son, may do what he
will, but all is lost, and must remain in sins. This is a sermon that
must be heard much and often.

1\) In the original: \"are want\". The Erlanger has omitted \"wollen\".

preach often, so that one may become full of the teaching. But I am not
yet full of it; this preaching is like bread, of which the body does not
grow weary. One can be full of other food, but one does not get full of
bread, unless one is sick so that he cannot eat; but a healthy person
does not get tired of bread. So a Christian man does not learn the faith
his whole life, neither you nor some saints, he is called Mary or John
the Baptist.

Therefore we must sit with the children by the stove and learn this
doctrine; without some having been so taught in a sermon that they know
everything, but when it comes to the meeting, they need the words to be
recited to them, and that a child of four years must pray the faith to
them. In the meantime, they pray psalms, just as the monks and nuns read
the Psalter and recite it by heart; but in mortal distress, when one is
to die, monks, nuns and priests cannot find a single letter in the
Psalter to comfort themselves. Nor shall such a one be called a great
theologian, since in his highest distresses he neither can nor knows
that which otherwise a child of four years can. Well, you excellent,
highly learned saint, don\'t you know that? Well, the Lord Christ knows
that there is much in it, and that people despise the article, learn it
too soon, become doctors too early, and when they have heard it, they
think that they soon know it by heart and can do it; but it is nothing.

This teaching applies when death comes and the devil speaks to you,
saying, \"You are forsaken by God, you are in sin, and your conscience
also rejects you. It is not a doctrine written in words, but a living
doctrine, which does not say what to do and what to say, but how to
live, and how to defend and preserve life against death, and that you do
not enter into the devil\'s mouth; then words and boasting will not do
it, nor will it end.

This is what John the evangelist is always urging. He cannot preach this
sermon enough, he cannot preach that it is all in Christ; for through
him, all things have been revealed.

242 Erl. 48, SS4-ssv. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2843-254.\" 243

we all. He knows that many will say, \"Lord, Lord,\" 2c. \[Matth. 7,
21.\], but they are very few who want to be freed from sins through the
Son, which happens when I believe in Christ, that he died for me and
suffered; this makes me free from sins; not through you, or your
fasting, or through monasticism and nunnery, mass, pilgrimage or Mary\'s
intercession, or other holy invocation; but that I have redemption
through the Son alone. For there is no one else born of Mary, buried,
dead, and risen from the dead, ascended into heaven, except the one man
Christ; there is no one else, neither in heaven, nor on earth, nor an
angel, who can help us.

For this reason we should also cling to the man alone, and recognize him
alone as our Savior. I know many of them who have learned these things
early, but I cannot. Therefore I teach it, and say that it is God\'s
work alone, and that it all depends on it, that one man should be
separated from all the others, and read \[God\'s words in the
children\'s faith\] 1) together, and throw everything else away into a
corner, and say: I will not be saved by this, everything must be cut
off; but if I want to become confident, have peace in my conscience, and
be free of sins, then I should believe what the children believe. There
it is in the Symbola, they say: I believe in Jesus Christ, my Lord, who
died, was buried and rose again. Then they say: Yes, that is a mean
thing, I want to learn something special. It is true; but learn only so
much that you know him as well as children know him. But it is said in
the proverb: The longer, the worse, and the older, the worse; therefore
we also despise the word, and become proud, and weary of the word,
become smart, let ourselves think we can do it well; but when it comes
to the meeting, we know nothing about it, and then the children are our
teachers and praeceptores. I know well what happened to me in this case;
it will happen to you, too.

237-. So now one is to become free that

they, the Jews, do not say that they are God\'s people and Abraham\'s
seed, and serve God; for with this they will not become free, for sin is
too great, they will not put down death and the devil with it. There is
but one means and handle, namely, \"If the Son shall make you free, then
are ye lawfully free.\" He wants you to put down and let go of
everything that you think helps to make you free, be it temple,
sacrifice or other worship, and look only to Christ. If you think so, he
says, I will make you free, and if you know the childish faith, you will
know it.

238 If this is done, then the other freedom will also be found. For even
if I am thrown into prison and bound with ropes by the pope, I am still
hopeful and defiant, and say to him: \"You, pope, are my servant, and I
am master of these chains or prison, for they shall not take away this
freedom from me, and shall not be a hindrance to my faith and
Christianity. These bonds shall not harm me, but be useful, and promote
Christ; and the more you torture and afflict me with the prison, with
laws, temptations and terrors, the better I am served thereby. St. Paul
also boasts and rejoices in the bonds, and is equally hopeful within; as
if he should say: Another would say: O the prison is my lord, and the
councilors of Rome have to rule over me, as my commanding lords: but I
even turn it around and say: Dear executioner, dear authorities, you are
my servants, I am your lord; with what you do to me, and with what you
attack me, you only make my cause better; I cannot owe it to you, 2) for
you only make my faith more proud and more splendid. And one must pray
against such a servant as against a mad, raging dog. And what else does
such a tyrant do, who takes fire, water, sword and all other torture and
torment, and wants to kill me and even oppress me, but that he lifts me
up and sets me in heaven? This follows after you have freedom first.

1\) Inserted by us.

> 2\) owe \-\-- give full thanks.

244 **Erl. 48, SW-zgs. Sermon On John 8:34-38. W. VII, 2S4S-2S49.** 245

239 But the pope and the world will not suffer this, that they let
Christ alone be something and be valid, and believe in him alone, and
let everything else go against it, but want us also to do our part, as
keeping mass and founding monasteries, and say: Should we be saved by
faith in Christ alone? So we want to carry the tree on both armpits, and
at the same time blow hot and cold from one mouth. So the Jews here also
want to do it, saying: You carpenter\'s servant, you beggar, you poor
wretch, should you make us free? You say that so much depends on your
preaching that all our good works and good laws are nothing against it;
therefore always dead, dead, and you burned and crucified. So it goes.

240 Therefore it is a great sermon which the Holy Spirit preaches to
children and the simple. The old fools, as I am one, learn it with
difficulty; the young children learn it most. But the others learn this
wisdom too much, so that when they have heard it once, they think they
know it. But I feel that I cannot grasp it. St. Paul also complains
about it, saying: \"I would like to believe it and think that it is
God\'s word, but there is one in my flesh who disputes it and will not
let it be good \[Rom. 7:18, 19\].

241 Therefore, you must preach it every day, and keep on the main thing,
that you may become free here before, and then the other worldly freedom
will also follow. But if you want to begin and act from carnal freedom,
you will get into such a wild and desolate state that you will lose
both. There you follow. \"He that committeth sin is the servant of
sin,\" and he hath death for his master, and hell is his master also; he
cannot escape them. Where then shall I be loosed? Then they say: I will
build a chapel, endow a perpetual mass, go on pilgrimages, fast, and
become a monk 2c. Yes, yes, says Christ, that is the right way; but if
you let yourself be freed from sins by him who is called the Son of God,
then you are free; if you give yourself to him, and let him make you
free, then it is right; if not, whatever you do will not help you, it is
all in vain and for nothing.

**The thirteenth sermon.**

Saturday after Oculi s9. March\] 15324)

**V. 39-41. They answered and said unto him, Abraham is our father. Said
JEsus unto them: If ye were Abraham\'s children, ye would do Abraham\'s
works: but now ye seek to kill me, such a man as I have told you the
truth, which I have heard of GOD, which Abraham did not do. Ye do the
works of your father. Then they said: We are not born out of wedlock, we
have a father, GOD 2c.**

242 You have heard in the Gospel of St. John that Christ says to the
Jews (v. 34, 36): \"He that committeth sin is the servant of sin,\" and:
\"If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. In these
words he preached true Christian liberty, and praised and set it apart
against the Jews, because they wanted to make a carnal liberty out of
it, and thought that if they were great lords, and had the whole world
under them, then they would be free. But he says that he did not come
for the same freedom, to make men free according to the flesh, as the
world and all men would have it, but that he had to do with another
freedom, which is eternal, namely, a freedom from sins. He does not
bring a temporal or carnal freedom, but a spiritual and eternal one.
Therefore he wants to say: That you boast that you are Abraham\'s
children is not enough; there is more to it: Plus requiritur ad
libertatem christianam, than that ye should be Abraham\'s child,
Abraham\'s flesh and blood. So you will not become free; for Abraham
himself did not become free because he was born of the flesh and blood
of his father (although the Jews boast much about the fleshly birth),
but his freedom comes from the fact that God promised him the blessed
seed \[Gen. 22:18\]. Therefore let Abraham depart, and all that you have
to boast of Abraham, and see to it that you alone come to be free
through me; otherwise you will not be free, and will have to remain
servants forever.

1\) In the original margin.

[246 Erl. 48, SW-401. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2S4S-25SI. 247]{.underline}

This was the worst heresy among the Jews, that he, Christ, should appear
and say to the Jewish people: Through me you shall be free; God grant,
you have Abraham, Moses or the law, yet all of it is of no use to you;
come to me alone, or you are lost. For this was in their way, that they
knew Abraham was called a friend of God; item, they had the promise of
God that they should be called God\'s people. Then he wanted to tear all
this apart and turn back, and not boast about Abraham, but says:
Remember and \"come to me, all you who are troubled, and I will give you
rest\", and help you \[Matth. 11, 28.\], or you will never be set free
and will be eternally lost. This means: Abraham is nothing, and all
promises of God, which Abraham had of freedom, are also nothing without
me; so it was said in the ears of the Jews.

244 Now he continues, and makes a plea, and wants to resolve their
argumenta, and says:

**V. 37. I know well that you are Abraham\'s seed.**

245 As if he should say: You insist that Abraham is your flesh and
blood, and that you come from him; but with this you will not stop my
mouth, nor put in my sermon. As if I, Doctor Luther, wanted to say: I
know that you are bishops and priests, and that you are baptized, item,
are in the episcopal office, and are in the church, come from Christ;
but that is not enough, therefore you are not yet the true church. They
say, should this not help us, that we are among the Christians, in the
Christian church, and have a Christian office? That should not be the
end of it. It was much higher with them \[the papists\] than with us,
when they said that they were the Christian church. For they wanted to
say with it: Poke and preach what you want, the Christian church will
not err; otherwise God himself would have to err. As they \[the Jews\]
say here: We are Abraham\'s seed, God\'s children, God\'s people; or
Abraham is not a servant of God. But if Abraham is a friend of God, then
we are also God\'s children and His people. As

Now the papists also say: If Christ does not err, and he is God, then we
are also the Christian Church, and the Pope does not err. We know it
well, you must not teach me; you come from baptism, and from the right
stock, and are among the number of Christians, and can tell the ten
commandments, pray the Lord\'s Prayer, and hear the sermon; but that you
say, therefore I am a Christian - not yet, that is not yet being of
Christ; just as they say here that they are of Abraham\'s seed. But the
Lord Christ saith, Ye are not yet free for this cause: ye must come unto
me, and be made free by me, or die in your sins, and perish. What then
is the fault that there is not enough in being Abraham\'s seed? Were not
Abraham\'s children God\'s servant people? Yea, saith he, \"Ye are
servants of sin, and seek to kill me: for my word soweth not in you.\"

This is an abominable sermon, and a great distinction among Abraham\'s
children. As if to say, I know ye are Abraham\'s children, but ye do
your father\'s works; ye are Abraham\'s children, but ye have another
father. He makes them two fathers: Abraham is your father, but you have
another father, whose children you are. If therefore ye be not loosed
from the same father, that ye do not his works, it is no help that ye
are Abraham\'s seed. For ye would have been Abraham\'s seed, if another
father, the devil, had not come unto you; but now ye are murderers and
the children of devils; so rhyme it together. Abraham\'s seed shall
inherit Abraham\'s kingdom and the promise, or the promised blessing,
the kingdom given to Abraham, his offspring shall possess it all; but
now ye are murderers and slayers, though ye be of his seed. So it is
divided. If you remained Abraham\'s children (as you are his natural
children), and were not false children, a seed and children of murder,
2) of the devil, you would be true children and soon be free; but
because you seek to kill me, you are not true Abraham\'s children.

These are the two delicious virtues,

1\) \"a Christian\" put by us instead of: \"Christians\".

2\) Perhaps: murderers.

248 **Erl. 4S, 401-tos. Sermon on John 8:36-41. W. VII, 2SSI-2SS4.** 249

that whoever falls from this faith, doctrine and word has the two
things, that he is a liar and a murderer. I also say to the Father, the
Pope, thus: You are baptized and washed from sins by the baptism of
Christ, as St. Peter says: your sin and death is drowned by baptism, and
by the divine word; you are finely cleansed and washed, but you are
again entangled in sin. Just as a sow, which has been washed clean,
finely washed and bathed, but quickly falls into the next mud, and
becomes sinful again; 1) then I say, \"Dear sow, you have indeed been
bathed, and are finely clean; but why do you not stay out of the puddle
and mud, so that you do not become sinful again? So also I say, that the
bishops are bathed, made clean and beautiful by the blood of Christ,
also called and baptized by the gospel, 2c. but they want to go back
again; as the sow after the mud rolls in the next puddle and atones, so
they also become murderers and liars.

That is to fall away from Christ and not to remain with Christ;
therefore you are liars, for my speech is the truth, which you do not
hear, and he who does not hear the truth is a liar and is full of lies;
he cannot grasp and suffer God\'s word and the truth. After that, when
he has grasped the lies, he cannot be fond of the one who speaks and
teaches the truth, but he hates him and would gladly kill him. If he
does not do it with his fist, he does it with his heart, and thus
becomes a murderer; for these two virtues follow one another, lying and
murder. As also happened in paradise. When the devil had brought Adam
from the truth to the lie, and had taken away the soul by the lie, he
also tore away the body by death; so he has done it. Today the bishops
also boast that they are the Christian church, but they do not want to
suffer the truth of Christ and suppress it, confirming their lies again.
If we do not want to confess this, we will be hanged, drowned, burned
and driven out. So now the citizens, peasants and nobles do to us that
their hatred and envy rises against us, if we do not want to be like
them. So it goes

1\) sülen - to pollute.

even if you tell the great Hansen of the truth, no one is favorable to
the preachers.

This servant of two sins becomes the one who falls away from Christ and
his word, and does not stand right with him; he becomes a liar and an
enemy of the truth, and also an enemy of the life of his neighbor. It is
a beautiful virtue that a man becomes so evil that he becomes an enemy
of God and man through lies, that he cannot stand the truth. He is an
enemy of our Lord God, who lets him preach the truth, and if he could
kill God, he would. But he does as much as he can with blasphemy,
cursing and desecration. But he murders and kills man.

The Lord Christ wants to say here: You see what two beautiful virtues
you have; you are hostile to God and men, who do not keep it with you;
therefore you are not free, because you commit these two sins, the devil
rides you. Now how can the pope be more like the devil than that he is
hostile to everything that God and men say and do? These two sins are
two great lords and imperatores, and if they possess a man, he would
like all the world to be dead. So do the pope, his bishops and princes,
yes, citizens, peasants and everyone now; they are all God\'s and man\'s
enemies; they do not want to hear the truth preached to them, so they
also cannot stand that a man who leads God\'s word does not want to be
silent about their evil things. Therefore, if one could kill them all,
one would gladly do so. That is where condemnation, judgment, judging,
blasphemy and killing come from. This is Abraham\'s seed.

Now, you noble little animal, you little herb, you little fruit and
flower, are you Abraham\'s seed? Yes, the seed of the devil. According
to flesh and blood they are Abraham\'s seed, but according to works they
are the devil\'s seed. Just as the pope is the Christian church
according to baptism, the Gospel and the Scriptures, but because he is
the enemy of God and of all Christians, he has fallen away from baptism
and Christ, and has the devil for a father. His children are he, all his
cardinals, bishops, monks and priests, because they are all murderers
and liars.

[250 Eri. 48, 404-40\". Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn,
2554-2557. 251]{.underline}

252 Therefore Christ says here, \"You want to kill me, because my words
do not sow anything in you. Whence cometh this sin, that ye grudge me
life, and would gladly take it from me? Should 1) ye be loosed and
delivered from sins? and should ye be Abraham\'s seed? You must be
God\'s enemy and murderer. This is the main sin that drives them, for
they are enemies of God. If you would be friendly to God, you would also
be friendly to me. And say, \"My words do not sow anything in you.\"
God\'s word assaults you, but you do not turn; I see nothing in you with
my net; I cast my word among you, but you are contrary to my word, and
are hostile to God. Therefore, since you hate my word and are opposed to
it, you must also be hostile to me. But God has the advantage that you
cannot kill him, but you can kill me who can die. Therefore an
unbeliever is a murderer of God and of men, called Abraham\'s seed, or
whatever else he may be. For if he could kill God and suppress the truth
and erase the divine word, he would do so; that is called murdering God.
Then he is also a murderer of men.

This sermon was preached against the boasting of the Jews. For they
thought that because they were Abraham\'s seed, they could not perish.
There is a great defiance, which is going on enormously in the papacy,
yes, even among us, that many boast of them and say: We are evangelical,
have learned this doctrine well, boast that everything they do is right,
think as if the gospel should do what they like, just as the Jews also
thought that they were Abraham\'s seed and wanted to do what they
wanted. Just as the pope and the bishops also think that they were
baptized for this reason, so that they can do whatever they want in the
church and Christianity. Now this is a strong sermon and solution: God
does not ask anything of you, whether you are Abraham\'s seed and have
been baptized, whether you have accepted the gospel and hold much of the
doctrine; but take care that you do not become God\'s murderer and
man\'s murderer. For thou art a

1\) \"Should\" here and immediately following placed by us instead of:
\"sollet\".

Such a fellow who will not hear the word of God and will not suffer the
truth; you will not hear that you are punished; and when you have long
profaned and blasphemed the word of God, then the death blow follows
from it, that with the fist God\'s servant and preacher is also
murdered.

254 So then it must be distinguished that one says: I know well that you
are evangelical, you can speak and write about it and hear it, but you
are therefore not a Christian man. For see how you stand against those
who preach and speak the truth. How many are there in this principality
who do not hate their village priests to the worst? When they tell them
the truth, and touch them in the pulpit for their sins, that they live
unjustly, they mean nothing else than that the village pastors have well
deserved to be beaten to death, and yet they boast that they are also
good evangelicals. Yes, says Christ, you are good evangelicals, as he
says here to the Jews: I know well that you are Abraham\'s seed, but you
do not want to hear the truth, and are hostile to those who preach the
truth to you. Do they mean Abraham\'s children and evangelicals? This
does not come from baptism, but from the sorrowful hell; and you alone
cover and adorn yourselves with the name and title of the church and
Christians.

These are the two virtues, beware of them. He who once falls from the
gospel does not take it seriously; Christ also cries out to him that he
is the enemy of God and man and a murderer. And he cannot avoid it or
leave it, he must kill. Although he covers himself and adorns himself,
and does not kill with his fist, he does it with his heart and mouth; if
he could do it with his hand, he would. And we see this example among
the nobility, peasants and citizens, and yet they all want to be
evangelical. It goes along by force, well, it will be found. We alone
shall learn that it must be so, they must remain the enemies and
murderers of God and man, saith Christ; for my speech soweth nothing in
you.

**V. 38. I speak what I have heard from my father 2c.**

256 Then he does not call Abraham their father anymore. Before that he
said: I know that you are

252 **He,. 48, 406-408. Sermon on John 8, 36-41. W. VII, 2SS7-2S60.**
253

You are Abraham\'s children, being born of Abraham\'s flesh and blood.
Just as we say to the priest, \"We know that you have been baptized and
have learned the gospel, but you do not live by it. But if ye would know
who ye are, consider a little in your heart your sins and your works,
which shall bear witness. Thus says the Lord Christ: \"I speak what the
Father has commanded me. My word is truth, but there is nothing in you:
you do not see my words, you ask nothing of them, but want to be
murderers, and see to it that you do as your father the devil does; this
you will do. And there is no other cause of murder, but that I preach
and say what God has commanded me, and you will not hear God\'s truth,
nor suffer me. The cause is that I preach and speak that which I have
seen of my Father; the word and the doctrine alone make you murderers,
and that ye persecute the word of God in me, and become murderers over
it.

Thus it will come to pass that both the princes and the nobles will want
one to preach what they like and what they want. If one touches them,
they say, one is stirring up rebellion, one is stabbing them, one is
slandering and denigrating them. If one scolds them, they say one is
seditious; that is already on the track. So they will bind the
preachers\' mouths, and where they will not praise them, they will put
all vices and plagues on the preachers. These have learned nothing from
the Gospel, but they follow their father, the devil, who cannot hear the
word of God, and against it exposes his behind. So they also despise the
word and are enemies of it. If you tell the world how to do it, it will
soon want to kill those who teach the truth. They persecute the truth by
lies, and will not suffer it; that is, God slain. After that, whoever
does not want to praise them, and worship the devil, and keep quiet
about their sins, they want to murder him quickly.

258 Christ says: \"Ask yourselves, how free you are, where your freedom
is; what children are you? Yea, ye are bondmen, not of sins only, but ye
are bondmen.

are also children of the devil. The devil is an enemy of truth, and is
also an enemy of life; therefore he murders all preachers, and destroys
everything that God speaks, just as you do. I also preach the truth, and
ye also seek to kill me; therefore are ye not the children of your
father, as ye call yourselves, but are ye the children of the devil,
because ye do that which ye have learned of your father, master, and
lord, the devil. He has learned disciples; the truth ye will not suffer,
nor hear me; ye follow not the preaching, neither can ye suffer the
preachers.

That is a strong sermon, and now it is also going on on our side. The
majority of the evangelicals are now becoming devils. They have heard
the gospel and are liberated, that they are no longer under the pope;
now we trample the preachers underfoot, want them to die of hunger, and
oppress those who preached this freedom to them, yes, who saved and
redeemed them. Then say also, I know well that ye are evangelicals; but
ye do as your father did, ye are God\'s and our enemies, and are
murderers. Therefore do not boast much of the gospel, because you do not
honor God, nor hear His word, nor respect those who preach to you and
confess God\'s word, so you are not God\'s children nor true Christians,
for you persecute God\'s word and His servants. Well, we want to suffer
gladly that we are persecuted by the heathen, and Duke George also
torments us, and I want to be quite happy about it, and let his anger be
quite ridiculous to me; but that those want to do it who are supposed to
be true Christians, as the evangelicals, and who have the name of the
church, that is no good. For I should hold in honor a Christian who has
been baptized, for the sake of the name he bears, and that he may be
marked. In the same way, one Christian should hold another in high
esteem, honor, love and esteem, for the sake of the one who dwells in
the Christian. Therefore, if a nobleman tramples underfoot his pastor,
and if anyone else despises Christians, he cannot be evangelical, but is
possessed by the devil, and an enemy of God, and a murderer in heaven
and on earth. And since a judge will come upon these murderers, and will
cry out against them, so persecute the truth,

[254 toss. (2.) IS, 334. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VII,
2SS0-WW. 255]{.underline}

and killed the Christians, they will suddenly pass away.

This should frighten us, so that we do not despise the word of God, nor
his servants; for one is hostile to those who lead the word. These
persecutors will probably find their judgment tremendous. For he who is
such a fellow has here his judgment, that he is the enemy of God the
Lord and of men, and is counted by God and men a damned and condemned
murderer. Otherwise it is a common saying in the world that whoever
speaks the truth has nowhere to stay, he will be persecuted, for no one
wants to be punished. Thus the world is the wicked devil\'s people, the
devil\'s children and servants, and bound under sin.

They think they are good evangelicals who love the gospel, and yet they
are very secure. They do not believe that, but they think they are good
evangelicals who love the gospel, and yet they are very safe; but it
will end badly one day.

This is what we wanted to say about this text, since the Jews boasted
that they were Abraham\'s children, his flesh and blood. But it
indicates that they are the children of harlots, and have fallen away
from God their Father to the devil, who teaches them to persecute God\'s
word and the truth, and to preach lies, and then to oppress and kill
those who preach and confess the truth.

1\) Erlanger: learn.

**H. Sermon on the passage Joh. 6, 29.\*)**

1537\. (?)

**This is God\'s work, that you believe in Him whom He has sent.**

These are John\'s words, and he leads them, as he is wont to write, the
way of Jesus; he leads them from the vision into the Word, Articulus
creationis, which alone belongs to God the Father. As we have been in
the Word, so we must go again into the Word, if we now cease to be. We
were in the Word before we were human beings. Into the word John drives
it, does not let it remain with the bad work, but teaches them, how they
will remain eternally in the word. This is called, in good German,
believing in God.

\(2\) This is a peculiarly good work of God; to whom it is hidden,
nothing shall help him afterward, though he have done the work of all
men. Nor can any man have this work with himself. Christ is not with the
disciples, but comes to them by another road 2).

2\) In the editions: \"to another road\".

The people come to him and love him because he feeds their bellies. It
is a great work of God to give sunshine, rain, life and food. This work
they praise, that he has fed them so abundantly: nor will he suffer
anything, that they thus praise him of food. Is this not God\'s work?
What is it then? So it must be something higher.

3 For this reason John wants to teach us here that we should look
carefully to see through whom such a work has flowed, namely through the
word. So Christ says here: Ye come unto me for the belly, glorify me
also for the belly, and for the food. I exhort you, if ye shall be
filled for ever, and not die, ye must have a higher work, which only the
Son of man can give you. Therefore they lift up and say:

**V. 28. What shall we do to work God\'s work?**

3\) \"not\" is missing in the Erlanger in both editions.

\*This sermon is among the twenty-one sermons (compare the proof of the
same in the seventh volume of our edition, according to the table of
contents.), which D. Caspar Güttel, pastor of St. Andreä in Eisleben,
bequeathed to his church. See the note Walch, St. Louis edition, vol.
VII, Col. 842. In the collective editions: in the Halle part p. 387; in
the Leipzig, vol. XII, p. 595 and in the Erlangen, I. Auf!., vol. 18, p.
41; 2nd Ausl., vol. 19, p. 334. We reproduce the text according to the
old edition of Walch with comparison of the Erlangen.

256 **Erl. (s.) IS, SSS-3S7. Sermon on Joh. 6, 29. W. VII, 2SS2-2SW.**
257

We thought this was a work of God, feeding people in the wilderness
where there is no flour and bread, Ps. 37:19: Tempora Tempore famis
saturabuntur pii. It must rain before bread; not that the bread does,
but the word that blesses the bread, that gives the people prosperity.
Not all have prosperity from bread, but only those on whom God speaks
the blessing and his word: Non in solo pane vivit homo. He withdraws the
blessing from the sick, it shall not be well with them; that is the
rough experience. Now go on, let it be another thing, to work God\'s
work, and to know by whom it is done. Hoc est opus Dei, ut credatis
etc., that is the special work, that we believe in him 2c., that is a
great wonder. Are these not God\'s works, that He created the world,
that the herbs have great power, that His rulers give, that they lead a
fine honorable, chaste, honest life, good police and peace? These are
all God\'s works. So also in the Jewish language there is only pietas
and God\'s name; their language is nothing but holiness; as in the Greek
language there is nothing but wisdom, which is a gift of God. Item, to
possess goods, to have wife and child and cattle, is a gift of God. Nor
does Christ say that it is not a special work of God, even though they
are works of God. But without the special work of God, all other works
of God are harmful to people.

005 What profit is it to the heathen that they are wise? What good is it
for all the world, that they have house and home full, wife and child
and cattle? They must go to hell with all these works of God. Yes, all
creatures, sun, moon, stars must be conducive for them to hell. But
where this work is that I believe in the one whom God has sent, it
follows that one esteems God higher than all creatures. For the believer
has overcome God with all the good that is God\'s; indeed, God will
protect him from all his enemies and will not abandon him in any
trouble. He is already in heaven, even though he already has flesh and
blood on his neck; yes, in this divine man a knowledge of all creatures
grows. So we have cows, pigs,

Geese, chickens, fish, birds, there we have our food, slaughter oxen and
calves, need horses and donkeys for our food, the sheep give us skirts
and furs. So the believer concludes, \"If God is so kind in creatures
that He feeds and clothes me, how great must God be in Himself? This is
an opus fidei that God works in me when he comes to me. Another one
thinks, if ten cargos of grain grow for him, he would like to have a
hundred; the other one is content, praises God in all creatures, in the
vineyard, in the apple tree; also desires: Oh, how good is this God in
himself, oh, if I should see him once! But against the wicked all
creatures will cry out that we have misused the creatures, and will not
be satisfied, nor will they learn to recognize God from them. This means
to trust in God and to learn His goodness from the creatures. Creatures
also teach us to fear God. When I see a lion, a wolf, a bear, a spider,
a snake or a toad, I am frightened, and I see such a face that I say,
\"Behold, if I am frightened by a snake, how frightened will God be when
he once shows his wrath?

The work teaches us to recognize \[1.\] His goodness, 2. fear, 3.
repentance and contrition, and invocation. The wicked are also afraid of
snakes and wolves, but they do not know what it is for, they do not
think of God to fear Him. That is why the highest special good, God\'s
work, is to believe and trust in God. Thus, in the good creatures there
is repentance and forgiveness of sin, in the evil ones fear and
trembling before God. Whoever does not have the Lord Jesus Christ, no
work of God is useful to him, but harmful. But the Christian says: \"God
does me so much good in his creatures; how kind he is and will be to me
when he is seen in his nature. Item: How can I be kind to sins, seeing
that God thus shows his wrath in his creatures? Who does not want
repentance, contrition and sorrow here 2c.

1\) Erlanger: erlernet.

[258 Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vii, \[ses-esse.
259]{.underline}

**I. Short explanation of the saying \"All that my Father gives me\"
2c., John Cap. 6, 37-40. \*)**

1519\.

**Translated from Latin.**

1 In the Gospel of St. John, one must focus on something quite different
than in the other Gospels. For the purpose of this Gospel is only this,
that we may know from it that man is not able or has nothing at all of
himself, but only through divine mercy. But he treats this mercy in such
a way that he attributes it in every way to the Father alone, and
decides that one must pay honor, glory and thanks to the Father alone.
And, what is even more astonishing, at the same time in one and the same
text he attributes everything to the Father alone in such a way that he
nevertheless claims that everything is common to the Son with the
Father, since, because he is the Son of the Father, everything that the
Father has in the Son therefore belongs to the Father alone, whose Son
is also the one who has everything that the Father has. And he describes
with a quite inexpressible mastery of the Father and the Son equality
and origin. Hence comes the contradiction, \"My doctrine is not mine\"
\[John 7:16\]. How is his \[teaching\] not his? And again, \"The words
that I speak unto you I speak not of myself: but the Father which
dwelleth in me, the same doeth the works\" \[John 14:10.\]. So also
here.

**V. 37. All that my Father gives me comes to me.**

2 That is, no one comes to me, no one recognizes me, no one believes in
me, unless it is given to him by the Father. Accordingly, everything
that comes to me comes, not through his own effort, but through the
mercy of the Father. As he says below v. 44 in the same way: \"No one
can come to me unless the Father draws him;

Similarly, v. 45: \"They will all be taught by God,\" that is, they will
not be taught by human masters, but by the Spirit of God. Thus also
Isaiah speaks in the 54th chapter, v. 13, from which Christ took this
speech: \"I will give that all thy children shall be taught of the
Lord,\" which the apostle Paul does well in 1 Cor. 3, 7, and thus
declares: \"Neither he therefore that planteth, nor he that watereth, is
any thing, but God that giveth prosperity.\" As if to say, We teach all
by the outward word; but if they are not taught inwardly by GOD alone,
they do not come to Christ.

\(3\) Therefore, with this word Christ casts down the hopeful, and those
who think much of themselves, so that they may salutarily despair of
themselves, and come to understand from where it must be obtained that
we come to Christ, and that therefore God alone may be glorified because
of His mercy, which He shows to the unworthy. Therefore Christ says:
\"All that my Father gives me\", this alone, and no other, \"comes to
me\"; therefore all imagination (praesumptio) on our strength is in
vain.

**V. 37. 38. And whosoever cometh to me, him will I not cast out. For I
am come from heaven, not to do my will, but of him that sent me (the
Father).**

\(4\) That is, not only is this entirely due to the Father, that someone
comes to me when he gives it, but also that he who comes is received by
me and not cast out. For we do not come by our own strength, so we are
much less received by our own strength.

\*) Luther wrote this \"short explanation\" in Latin for Spalatin. It is
published under the title: Brevis explicatio dicti ex VI Gap. Johan:
Omne, quod dat mihi pater. Autore D. Marti. Luthe. in the Latin Jena
edition (1579), Dorn. I, toi. 2O7I\>. In German translation it is found
in the Leipzig edition, vol. X, p. 1, which Walch has printed. We have
improved it according to the Latin.

260 Short explanation of Joh. 6, 37-40. W. vn, WW-Wn. 261

or persevere. But that this is to be attributed to the Father, he proves
with this: Because I receive him who comes, not according to my will,
but according to the Father\'s will. And so he most lovingly praises the
Father of mercy to us, and in all that we see happening in Christ, he
leads us to love, honor, and glorify the Father, so that we may not
stand still at the humanity of Christ, through which mercy is shown to
us, but through it be carried away to the invisible Father and admire
him, since we hear from him that he is doing such great things for us
through this humanity of Christ.

\(5\) And this is the only way to know God, from which the teachers of
the doctrines (Doctores sententiarum) have departed far, who have placed
themselves on absolute speculations of the Godhead, and have left the
humanity of Christ behind; and therefore \[without the right knowledge
of God in Christ\] no soul can stand before the greatness of His power,
His majesty, His wisdom. I, along with many others, have miserably
toiled over this, and have fallen into the greatest danger. Therefore, I
repeat it and want to remind you again and again: Whoever wants to think
or speculate about God in a salutary way, must set aside everything
except the humanity of Christ. Let him imagine it either sucking at his
breasts or suffering until his goodness becomes sweet. Then he does not
stop there, but goes on and thinks: \"Behold, he does not do this and
that according to his own will, but according to God\'s will of his
Father; then the most loving will of the Father, which he shows in the
humanity of Christ, will begin to please you. Through this will, God the
Father can be grasped safely and confidently. But if one leaves this
path, there is nothing left but to plunge into the eternal depths. For
he wills that by no other way shall one come to him, know him, and love
him, than by this; as he saith \[John 14:6\], \"I am the way, and the
truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father, but by me.\" Here
you hear the unqualified saying: never

no one comes to the Father without Christ. Practice this way, and you
will soon gain a deeper insight into theology than all scholastics, who
not only do not know this door and this way, but also block it for
themselves through their unfortunate imaginings, as it were through
great scaffolding (machinis) of speculations.

\(6\) But this word, \"I will not cast him out,\" according to the
manner of speaking of Scripture, which affirms most strongly by the
negation, must be so understood: I will not cast him out, but will very
gladly embrace him, so that Christ\'s cheerful and willing obedience to
his Father is thereby expressed, and at the same time his most sweet
love is praised, with which he most lovingly embraces us, who have been
given to him by the Father (only that this is not ascribed to his love
or power, but entirely to the fatherly will), which he wants to be
glorified and known through himself and in himself. As if he said:
Although I have a fervent desire for you and embrace you, I do not want
you to boast about it or to stop there, but I want you to recognize and
love him, according to whose exceedingly good will and by whose command
I embrace you like this. For in this way he loves not himself, nor his
own honor, but he seeks our blessedness, and in this nothing but the
praise and honor and love of the Father, who wants our best and cares
for us in the best way. So that he may praise us and make us accept this
very best will of the Father, which has been entrusted to him, with the
very strongest praise, he declares it and says:

**V. 39. Now this is the will of the Father who sent me, that I should
lose nothing of all that he has given me, but that I should raise it up
at the last day.**

7 Here you see why he does not expel anyone who comes to him. For, he
says, it pleases God, so that the glory may not be given to me and
people may stop at me, but that the will of the Father may be loved, who
wills that I should not cast out anyone who comes to me, yes, that I
should not only not cast him out, but that I should not cast him out.

262 Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vn, Wn-Mi. 263

nor lose them. Therefore, behold how much the Father loves the world,
that he imposes all things upon the Son, whereby ye shall not be cast
out, nor perish, but be preserved. But that he adds, \"But that I should
raise them up at the last day,\" he speaks to refute the foolish mind of
the flesh, for when he said this, the Jews took it as if he spoke of
losing by temporal death. Therefore he says: \"The Father does not want
me to lose one person, but to preserve them all, so that even if they
are lost in the flesh, they will not be lost, but will be preserved in
such a way that they will be raised again on the last day. As he also
saith in like manner in the 11th chapter of John, v. 25: \"I am the
resurrection and the life: he that believeth on me, though he die, yet
shall he live.\" Therefore, those who come to Christ cannot be lost.
Yes, in this very text he clearly shows what he wants to be understood
by \"perishing\"; because he promises that he will raise them from
death; consequently he tells them beforehand that they will die, and yet
not perish. For no one is raised from death unless he has died.
Therefore, those who die are not lost to him, but all things live to
him. If then you ask, What is this will of the Father? What does he
prescribe? By what work shall we merit to come to you, to be given to
you, not to be cast out, not to be lost, but to be preserved and raised
again? Now this he sets here, saying:

**V. 40. Now this is the will of the Father who sent me, that whoever
sees the Son and believes in him shall have eternal life, and I will
raise him up at the last day.**

\(8\) Now here you have what is meant by \"coming to Christ. Hereby he
explained the will of the Father, what he wants, namely, that one comes
to Christ, that is, that one sees him and believes in him, that one is
not cast out, not lost, according to the will of the Father, that is,
that one has eternal life. Accordingly, the will of the Father is this,
that all who are given to Christ may be saved through Christ forever.
These are important

These are just words, which have been sufficiently dealt with in another
time, that faith in Christ is enough for the attainment of eternal
blessedness. He does not say, \"Fast like this, pray like this, do this
and that; but believe in the Son, and you will be saved; this is the
Father\'s will. But lest the carnal mind should think again, as if
eternal life were given without bodily death, he says beforehand, that
though they die, yet they shall not lose eternal life, for they shall be
raised again at the last day. Thus you see how the words of the Gospel
explain themselves, and have their glosses with them, that it is not
necessary to mix in strange things and humanity.

\(9\) Hitherto he hath taught men how they ought spiritually to remember
life and death, and to confess with thanksgiving of all things that we
have received them of the Father, and that we have nothing of ourselves.
But now see, and pay close attention, how he claims that he has the
Godhead and everything in common with the Father. He has said that he
does everything according to the will of the Father; therefore, there is
no doubt that all the works Christ has done are the Father\'s works. But
he also publicly testifies that he himself does the very works that his
Father does, saying, \"And I will raise him up\" from the dead.
Certainly, to give life and to raise again belongs to God alone. But
since it is one and the same work, it is evident that Christ is true God
and one with the Father, because there are not two Gods; and yet, since
he differs from the Father as one who speaks of another, and calls
himself the Son, he nicely concludes that he is true God from the
Father, the true God, and that both are not two, but One God, of equal
power, equally mighty in everything, of equal action and equal will.

\(10\) The same is proved by the words in which he says, \"He will not
cast out any man, neither will he lose any. For it belongs to the same
power to preserve life that it belongs to give life. The Father gives
it, and the Son does not lose it, but receives it. So he is indeed
another, but

264 **Eru 4g, 1-4. Short explanation of Joh. 6, 37-40. W. VII, SS74 s.
VIII, 1-7.** 265

not a different God; he has and can do the same with the Father.

11\. Furthermore, this is the strongest proof of all, that he says: \"He
who believes in the Son\" 2c. It is ungodliness to believe in anyone
other than the one true God; and the Father, who is true God, wants one
to believe in the Son. But what does he want other than that one should
believe in the true God? For he does not want to give his glory to
anyone else; but his glory is this, that one believes in him. For no
creature has enough strength to support or help someone who believes in
him. For to God alone one owes faith, hope, and love, which is why they
are also called the theological virtues (theologicae

virtutes). But he adds: \"that whoever believes in the Son has eternal
life\". The faith in the Son could not grant eternal life at all, if he
would not be eternal and true God himself.

12 Accept this, my dear Spalatin, as a reason to think about the words
further. I, too, see many other things, but I do not have the leisure to
devote myself entirely to them. For I am burdened with much business.
However, I am loathe to deal with the Gospel of John only casually, for
there is so much invaluable theology in it; I have experienced it many
times. Meanwhile, accept this, which I have only touched upon briefly,
and commend me to the most noble prince. Farewell.

**K. D. M. Luther\'s interpretation of the fourteenth, fifteenth and
sixteenth chapters of St. John\'s.\*)**

Preached in 1537 and 1538.

**The fourteenth chapter of John.**

**^1^) Preface.**

1\. in this fourteenth and two following chapters of St. John\'s
Evangelist

1\) We have not considered it necessary to have the text of the 14th
chapter of John printed here, because the words of Scripture are
prefixed to the explanation everywhere in the following interpretation.

We have the beautiful sermon of the Lord Christ, which he preached after
the last supper, when he was to enter upon his passion and leave his
dear disciples behind him, to comfort and strengthen them both against
the present sorrow at his departure and against the future suffering
that would overtake them.

\*Luther preached in 1537, especially between Easter and Pentecost, on
the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters of St. John. These sermons were
transcribed by D. Caspar Cruziger rewrote these sermons and put them
into print with Luther\'s knowledge and will at the beginning of the
year 1538 before April 19 (The first original cited in the Erlangen
edition has this handwritten time determination.). The first single
edition was published in 1538 in Wittenberg by Joseph Klug, then by
Johann Weiß in 1539. Luther\'s sermons on the sixteenth chapter of John,
delivered in 1538 (this is stated in the title of the first edition) and
also transcribed by Cruziger, first appeared in 1539 by Joseph Klug in
Wittenberg and were printed by him again in 1544. In the collective
editions: in the Wittenberg (1553), vol. IV, p. 110; in the Jena (1568),
vol. VII, p. 42; in the Altenburg, vol. VII, p. 45; in the Leipzig, vol.
X, p. 5 and in the Erlangen, vol. 49, p. 1 to vol. 50, p. 265. We give
the text according to the Jena edition, comparing the Wittenberg and the
Erlangen. At the table, as Mathesius relates (Mathesius, Luthers Leben,
St. Louiser Ausgabe, p. 198 f.), Luther called this interpretation his
best book that he had made, \"although I did not make it,\" he said,
\"for Doctor Caspar Cruziger has demonstrated his great intellect and
great diligence in it. This shall be my most valuable and dearest book
after the Holy Bible.\" This statement by Luther \"against his\" wife
occurred on 12 Der. 1542. (Cf. Köstlin, M. Luther, (3.) Vol. II, p. 873
ack p. 437.)

266 Erl. 49, 4-7. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII, 7-L0.
267

would be of the devil, of the world, and of their own conscience.

\(2\) And this, of course, is the best and most comforting sermon that
the Lord Christ has preached on earth, and St. John is to be especially
praised above other evangelists because of this piece, that he has
composed such a sermon and left it for the consolation of Christianity
after him as a treasure and treasure, which cannot be paid for with the
world\'s goods, and indeed would always be a pity and highly to be
lamented if such a sermon were to remain undescribed and we were to be
deprived of such a treasure.

3\. For these are the most loving, kindest consolations and sweetest
words of the faithful, dear Savior of Christ, which he gives to his dear
disciples when he departs from them for the last time, the like of which
no man on earth can ever do and speak to his dearest and best friends,
so that one sees how he, out of vain, full of inexpressible love, cares
for them and takes care of them, so that his heart burns against them,
cares for them and takes care of them, more heartily than any man can
care for his closest friend\'s greatest danger and distress, so that he
forgets his own sorrow and fear (so that he only sustains them through
his comfort), which his heart was full of at that hour (as he himself
says to them: \"My soul is sorrowful unto death\"), and was already in
the highest battle against death and the devil. And here he has
abundantly poured out all the high, heartfelt comfort that all of
Christendom has, and that a person should desire in all hardships and
suffering.

\(4\) Moreover, the right, noblest, high articles of Christian doctrine
are here also most powerfully established and set forth (as is found in
no other place of Scripture); as, of the three distinct persons of the
holy Trinity, and especially, both, of the divine and human nature, and
yet eternal inseparable person of the Lord Christ; item, of the
righteousness of faith, and of the right consolation of consciences. For
here he speaks of the high things, how a man may surely meet and take
hold of God, stand before Him, and be sure of His grace, and thereupon
found his heart, and maintain his defiance against all kinds of
temptation. And if these articles are all so clear and forceful

The only reason for this is that it can be used to defeat all heretics
and red spirits (by whatever name they are called).

\(5\) It is therefore right and proper that this preaching be diligently
practiced and done in Christendom. For this reason, these three chapters
have been divided into the Gospels between Pentecost and Easter from
time immemorial. And whoever would like to do them properly one after
the other during this time. Therefore, we have also taken pains to
interpret them for the simple, but mostly to preserve the right, pure
doctrine of Chxisto and Christian faith against the troublesome devil\'s
caves (whether present or future). And herewith we want to command such
sermon to the pious Christians as their highest and most precious
treasure and comfort, to learn and keep it with diligence.

**\[V. 1. And he said to his disciples:\] Do not let your heart be
troubled.**

6 Here you see first of all how warmly and faithfully the kind Lord
Christ takes care of his dear disciples and cares for them, so that he
does not leave them without comfort, because it was now about to happen
that he would be separated from them that very night through his bitter
suffering and cross (as he had told them many times before), and leave
them alone behind him in great danger, fear and terror.

007 For until then they had always been secure, confident, and without
fear, because he himself was with them in person, and they saw how he
showed himself so mightily among the people with preaching and miracles
that they all had to take notice of him; and the chief priests and
rulers themselves had to fear, and worry that where they attacked him
the whole people would stir up against them. Therefore the apostles,
though they were poor and lowly men, yet they were without care or fear,
and went as though before others they should be afraid. For they
thought: because this man lives for us, there is no need, he can well
protect and save us 2c. Therefore, St. Peter was such a wonderfully bold
man and fearless apostle that he was ready and willing to go to his
death with Christ, even though the others all denied him, and he began
to do so,

[268 **Eri. 49, 7-9. Sermon on Joh. 14, 1. W. VIII, 10-13.**
269]{.underline}

When the Jews saw Christ, he immediately stood up to defend himself and
began to strike them with the sword, unaware that the mob was large and
armed with weapons. And as long as they had Christ with them, they could
not worry about anything and would have remained safe from anyone.

008 But when Christ shall declare unto them that he must depart from
them, he sheweth and prophesieth unto them beforehand, that it shall be
much otherwise unto them than so far, and that now their hearts shall be
tried with fear and trembling. And it came to pass, when he was gone, so
shamefully, miserably, and grievously put to death, that their hearts
were soon troubled, and they shut themselves up in fear, and hid
themselves, and could not come forth.

\(9\) For it was also a terrible, dreadful thing, that the Christ, who
before was feared and dreadful to all the councillors and priests of
Jerusalem, should suddenly become so weak and so utterly forsaken, that
he should fall into the hands of his enemies, who should deal with him
most grievously and put him to the most shameful death. This is no
longer the Christ who raised the dead, who threw the buyers and sellers
out of the temple, and was so astonished that everyone was astonished by
it, but so weak and despised as the poorest, most miserable man on
earth, whom everyone tramples underfoot, and the very least spit at him.
This had ever fallen far and low from the former glorious form, so that
the dear disciples, when they were still weak in faith and had not
experienced such blows, had to worry and tremble: \"Oh, where will we
stay now? He was our comfort and defiance, now he is gone, and we have
no one to protect us or to help us, now our enemies are strong and
powerful, but we are weak and abandoned by all the world 2c.

\(10\) Against such future fears and terrors he comes before them, as a
devout, faithful Lord, with this comfort and admonition, that they may
nevertheless remain and not despair. He tells them of the things that
should and must happen to them, so that when they do, they will remember
that he told them beforehand and admonished them against them.

do not be afraid.\" As if he should say: \"I know well, my dear
disciples, how you will fare when I come from you 1) and leave you
alone, that you will be overcome by terror and fear; and you will see
such a thing in me that you will have great cause to tremble, that your
heart may melt in your body, and you will not know where to stay. This I
tell you beforehand, and for this very reason, that you do not let your
heart be taken away so soon, but be bold, and prepare yourselves for the
battle, and when it comes, remember this my admonition, that you
therefore do not so soon despair and despair 2c.

\(11\) Thus he would gladly lift up and keep their hearts, when he knew
where they were: that, though they felt terror and fear, yet they might
be able to endure, and the more easily withstand it. For it is very
important how the heart is prepared; whether misfortune and terror come
along, that one may nevertheless know how to stay, or have someone to
talk to or remind him of a comforting word; then it is all the easier to
bear. Therefore he preaches this sermon to them beforehand, both to
indicate the future terror and to comfort them, so that they will
remember it afterwards and thus be preserved; although this comfort did
not help at that time, nor did it have any effect until the Holy Spirit
came. But at the time when Christ was gone, it was all over, and neither
heart nor courage was left with them, so that no one could stand before
a fainting servant; all his words and works were gone, and this comfort
was completely forgotten. So this time he exhorted and comforted his
dear apostles, when they also needed comfort.

\(12\) Now it is not written for their sake, but for ours, that we may
learn to use this comfort for present and future needs, and that every
Christian, when he is baptized and has turned to Christ, may and should
also be prepared in this way, and certainly will meet with terror and
fear, which will make his heart dumb and despondent, whether through one
or various enmities and oppositions.

1\) Wittenberger: come.

[270 Eri. \"s, 9-11. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
iz-i\". 271]{.underline}

\(13\) For a Christian has many enemies out of measure when he wants to
stay with his Lord; the world and the devil are daily after his life and
limb, and his own flesh and reason and conscience are always tormenting
him, so that he is easily frightened and troubled, even by his own
heart.

014 But these great causes of fear and trembling are not regarded,
because they are not present. Just as the Jews were neither terrified
nor distressed everywhere when Christ wept over them, saying beforehand
that the city of Jerusalem would be broken up and destroyed, and that
not one stone would be left upon another \[Luc. 19:44\]. So also we,
because trouble is not yet present, and the devil does not afflict us,
nor does sin bite, we think there is no danger, are safe and of good
cheer, and do not think that we will need comfort. But there we should
be instructed and think that surely a terror will follow, either from
the world by disgrace, persecution 2c., or from the devil himself with
his heavy, poisonous arrows and spears, shot into your heart as
melancholy, despair or blasphemy 2c.

15 Therefore, if you also want to be a Christian, like the apostles and
all the saints, prepare yourself, and wait for it with certainty, that
once an hour will come and strike your heart, that you will be afraid
and tremble. For this is proclaimed to all Christians, that they may
learn to be accustomed, and briefly arrange their affairs thus: if they
are now sure that they accept and regard it thus, as if it would soon
change, and think: it would be as long as God wills; today happy and of
good cheer, tomorrow sad; today alive, tomorrow dead; today in happiness
and security, tomorrow in all distress; and not so much as snoring along
for and for, as if it would have no distress.

For the world is so mad and foolish, so blind and obdurate, that it does
not think otherwise when a small fortune comes along and it is certain
that it will remain so forever, and it is drowned in it, so that it
cannot provide for any accident; but lives as if both the devil and all
misfortune were no longer anything. On the other hand, when she is
suddenly overcome by fear and distress, she also falls by the wayside,
has neither heart nor courage any more, but is bad.

despondent and in despair, as if there were no more comfort or hope
forever. Summa, because there is peace, it does not think further,
whether it would turn once, how it wanted to oppose it; but accepts it
so, as if it can never become different. Again, when the weather turns,
and sickness begins to come after a healthy body, war and 1) misfortune
after peace, hunger out of abundance, there is no end to mourning,
trembling and despair. So a Christian should not do, but always think:
If it is peace and quiet now, it will be different tomorrow. The devil
may soon shoot an arrow into your heart, or some other temptation may
strike you. Therefore, see to it that you are prepared when it comes, so
that you can stand firm and take comfort from God\'s word.

17\. Christ knows well, if we want to remain faithful to baptism,
sacrament and gospel, that it cannot be otherwise, we must have the
devil as our enemy, who attacks us without ceasing with all his power,
and is after us body and soul; And although God does not prevent him
from strangling you in one day, he does not let up with all kinds of
wiles and tricks, so that he at least takes away your courage and
security, and brings you to trouble and sadness, and then also to other
danger and trouble. Because it must therefore happen that we have to run
under the devil\'s pikes and let him torment and torture us, Christ
wants to admonish and comfort us herewith, so that we should not get too
frightened, nor let the devil take us so easily that he brings us to
gloom and despair.

\(18\) Therefore let this comfort also be told us, and so let us imagine
and understand that we need it, and can strengthen ourselves with it
when we feel affliction and fear, as if we then heard Christ say such
words to us: What are you doing? Will you be frightened to death and
tremble for this? Be of good cheer, and take heart; it is not yet over
whether the devil, the world, or your own conscience afflicts and
terrifies you, and you do not feel me present. Do you not know that I

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlangen.

272 **Erl. 49, 11-14. Sermon on Joh. 14, 1. W. VIII, 16-18.** 273

I have told you long before, and left behind me the comfort that should
strengthen and sustain you? 2c. Behold, we ought to learn and become
accustomed to make use of this comfort of the Lord Christ by daily
practice, in all our trials, so that we do not let this be said and
written to us in vain.

\(19\) And from these and such like words and admonitions of Christ we
shall also learn to know the Lord Christ rightly, that we may gain the
more hearty and comforting confidence in him, and pay more attention to
his word than to all that may come before our eyes, ears, and senses.
For if I am a Christian, and hold fast to him, I ever know that he
speaks to me. Now I hear here and elsewhere that all his words are meant
to comfort me; indeed, everything he speaks and does, or thinks, are all
kind, comforting words and works.

20 Therefore it must be certain, and not lacking, that if a man mourn,
and have a sore and troubled heart, it must not be of Christ. For he is
not the man who wants to frighten hearts or make them sad and
melancholy. For he has just come to this, and has done everything, and
has also sat down in heaven for this reason, that he might take away the
sadness and terror of the heart, and instead give a cheerful heart,
conscience and thoughts, and also for this reason promises to send the
Holy Spirit to his disciples and Christians; and calls him a Comforter,
by which he wants to strengthen and sustain them, after he had to pass
away from them in the flesh.

\(21\) Now if any man could learn this, and take it into his heart, as
Christ speaketh with his mouth, and testifieth that it is abhorrent and
grievous in him, when a Christian\'s heart is sad or troubled, he would
be well off, and would have gained more than half. For if it comes to
this, that I know the enemy, who wants to frighten and sadden me, and
where such thoughts and ideas come from, then I already have a firm
footing and rock, on which I can stand and defend myself, and say: This
is not my Lord Christ, but Christ\'s enemy, the wretched devil 2c. For
he also deceives the devout hearts by disguising himself (as St. Paul
says 2 Cor. 11, 14.) into an angel of light,

and thus forms and pretends to be Christ himself.

But this is the sign by which he is to be recognized, that he always
leaves his stink behind him, that is, makes a stupid, frightened,
troubled conscience. This can also be seen in all false teachers and
spirits of the mob (as those of their master, the devil, also have 1) a
kind in themselves), who do not and are not able to comfort or make
happy any stupid conscience; but only make the hearts mad, sad and
melancholy, so that they go along as darkened or delusional people, and
consider this a delicious spiritual life, if one goes along in a gray
skirt, hangs one\'s head, looks sour and is sad. This is nothing but the
devil\'s monkey play and betrayal, who delights in making hearts
frightened, cowardly and despondent. So they also want to make their
clergy look sour, so that no one can ever have true comforting thoughts,
nor speak a cheerful word.

\(23\) But a Christian also lives in such a way that outwardly he has
many sufferings and temptations, but still he can have a confident,
joyful heart and courage toward God, and take care of the very best for
him. Therefore let us learn this: whatever misfortune may come upon us,
pestilence, war, hard times, poverty, persecution, heavy thoughts that
knock down the head and make the heart beat and fidget, that we may know
and conclude that such is not from Christ, and beware of the devil, who
can form himself and present himself in the form and name of Christ.

\(24\) Yes, you say, Christ Himself often frightens and threatens in the
Gospel, as when He says \[Matth. 4, 17j: \"Repent\" 2c., item Luc. 13,
5: \"I tell you, if you do not repent, you will all perish\" 2c. These
are the words of the Lord Christ, so that a stupid, afflicted conscience
must always worry that it will be struck, and say, \"Say what you will,
for Christ Himself says so. Answer: Therefore I have said that we should
become good artists here, and learn to distinguish between Christ\'s
rebuke and his rebuke, so that we may direct it to the place where it
belongs.

1\) \"also\" is missing in Walch and in the Erlanger.

274 Erl. 4g, 14-IS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
18-21. 275

For there are two kinds of people on earth: Some are reprobate and wild,
who do not respect God\'s word, and live according to their own mind,
secure and without all timidity and fear; these are the ones who are to
take care of it, when he says: \"Do you think that these alone, on whom
the tower of Siloam fell, were sinners and guilty before all men? I tell
you, if you do not amend, you will all perish in the same way\" 2c.
\[The curse goes where he speaks it and no further, over the hard,
proud, insolent heads, who ask nothing everywhere about Christ and his
word, as now is the great multitude, and the greater part of the world
in all classes, who go and let Christ preach to them what he wills, and
they do what they will. There one should confidently rebuke and punish,
and read such texts, as Christ will say on the last day: \"Go, you
cursed, into the eternal hellish fire\" 2c. \[Matth. 25, 41.\]

\(25\) But the other company (that Christ may speak here) are those who
would gladly be godly and live as Christians, having baptism and
Christ\'s word, and keeping themselves, as much as they can, not to
despise the gospel, nor to be so stingy, robbing, stealing, lying, and
deceiving, and to do their will as that company does. These are the ones
whom the devil attacks as an enemy, with all kinds of plagues and
misfortunes, to frighten, afflict and make them despondent. And so it
goes wrong on both sides. For the devil frightens them without any
cause, because they are stupid and fainthearted beforehand, just as he
did to the apostles after the death of the Lord, when he chased them to
the corner so that they could not be seen. But the other secure and
impudent ones, whom he should frighten and torment, he lets go, tickles
and strengthens them in their wickedness; thus he always plays against
Christ 2c.

\(26\) Therefore, here the persons must be distinguished, and judged
according to what the people are; namely, where there is such a man who
loves the gospel, and would gladly believe and live rightly, that he may
learn to resist the devil (which frightens and afflicts him), and say,
Thou deniest, thou wicked devil, though thou come in the likeness of my
Lord Christ 1),

1\) \"Christi\" is missing in the Wittenberg and Erlanger.

and lead his words. For I have been baptized into him and believe the
gospel, and am (by God\'s grace) not one of the savages, the reprobates,
who trample the gospel underfoot and deliberately live contrary to it,
but do and suffer according to the same as much as I can; and God would
that I could do more. Therefore, such urgings and terrible sayings do
not concern me, and I should not and will not listen to them now; but
keep to the way he speaks to the poor wretched people who suffer
persecution, misfortune, hardship and fear.

\(27\) Behold, if they could thus be made three and differ, it would be
rightly divided on both sides, that Christ should comfort them whom the
devil would make afraid and despondent; and again, that he should
terrify them whom the devil would make secure and presumptuous. For the
two must always be at war with each other. What the devil corrupts and
destroys, Christ must build up and establish; and again, what the devil
destroys, Christ destroys, as 1 John 3:8 says: \"For this cause the Son
of God appeared, that he might destroy the works of the devil.\"

28\. Since we know these things, we should act accordingly, and so be
careful that we are neither safe nor without worry, but rather fear when
the devil tickles us and pokes us, that is, leaves peace and good days;
and again, not to be frightened nor distressed, but to be confident and
undaunted when he scratches and stings us and plagues us with all kinds
of misfortune that he can inflict on us, and always say (when he wants
to frighten us, as in Christ\'s name): I do not want to hear or know of
any terror or fear now, for I know that it is not the will and mind of
my Lord Christ, for he calls me and all who believe in him to be
confident and of good cheer; therefore, even if he himself has some
terror or fear, I should not accept it. For it is only over the sure,
impenitent, hard and reprobate despisers of his word and grace.
Therefore, because I am a Christian, and hold fast to my Savior, let me
not swear by those sayings. For though they be the word of Christ, yet
are they

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: and.

3\) stho \-- somewhere, anywhere.

276 **Erl. 4S, IS-I8, Sermon on John 14:1. W. VIII, LI-W.** 277

But not in season, nor in place, nor over the person to whom they
belong, and as Christ speaks them, but perverted by the lying spirit,
the devil, who leads and corrupts both the urgings and consolations from
the heap to which they belong, as he perverts all God\'s word, and turns
it from truth into a lie.

This would be the right art of a Christian, who could therefore
distinguish in the right fight what is Christ\'s or the devil\'s input.
But how difficult it is, no one believes, except he who has experienced
it. For the devil, as I have said \[§ 21\], can so clothe and adorn
himself with Christ\'s name and words, and so form and present himself,
that a man may swear a thousand oaths that he is truly Christ himself,
when he is the arch-enemy and true arch-Christian.

30 Therefore learn from this, if you are a Christian, who wants to
frighten you and make your heart stupid, 1) that you can certainly
conclude that he is the devil\'s messenger. For even if Christ frightens
someone to repentance and conversion from unbelief and sinful living (as
he frightens St. Paul before conversion, item, St. Paul on account of
Christ those in Corinth, item, the Galatians), it does not last long.
For he does not do it so that you should remain sad; but soon brings you
out and comforts you again. The devil does not do this, but does not let
the proud and impenitent become despondent, or if he falls into terror
and fear at the last (as finally happens to all of them), he leaves him
in it, makes no end of it, drives and presses so hard that he must
despair forever, if he is not raised up again by Christ.

Behold, this is what Christ wants to teach here, saying, \"Do not let
your heart be troubled. 2c. As if to say, I die and depart out of your
sight, leaving you behind me in the world, where ye shall not see me nor
hear me, but shall see, hear, and feel all manner of trouble and
calamity, which shall terrify and affright you in all places; but let
not your heart be troubled nor cowardly for this reason.

1\) The words: \"hieraus \... machen\" are missing in the Wittenberg.

2\) Jenaer: and.

But take heed when you hear from me, that you may be of good cheer and
courage. For I will not be the one to frighten and afflict you, but if
you hear or feel such things, immediately conclude that they are the
devil\'s ghost and deception. My voice (that you may know me as the
sheep know their right shepherd) shall thus be called, \"Do not be
afraid, and do not be dismayed. These are my words and thoughts. If thou
hearest any other, thou hearest not my voice, though it be in my name
and likeness unto thee. Therefore you shall not believe nor follow such.

\(32\) We must preach and practice this for those who are Christians,
who otherwise have tender hearts and consciences and are easily
frightened, as they well know and feel their weakness and unworthiness.
The rest of the rough crowd, who do not know of any terror and fear, and
do not ask for any fear, we must also let go. For they will have to pay
when their hour comes, when they are suddenly attacked and no one will
comfort them. The devil must keep his servants in such a way that he
lets them be happy now; but afterwards he will reward them in such a way
that, where now the Christians have to have a little and short terror,
those will have to suffer eternal mourning, fear and trembling, and have
to swallow the right basic soup, yes, the whole hell.

\(33\) Therefore let him who desires to be a Christian write and put
these things in his heart, that Christ comes before (as the one who
knows what is to happen to us) and admonishes, so that he does not
abandon his faith and confidence, whether he is terrified and afraid
because of it. For this very reason he spoke these words before, and
left them behind, that you might remember them, and know that he
requires you to be undaunted, and wait that he will help you and come to
you and help you out, as will follow:

**If you believe in God, believe also in me.**

\(34\) Then he set forth the cause of the former words, that he might
begin to exhort them to be confident and undaunted. Do not let them-

3\) \"da\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

278 Erl. 4S, IS\--0. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
23-26. 279

I will not be afraid, nor will I make the heart cowardly, if I come from
you in the flesh and leave you in the midst of the world and the power
of the devil, who will oppress you and hold you down and bring on you
all kinds of misfortune, but stand firm and steadfast against everything
that may befall you. For you, as Christians, should neither mourn nor
tremble, because you are not like those who, when they come into
suffering, misfortune and adversity, have neither comfort nor
confidence, as there are those who neither believe nor know God\'s word,
but set their comfort on temporal things, and with their heart cling
only to that which is present and visible, and where it turns, there you
also turn your courage and confidence. Therefore, when happiness turns
into misfortune, they suddenly fall away and despair, as if everything
is over with them. These are people who have no God, and neither know
nor experience anything of such comfort, which can stand and triumph in
the midst of the greatest trouble and misfortune, although everything
temporal and transitory, which one has to provide for and hope for, has
come to an end. Such people (he says) you shall not be. For you have the
word of God, through which you have come to know him and believe in him.
Therefore, do not let yourselves be overcome by terror, but resist
boldly and manfully, and show yourselves to be those who know much more
certain and higher comfort and defiance than all the world has, and
greater strength and power to rely on than is the power and might of the
world and of the devil. Let others defy and insist on their temporal
power and happiness; but you take comfort in the fact that you have a
God and know him, and rely on the fact that he is with you and can help
you, as he has promised you through the word, and will certainly not
fail, although everything is against you, but will stand by you, protect
you and help you out, because you suffer everything for his sake.

35 If then you believe and rely on God, believe also in me. If your
faith is right, that you look to God for all good things, look to me for
the same. What you seek and wait for comfort and help from Him, wait for
it from me; you will certainly not lack me, as little as God Himself. If
I have helped you up to now, and have done everything for you that you
have needed, and have thus saved myself, I will not be lacking.

show, both in word and deed, that you have been able to take comfort in
me and have relied on me boldly, and that I have never failed you, and I
will continue to do so, and I will not fail you, even though I do not
remain with you in body. For I still have the same strength and power,
both from God and with God, that I can and will do it; but do not doubt
and tremble, as if you had both lost God and me; but stand firm in
faith, and do not let your confidence sink or weaken, even though you
see me suffer and die, and leave you alone behind me. And as ye have
hitherto seen and experienced my bodily help and protection, believe
also now, though ye see it not before your eyes. For if you are my
disciples and true Christians, you must not always cling to the seeing
and feeling of outward comfort, but continue and learn the art (which is
the art of Christians) of believing without doubt that I can and will
help you, since you cannot see or feel it, but see and feel the
contradiction, namely in the midst of suffering and all hardships, and
yet always retain the comfort that you have God and me, although
otherwise everything is denied you and falls away. 1)

\(36\) And here you see clearly how Christ himself speaks and testifies
that he is like God Almighty, because he wants us to believe in him as
we believe in God. Now if he were not true God with the Father, then
faith would be false and idolatry. For the heart of man shall not
shortly trust nor rely, but on the one God; and whatsoever else is
called trusting or relying is all idolatry, as when a rich man trusteth
and buildeth upon his goods, knowing that he hath treasure behind him,

1\) Here the Wittenberg edition has inserted the following note
(bracketed) into the text: \"Not long before his departure from this
world he \[Luther\'s\] gave these words so German: Believe ye in GOD,
believe ye also in me, and interpreted as follows: Why and before whom
should you or would you fear? since I am the very God in whom you
believe, if you believe in God, and cannot lack God, if you believe in
me. Now I am a righteous man, like unto you, of whom ye must not be
afraid, but am my good friend, again I also your good friend. So you
must not be afraid of God either, as good friends are not afraid of good
friends, but take comfort in him, and all good things in all accidents
are given to him. For it is said: God became man.\"

280 Eri. ts, so-2-. Sermon on John 14, 1. W. vin, 2\"-W. 281

Then he becomes courageous and proud. Another trusts in a good friend or
a gracious prince, and thinks, if all things are lacking, I still have
this one for a friend. 1) Scripture also calls this confidere, to trust,
but to trust in men or princes, since one makes an idol out of man,
because one trusts in him, becomes proud and sure, as if one had God and
everything, and should not trust anyone else.

\(37\) Now what such and such idolatry is, by this one sees and learns
that the two, trust and God, belong together. Where there is a heart
that trusts and relies on something, that is certainly its god, even if
it is a false god; as it certainly is, and in all the world a vain idol
reigns (which Christ calls Mammon) until that day when the right, one,
great God will show himself, as St. Paul calls him. But now everything
depends on the great god; he who has him is proud and sure that he asks
for no one, so that there can be no pride, nor throbbing and certainty,
it must stand on one God. Now if the god is right, then the trust is
also right, 2c. again.

Now our trust and defiance (we who are Christians and not of the world)
should also be placed in God, and thus stand: I am in the world, which
is hostile to me, together with the devil, and my own conscience itself
bites me and grieves me, and all things terrify me and make me
despondent; what shall I think here? So I will think: If I see how a
rich man trusts and believes in his god, and if someone is too close to
him, or wants to challenge him, he quickly defies and insists on his
mammon, and certainly hopes that there is no need, because he has it:
should I not much more comfort myself and rely on my right eternal God?
2c.

Thus Christ wants to admonish us to learn from the idolatrous world how
our trust and faith should stand on the right God. Therefore, since we
see how everyone defies his neighbor, through mammon or through his
ruler, let us also defy the devil and his scales, through our Lord and
God, and

1\) Wittenberger: so I do have this friend.

Saying, What canst thou fear and do evil, though thou tryest all thy
salvation upon me? Knowest thou not that I have a Lord mightier than
thou, who can give more comfort, consolation, and joy, than thou canst
afflict and afflict? If thou canst make me poor, he hath enough, and can
feed me abundantly. 2) If thou canst blaspheme, defile and kill me, he
can restore me to honor and make me alive 2c. And so, always taking up
defiance, and thinking: I have a God, though all things are lacking;
what then do I ask of all that is against me? He who will not laugh, let
him be angry; he who will not give, let him leave it; only always go
away with your pride, hatred and envy, and go to the devil with your
idol, and leave me my God. Yea, I will take thee by the head (saith the
world together with its lord the devil), and cast thee into prison, and
put thee to all manner of torture and death: let me see then what thou
hast in thy God. Go on, then, and do what thou canst not do; what hast
thou more, if thou torture and kill me at once? You cannot kill me so
often, he can bring me back to life; you cannot do me so much dishonor,
harm and suffering, he can pay and repay a thousand times more honors
and goods.

40 Behold, a Christian should thus insist, not on himself, nor on men,
nor on mammon, but on God. This means that Christ says here: Believe in
God, and let nothing frighten you that can arise against us or happen to
us. For all the harm (he wants to say) that can happen to you on earth
is small compared to the benefit and gain that you have through this
faith. For you have such a Lord and God, who, if they take one florin
from you, can give you a hundredfold in return. If they take away your
honor, your favor, your life, 2c., he can repay it all abundantly, 4)
and for this short life, which you have to leave without it.

2\) Thus the Wittenberg and Jena. Erlanger: more abundant closer.

3\) Walch and the Erlangeners: honor and good. That these two words are
to be taken substantively results from the contrast to \"shame\" and
\"damage\". Also the following paragraph confirms our reading.

4\) In the old edition: statten again.

[282 Erl. 49, \[s-ss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
28-31. 283]{.underline}

Create another, imperishable, eternal life that no one can take away
from you nor challenge.

\(41\) That one should not consider the small damage against the great
good that we have from God. For in him we have eternal life, riches,
power, honor, compared to the poor beggars on earth, who must leave
everything behind them; as there are already so many hundreds of
thousands of them gone, who have not taken a thread with them, and have
gone down into the abyss with their idol, on which they have braved. We
have nothing to insist on on earth; if our lives can be taken away from
us and all evil done, it will be done. And how long do we live, if we
are here for a long time? It lasts for one dance at the high mass; after
that it will be different, and God (in whom we have believed) will
pronounce such a judgment: You have been afflicted and defiled; but I
will honor you again forever, that you may have a thousand angels for
friends, yes, for servants, for a wicked, proud peasant or other who has
been unkind to you.

So you see what it means to believe in God, namely, to gain such a heart
that it becomes great and undaunted against everything that the devil
and the world are able to do, including poverty, misfortune, shame and
sin. Such a man must be a Christian who can despise everything that the
world has, both good and evil, and everything that the devil can tempt
and entice, or frighten and threaten, and stand alone against all its
power, and become such a knight and hero who conquers and overcomes
everything.

\(43\) If you have such confidence in God, he says, then have the same
confidence and trust also 1) in me. There he makes himself equal to God,
as said above \[§ 36\], and demands the same honor that is due to God;
not that he puts another God beside and apart from the one, but wants to
indicate herewith that he now wants to establish his kingdom on earth,
and for this very reason departs from it, that he assumes his right
office and rule. As if he should say: Now on earth I am regarded as a
poor, miserable, powerless man; as Pilate and Herod and the high priests
regarded him at that time;

1\) \"also\" is missing in the Wittenberg and Erlanger.

But when I come up, I will draw all men\'s hearts to me (as he says
elsewhere \[John 12:32\]), and they will let me be their consolation and
defiance, their confidence and all things: then you will know what you
have in me. For I will show myself, that ye shall not have put your
trust in me in vain, and have believed in me, as ye have believed in
God.

44\. Why then does he exalt himself to sit beside God? Shall he then
take the glory from the true God and give it to himself? No, but this is
his teaching, which is especially practiced in this evangelist St. John,
2) that he shows us the right way to take, and the right way to trust,
so that we do not lack the right God. For so do all the Turks, the Jews,
the mobs, and the false believers; they sit down in some corner, and go
about with their own thoughts, how they want to serve and please God;
they attack each other bravely, and do much for God\'s sake; they give
away their mammon, and willingly suffer shame, disgrace, and misery;
some allow themselves to be martyred and killed, just as the true
Christians do. And this is no wonder, for today we see what the mad
soldiers do, who risk life and limb for the sake of their pay, by the
spear and the gun. A merchant risks his life daily in the streets, by
robbers and murderers. Likewise, a pious citizen or nobleman must also
risk all kinds of danger and misfortune for himself and his lord or
prince.

\(45\) All this is done for the sake of temporal goods, but much more is
done for the sake of God. How then must they who trust in God put their
money and goods, and their lives, in danger, and, if need be, let them
go. As we have done in the past in false trust and idolatry with the
holy service. Have we not given more to St. Lawrence and other saints
than to God Himself? How much has been given for the sake of St. Anne,
of whom we do not know if she ever lived? How much have \"we\" fed monks
for the sake of St. Francisci, since we do not now give to a priest for
the sake of St. Francis?

2\) \"will\" is missing in the Wittenberg and Erlanger.

284 **Erl. 4S, SS-S7. Sermon on Joh. 14, 1. W. VIII, LI-S4.** 285

for the sake of God? For these were also our gods, in whom we trusted,
and everyone thought that God should also think thus: There are people
who call St. Annam, St. Franciscum; oh, these are holy children! 2c.

Thus all Jews, Turks, and such great saints think that God regards their
worship, and if they honor their Mahomet or another, He must consider
them great saints. So also a monk, when he keeps his rule, thinks that
God must allow him to do so, as a special, excellent service.

Where do such thoughts come from? All of them lead their thoughts from
God, but not from God, 1) but from the troublesome devil and their own
head. For where has God thus testified and let it be heard that he is
thus minded, and would have served him thus, as they think? But this is
what human reason does: when it hears the name of God and is supposed to
trust in Him, it is so mad that it quickly moves in, and wants to make a
way and a rule according to its own mind and thoughts, how one should
act with God; as, as I said, a monk has his rule, and because he hears
that one is supposed to trust in God, he sows it on such a rule, and
thinks: Thus I will serve God, this order will please him 2c.

Because the word trust in God and serve God must be stretched so that
each one draws it from his own thoughts, and each one interprets it in
the same way, he has placed himself and attached himself to a certain
place and person, where he wants to be found and encountered, so that he
will not be missed. This is none other than the person of Christ
himself, in whom dwells bodily (as St. Paul says Col. 2, 9) the whole
fullness of the Godhead, so that he is nowhere to be found except in
this person.

\(49\) Wherefore he saith herewith, Ye have heard that ye ought to trust
in God; but I will also shew you how ye ought to meet him aright, that
ye make not for yourselves under his name another idol after your own
thoughts. This means: If you want to believe in God, then believe in me;
if you want to put your faith and trust in the right way, so that

1\) \"but not from GOtt\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

If it is not lacking or false, put it on me. For in me is and dwelleth
the whole Godhead complete; and, as he shall hereafter say, I am the
way, the truth, and the life; and, He that seeth me seeth the Father, he
that heareth me heareth the Father 2c. Therefore, if you want to meet
him with certainty, meet him in me and through me; if you have me, you
have him rightly. The Father himself bears me witness to this. As he now
and then indicates in the Gospel that he was sent by the Father, and
neither speaks nor does anything about himself, but everything is the
Father\'s command and commandment to all the world, that one should
believe Christ as himself. Therefore, that no one should accept any
other person or means by which he may take hold of God, except this one
Christ, and that we may be sure that if we trust in Him, we will not
meet with an idol like the others who, apart from Christ, deal with God.
For he has certainly and clearly enough shown himself through the Word.
Therefore it is decided that whoever goes beside this person of Christ
will certainly never meet the right God. For since he is completely in
Christ, and places himself there for us, it will do no good for others
to act with God without and apart from Christ, out of their own human
thoughts and devotion.

50 Therefore, he who wants to go right and not be lacking in his faith
should look there, where God has placed it, and let himself be found;
otherwise it is certainly a failure, and everything he believes and does
is in vain, and accomplishes nothing more, except that he deceives
himself miserably, as those do who go about with great hard works to
gain God\'s grace. I, too, have been a monk for twenty years, and have
toiled with prayer, fasting, watching and freezing, so that I alone
might have died of frost, and so hurt myself that I never want to do it
again, even if I could. What else did I seek with it, but God? who
should look at how I kept my order, and led such a strict life, so
always went in dreams and right idolatry. For I did not believe in . For
I did not believe in Christ, but considered him to be no other than a
strict, terrible judge, as he is painted sitting on the rainbow.
Therefore I looked for other intercessors, Mariam and other saints.

286 **Erl. 19, S7-SS.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 34-36.** 287

item, my own works and merits of the order. 1) All this I did not do for
money and good, but for the sake of God; nor was it false and idolatry,
because I did not know Christ and did not seek such things in and
through Him.

\(51\) So did the Jews, whom God had so often and so severely forbidden,
that they should by no means establish a place of worship, neither on
mountains, nor in meadows, nor in green woods, and in short, that they
should not leave them a place so pleasant or convenient, that they
should say, O! there is a fine church or place of worship to be
established, 2c. but there you shall seek me and find me, where I have
placed myself by the mercy seat on the ark. But they did just as we did,
running and dividing themselves to all ends, without any other reason
than that they would not go where God had directed and commanded them to
seek Him. What shall we do (they said) there in front of the 2) dark
tent, or in the temple at Jerusalem? Here it is pleasant and
comfortable, there can be a great service. Then it was filled with
heaps, and gave money in abundance, so that one queen alone could feed
four hundred priests to her Baal, since the right priests had to suffer
hunger and need.

52\) Now what God cried out through the prophets, as he had said before
through Moses, that he would not hear nor accept prayer or worship in
other places, they would not hear, and cried out against it: Here we
worship the right God, 2c., and continued with their self-devised
worship, and were allowed to kill the prophets over it. Without what was
of the small group who believed God\'s word and did not turn to the
great houses, as the true Christians must do, that they do not pay
attention to what the others do, who have the name and fame that they
are called great, holy people, God\'s servants and the church, but say
thus: Here is my God, I will believe in no God but a creator of heaven
and earth, without only one who is united with him who is called Jesus
Christ 2c. There I shall believe my

1\) Thus the Jena. Wittenberg and Erlangen: Glaubens.

2\) Wittenberger: before the dark huts.

3\) \"the\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlangen.

If I raise my trust, then I know that I have the right God. If I have
him, then I can defy and fight against the devil and the world. If it
only takes mammon, goods, honor, life and limb, then I still have a
Christ who is Lord over life and death, the world and everything; item,
whether the devil frightens me, and makes my mind and conscience heavy,
he shall not gain anything from it. For here is my Lord, in whom I
believe; and if I trust in him, I trust in God, for he himself is truly
God. Therefore, whatever harm comes to me in time and in body, I count
as a shell or a dead nut, for which he gives me eternal treasure and
life.

53\. so these words are also said for the comfort of the Christians,
whom he leaves stuck in the misery, because they must have as enemies
the devil, who plagues and tortures them, and the world, which defies
them with pride and insistence, contempt, persecution and murder 2c. So
that you may remain confident in all this (he says) and not be overcome,
think only that I am the true Savior and God, and trust in me, and you
will meet the true God and experience my almighty power and might. Let
the world and the false saints defy and insist on whatever they want,
believe and do whatever they want, and it will all be lost and nothing;
but against all this you must have no other defense or armor, neither
must you cling to me; if you cling to God, he cannot let it go and must
help you. Therefore, though they hate you, persecute you, kill you, we
will love you, receive you, and protect you, and make you alive, and
dwell with you forever, as follows:

**V. 2-4. In my Father\'s house are many dwellings. But where these are
not, I say unto you, that I go to prepare a place for you. And though I
go, yet will I come again, and receive you unto myself, that ye may be
where I am: and whither I go ye know, and the way ye know also.**

St. Augustine interpreted this most sharply about the dwelling place
above in heaven, that every man\'s own is prepared and provided for him
where he is to stay. But that Christ will go and prepare them, he also
interprets so sharply that there is nothing else.

288 **Erl. tg, S9-SI. Sermon on John 14:2-4. W. VIII, S6-SS.** 289

because we are being prepared for it. This is a fine, sharp
interpretation and a good catachresis, 1) but we do not want to go so
high as he goes, but act in the most simple way, as the text itself
gives it. Here he comforts his dear disciples and Christians in three 2)
ways: The first is that they should know that with his Father there are
many mansions for them. This he sets against other two kinds of houses
or dwellings, as if to say, On earth you will not have many houses, nor
certain dwelling place. For here the devil has his kingdom, his house
and dwelling place, since he is lord, and sits in his own; therefore,
since you strive against him and his kingdom, he will not long let you
dwell and house here. For he is (as Scripture everywhere gives him his
title) a liar and a murderer. \[John 8:44.\]

55\. as it is also seen in the world, that his rule is not different
from these two things, that he deceives people with false doctrine and
thoughts, so that he deprives them of their souls, and fills everything
with murder, war, and all kinds of misfortune and heartache, as if he
had nothing else to do, but to kill both spiritually and physically.
This is his nature and office, which we must do, because we are all here
in his possession. But be fearless of this (says Christ), it shall not
hurt you; if you have no house and dwelling here, and the devil with his
tyrants chases you out of the world, yet you shall have room enough
where you shall abide. If they will not suffer you to be citizens and
neighbors, or even guests, and have, possess and 3) keep the world
alone, let them keep it, and know that you shall nevertheless also have
dwelling, and have plenty of them.

This should be the most simple opinion here, just as he speaks in
another place, Matth. 19, 29: \"Whoever leaves house, brothers or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or child, or field, for my sake,
and for the sake of the gospel, will receive it a hundredfold in this
time, and in the next.

1\) Catachresis - hard use of a trope.

2\) Wittenberger (erroneously): ..viererlei\". Cf. § 64.

3\) The words: \"inne haben, besitzen und\" are found in the Wittenberg
alone.

The world to come eternal life\" 2c., so here too the opinion is: \"If
you are driven out of one house, you shall have many houses for it; if
they take away one thing from you, you shall receive it again manifold,
and shall not make it so bad, and shall not take away so much from you,
you shall have it a hundred times as good and much better. If you do not
have it here, you will certainly get plenty there. For he still has such
a large supply that he can give you each a hundred homes for one.
Therefore, put there with confidence and freshness what the world can
take from you; the dwellings of life are much wider than the dwelling
place of death. Whether they put you in dungeons and prisons here, or
drive you out, do not worry, they are houses that belong to the world;
but you are looking at another, for which you have to wait, and what you
shall get and possess there.

\(57\) So this text is spoken for the comfort of the Christians, that
they may not be deceived, if the world puts all plagues on them, and not
only deprives them of this dwelling, but takes away all that they have
here, goods, honor, life, and throws them into misery, poverty,
nakedness, shame, dishonor and death, but that they may hold against it
what they gain against this small loss; where they are now deprived of a
dwelling, that they may get much better dwellings for it, namely in the
place that is called: In my Father\'s house. Where he is and abides,
there will I and you also abide (as he will say hereafter), that you
shall not have worldly nor human, but heavenly, divine dwellings and
houses; that is, for a vile, perishable, uncertain and inconvenient
dwelling (which you and all the world must soon leave without that),
dwellings that are beautiful, glorious, wide, eternal, secure and
certain, which cannot be taken from you, and shall be kept peaceably
from everyone.

058 What have they wrought, that they should now take away all things
from you, and utterly cast you out? not that they should bring you out
of this woe and misery unto the same happy everlasting mansions, where
ye shall no more be under the devil\'s kingdom, neither separated from
me, but abiding with the Father and with me for ever, whereunto they
shall neither smell nor taste; but that they should now take away all
things from you, and utterly cast you out?

[290 Eri. 49, 31-34. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
\[s-i2. 291]{.underline}

If they persecute you and hold the world here, sitting firmly and
securely, living in their pleasure and wealth, then they will have
neither room nor place here nor there, and they will be so afraid and
anxious forever that they will not have a corner of a moment where they
would like to rest and stay. They will bring this on themselves by
persecuting you and thinking to harm you. Therefore, let them go on and
on, pawing, scratching and gathering for themselves, as if they wanted
to stay here forever, and have the world to themselves, frightening and
threatening as much as they can, since nothing can help them and nothing
can harm us. Those who want to be Christians, and especially those who
want to preach Christ, must truly think and act in this way. There will
be much different reckoning there: He who gathers much here, let him see
what he will have thereafter; again, he who has suffered much here for
Christ\'s sake will find it there also.

59 The other consolation is that he goes on to say, \"If not, I tell you
that I am going to prepare the place for you\" 2c. That is, though the
dwellings were not ready, yet if ye believe, I have power to make and
prepare 1) them enough. And for this very reason I go from you, that I
prepare them and order them, whether they are already there, so that you
may not worry, nor doubt where you should stay. You will certainly have
enough dwellings, and if there are not enough of them, I will provide
enough, so that if it is too little for you to have a hundred for one, I
will provide a hundred thousand and more, so that there will be no lack
or need of all kinds of dwellings, as your heart may desire.

So he speaks to them in the most simple and childlike way, according to
their thoughts (as one must provoke and entice the simple), so that he
may draw them up from the same, so that they may draw courage and
comfort, and think such thoughts: What is it then, if they take away my
house and my farm, and this perishable dwelling, and put me in some dark
dungeon, because my Lord Christ promises me that I shall have many more,
more glorious, more beautiful, further and safer things?

1\) \"Their\" (jr) is missing in the Wittenberger.

I have dwellings and fortresses, for now I have my enemies and all the
world, and have already gone up for this reason, that he might surely
order them from him, and that I should find them ready at all times.

\(61\) But this would be the art, who could believe such things. For it
is true that every Christian who wants to confess the word, either by
preaching or otherwise in court, stands very badly on earth, uncertain
all hours and in danger of being chased away from his property, wife and
child, while others have everything they need and live in drunkenness
and good company. But if we also look at what is reserved for us, and
what we should come to, we should be cheerful about it, and rather let
ourselves lament the poor, miserable world. For what does it matter if
it tramples us underfoot now, and afflicts us to the utmost and causes
us suffering? we have nothing to lose. But if we lose, we lose the sack
that we wear around our necks, which is no more lost than the husks;
nevertheless, the treasure remains for us, that we both, if we leave it
here, will get it back in abundance, and in addition much more eternal,
divine goods.

62\) On the other hand, they now have the shells and husks, but they
have already lost the kernel and the real treasure, and must also leave
the husks here, so that they are completely bare and miserable. And then
everything will be reversed, so that where they now have everything,
they will have nothing at all; and where we now suffer a little misery,
poverty and hardship, they, on the other hand, will have to suffer
eternal misery, fear and sorrow. I do not know how to take higher
revenge on the world, nor how to wish for more misery, for it already
has too much, that it is plagued with blindness, contempt and
persecution of the gospel; I cannot curse it more grievously and
atrociously, but would much rather pray for it, if it could be helped
out of its misery.

63 Thirdly, he says, \"If I go away from you now (to prepare a dwelling
place for you), you shall not be dismayed nor grieve that you do not
have me, but you shall also have the comfort that I will not leave you,
but will come to you again and take you to me 2c.

2\) \"now\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

292 Erl. 49, S4-SS. Sermon on John 14:2-4. W. vru, 42-44. 293

I do not want you to be harmed by my going or leaving, but know that it
is for your benefit that I prepare and provide you with dwellings with
the Father, and for this purpose I will also come to you again, and even
bring you with me to take up the dwellings, and so stay with me where I
am; so that you will certainly have both the dwellings in heaven and me
with you for eternity.

64 These are the three things which shall comfort us against the devil
and the world, and against all that evil may befall us, that we have
such a Lord and faithful Saviour, which is gone, and hath already made a
dwelling for us, and yet will be and abide with us. But it is still very
hidden, and does not appear: for we see and feel that the world and
tyrants nevertheless continue to exercise their defiance and iniquity
against the gospel and the Christians. But for this reason he calls us
to believe in him. As if he should say: If you could only have patience
for a little while, and cling to my word, they will not sing it out,
even if they were all much more wicked now; for it is already decided,
and the judgment has gone too far, they will meet^1^ ) the little hour
that will frighten them and make them so anxious and fearful that they
will have nowhere to stay. But it is for this reason that you open your
eyes rightly, and do not look at how things are going and standing
before them, but at what I say and say, that I will not leave you nor
remain with you, but will come to you and take you to myself, so that I
will be with you and you will remain with me 2c. St. Paul interpreted
this to mean that when we are baptized, we already have Christ dwelling
in and with us, and \"are already set (Col. 1, 13. Eph. 2,^2^ ) 19.) out
of this shameful nature and kingdom of darkness into the spiritual,
heavenly nature, so that^3^ ) we are citizens with the saints and
members of God\'s household\" 2c.

65\. fourth, he implores: \"It is not enough that you know that I am
going to give you

1\) So the Wittenbergers and the Jenaers. Erlanger: \"will\" (after
Walch), although the original also offers \"become\".

2\) In the old editions and in the Erlanger erroneously: Eph. 1.

3\) Erlanger: da.

to prepare the dwelling place, and to come to you again and stay with
you, so that you are where I am 2c., but above that you also have the
advantage that you already know where I am going and also know the way.
Is this not comfort and good enough? What more do you want and desire?
You have everything you should have, a hundredfold and superfluous
enough; and if you do not have it, you have the master, who creates it
for you, and the same so that he wants to stay with you. In addition you
know where I go and which way, so that nothing is ever hidden from you.

Now this is the way of his holy suffering, of which he had already told
them much and often, especially on that last evening, although they
could not yet understand it, and this word was still dark to them, so
that they soon asked him. \"But this much has been said: What shall I
tell you much? I will not let you flutter and float with thoughts; you
know it and see it all already. For if you have me, you have God and
everything, and if you see me going, you already see the way: I will not
show you any other way, nor suggest any other way; it is all there
already. Only that your heart may be content, and not be dismayed, if
the world terrify you and trouble you, that in me you may have joy and
peace. 2c.

Now this is a mighty and strong consolation, as the man Christ should
comfort those whom he leaves behind, that they see not where he abideth,
but are cast down to the devil, and to his wickedness, and mischief, and
lying, and murder. But it is necessary to close one\'s eyes to what one
sees and feels, and to hold fast with the heart to the word of Christ,
that things go as evil as they will, and the world makes them as evil as
it always can, with its angry tyrants, mobs and devils, so that we
always say: This is all still bodily, which one feels and grasps, it
goes with the same, as it goes, it stands or falls, as it stands or
falls, there I ask nothing. Here is another man who promises me that I
should find a hundredfold for everything that I can lose here.

68And again, that it may turn with them also: they that now exercise
their courage, and have all things enough, they also shall have the

294 Erl. 49, p6-38. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
44-47. 295

They will find a contradiction. Where they now have a florin with peace,
they shall hereafter suffer eternal torment for it; where they have
afflicted one Christian here, they shall have a hundred thousand devils
for it, who shall afflict them again without ceasing. Why then are you
afraid and want to despair? Let them do it to the utmost and see what
they gain from it. The advantage is that they must stop. For those who
are evil now, blaspheming, raving and murdering, will not do it again
for twenty, thirty, forty years. What is it then that one should be
concerned about it, or be frightened by it? since their life is nothing
else but a dust or a water bubble, which is woven and passes away in a
moment. But we have such a glorious and comforting promise, not of
temporal but of eternal good, which is sure to us if we hold fast to it.

**V. s. 6. Thomas (who is called a twin) says to him, \"Lord, we do not
know where you are going, and how can we know the way? Jesus said to
him, \"I am the way and the truth and the life.**

69 They had heard, the dear disciples, that he would go and appoint them
dwellings, and not only that, but that they themselves already knew the
way where he would go and stay, and that they should also follow him
there, that he should not preach much, and that they should be the less
grieved and frightened that he now had to depart from them. Then St.
Thomas begins to wonder, and he is justly spoken to, that he says: they
know where he wants to go, and know the way; when he has told them
nothing about where or which way he wants to go from them. 1) So begin
to think, roughly, carnally, of the road on which one physically walks
or drives from one city to another, and of the way on which one\'s feet
tread; of which, they say, we do not know where or to what gate, and
where you want to go out; how then should we know the way?

70 To these crude carnal thoughts Christ answers: \"I mean that you know
the way, that is, you know the way.

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: Fähet er.

2\) You see and know that I am Christ, your Lord and Savior, and you are
my disciples, who have heard my preaching and seen my miracles for so
long. Therefore, if ye know me, ye know and know the way, and all things
that ye ought to know.

Now this is something special, and this is what the evangelist St. John
always used to write and do, that all our doctrine and faith should go
to Christ, and only hang on this one person; and that we (putting all
art and wisdom aside) should know nothing but, as St. Paul says in 1
Cor. 1, 23, Cap. 2, 2, says, \"Christ crucified.\" For thus he punishes
his clever and pointed heads, who thought they had to go much higher
than St. Paul with his simple preaching of Christ, considered themselves
much wiser, more learned and of a higher spirit. What shall I say,\" he
says, \"I have hardly been with you half a year, and you are already so
learned that no one can be anything before your wisdom and prudence, and
I can no longer do anything among you, but must be a disciple alone, and
no longer desire or boast of knowing anything but my Christ.

\(72\) Thus the devil is always at play, when he comes in among the
clever of heart, and gets into the Scriptures, that they may prove their
cleverness, presuming to catch and grasp all things with their head and
conceit, and thinking that they can do it so well that no one can
exhaust them, knowing all things better than they can be told; and yet
never learning this, in which is all power, how they may know the Lord
Christ aright. For this reason John the Evangelist wants to warn here
and everywhere all who want to be Christians and to know rightly how to
proceed in divine matters, so that they may know what they should seek
and learn; namely, that this is the highest wisdom and art before God
above all arts and wisdom, even if it were angelic, that one may know
this Christ rightly, and know what one has in him, and how one comes to
God through him alone. This is the most noble thing, so all

2\) Thus the Wittenberg. Jenaer and Erlanger: den.

296 **Erl. 4g, S8-4I. Sermon on John 14:5, 6. W. VIII, 47-49.** 297

Here in this question St. Thomas and the Lord\'s answer is indicated.

But how great and difficult this teaching and art is, even for the true
disciples of Christ, is shown here by St. Thomas, and soon after St.
Philip (as we will hear), who, because of all the others, 1) come out
with their lack of understanding, and let it be known that they still
understand little or nothing of his speech; yet they have heard the Lord
Christ so long, and even now hear him over the table, as he tells them
of his Father\'s house, where he will go and prepare a dwelling place
for them 2c. If they let him sit behind the table and preach this to
them for their comfort, they flutter away with their thoughts and make a
different way for them, and separate Christ far from them.

74 Therefore he moves them around, but with fine, friendly words, as a
kind Lord and Master, who is able to provide for his ignorance and
weakness and keep it to himself, and wants to bind them badly to himself
with eyes, ears and heart, so that they will not see or think any
further. As if to say, \"Thomas, where are you looking or thinking? So
there is no need to speculate and flutter; here you must look to me. You
know and know me; if you now know and see me, then you know and see the
way, and must neither seek nor worry any further. For you must not look
upon me as a heifer looks upon a new gate, or as the unbelieving Jews
look upon me, as having eyes, mouth, and nose, as one of you; but purify
your eyes, sweep out your ears, and see, hear, think, and understand
otherwise than according to the carnal mind and understanding.

For here are two kinds of seeing and hearing: One is with the eyes and
ears of the flesh alone, without any spirit: Just as the Jews all looked
at Christ, no further than with five senses, that he was of Nazareth and
the Son of Mary, just as I look at you as born of father and mother,
male or female, living and doing this way or that way.

1\) i.e. in the name of all other apostles. So the Wittenberg, the Jena
and the original. Nevertheless, the Erlanger has taken Walch\'s reading
into the text: \"vor den Andern allerwegen\".

fights. So we cannot know Christ (nor his Christians), even though we
see and hear him before our eyes every hour. The other is a spiritual
seeing, which only Christians have, and is done with the faith of the
heart, according to which we, if we are Christians, must also see and
know one another. For I do not know a Christian by the fact that he
looks or behaves, walks and lives in any other way, but by the fact that
he has been baptized and has God\'s word, by which he is God\'s child, a
citizen in the kingdom of heaven, and an heir of eternal life 2c. This I
see not written on his nose, nor on his forehead, nor with the eyes of
the flesh, but with the spiritual vision of the heart.

\(76\) So also, if you want to know Christ and who he is, you must look
at him, not as your eyes and senses tell you, but as his word shows and
portrays him to you, born of the virgin, dead for you and risen again,
and set over all things as Lord. There you see not only his form, as the
eyes see, but the power and authority of his death and resurrection; He
is not now called the Son of Mary and Joseph of Nazareth, as the Jews
thought, but our only Savior and Lord over all things, which He alone
accomplishes through the course of His suffering and death into that
life, when He rises again from death and is glorified, so that all
things in heaven and on earth must be subject to Him and rule powerfully
over all who believe in Him against all that is against them.

77\. Behold, in this way he is seen here; not as the eyes see him bodily
going with his feet from them to another place, a way they do not know
where he goes or stays, and so leaves them behind him that they can no
longer be comforted by anything, but as he goes and travels spiritually
(which he calls going to the Father) in that he suffers and dies, and
yet does not remain in death; but by the very fact that he enters his
kingdom and reigns, that they may come to the Father through him, and
that he may protect, save, and help them in all their troubles.
Therefore he says: \"Whoever looks at me like this

2\) \"auf\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlanger.

298 Erl. 4g, 4I\^S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
49-S2. 299

I go to the Father, who has seen so much, that I suffer death according
to my Father\'s will, 1) and after that I live and reign forever; and so
I go before you, and break the way, that you also should follow. This I
do and no other, and must do it; otherwise you would never come to it.
Therefore, if you know these things, you both know where I am going, and
you also know the way that I am coming there, and that you must follow
me; namely, that I am myself, and you have everything in me that you
need, as he who dies for you, reconciles the Father, cancels sins,
swallows up death, and so draws everything to me, that you may have
everything in me.

78 This means that Christ is seen in a much different way than the way
the whole world sees him, and the disciples themselves saw him before.
For now the eyes are purified by faith, and there is even a new
knowledge. Just as when I see a king\'s son imprisoned and in misery, in
a gray robe or Pilgrim\'s form, as a poor man, and know nothing else
about him, I consider him no different than a beggar, as my eyes tell
me. But when I hear that he is the son of a king, then as soon as the
gray skirt and the staff and all such beggar\'s appearance fall from my
eyes, I bend my knees to him and call him gracious lord, even though no
golden crown nor majesty is seen on him. So, when St. Thomas and the
others see Christ sitting behind the table (as with fleshly eyes), they
do not yet see what kind of man he is. But afterwards they get another
vision, 2) namely, that he is the way and goes to the Father through his
death, and (by believing in him) they are also brought there through
him.

So you know, says Christ, where I am going, namely to the Father, that
is, to eternal life, and to the rule or dominion, where there is no sin,
death, poverty, misfortune, or heartache. You know this because you know
me, since you have heard from me so often why and for what purpose I
should come and what I should accomplish. Likewise, you also know the
way, or the road, how I come to such things, namely, that I must let
myself

1\) Erlanger: for the sake of my father.

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: Face.

crucifixion, and then rise again from the dead. Therefore, such
knowledge is nothing else in a nutshell, but to believe with all one\'s
heart in Christ, who died for us and rose from the dead and is seated at
the right hand of the Father. If faith is there and thus relies on him
without doubt, then I recognize both the way he has gone and the place
where he comes and remains, and see him in such a way that I would also
look at him with bodily eyes, if he were standing before me, in such a
way as I could not have looked at him before, before faith was there. If
I then remain in such faith, I also travel the same way and road
afterwards, through cross and suffering, and also come to the same place
where he went and came.

\(80\) Therefore it is not necessary to go on here, nor to flutter with
thoughts apart from Christ, as if there were any other way or road we
should or would go, as the false saints always do, and all reason seeks
and wants to go other ways; but those who are called Carthusians build
them a special bridge up to heaven, that they keep vowed poverty and
obedience, do not eat meat, do not wear linen clothes, do not lie in one
place for one night 2c.In delusion they go, thinking they are on the
right way to heaven. But there is a bridge and a stairway made of
cobweb, on which the higher they climb, the deeper and more shamefully
they fall down into the abyss of hell. For this is not the way, but vain
deception, because no Christ is believed or recognized there. Similarly,
a barefoot man with his rope and wooden shoes, who fasts a lot, grumbles
and babbles, keeps his rule, does not lie out of his cap, and lets the
lice eat him; 4) thinks that he is going straight to heaven, and not
only for himself, but also misses to draw others with him by his good
works and merit of the order.

81 That is, not on the way to heaven, but in vain blindness and deceit
of the

3\) In the issues: not.

4\) A barefoot man did not dare to kill a louse, but kept all his lice
to comply with Christ\'s saying Matt. 5:39: \"You shall not resist
evil.\"

300 \". 4s, 43-4-,. Sermon on John 14, 5. 6. W. vm, 52-si. 301

The devil has run straight to hell. It does not do so. Build, do and
seek what you will; if it comes to this, that one is to step into
another life and depart from this one, then you must take this path
alone, or be eternally lost. For \"I (says he) am the way\" (by which
one comes to the Father) and no one else: I, and no other, \"am the
truth and the life. Then you must hold fast to this man and remain firm
in faith and confession; and always practice the same in suffering and
dying, and say: I know no other help nor counsel, no salvation nor
comfort, no way nor path, but only my Lord Christ, who suffered, died,
rose again and ascended into heaven for me. I will stay with him and go
through him, even if the devil, death and hell are under me and before
me. For this is the right way and bridge, firmer and more sure than any
stone or iron building, and heaven and earth must break before it should
fail or fall.

Therefore, the art lies in keeping to this path alone, and not following
the deceiving and lying spirit, which does nothing but lead us from this
road to its wrong ways, so that it tears the thoughts of faith from our
hearts, and removes this Christ as the only way and means, so that it
does not think of him, especially at the hour when it is necessary, and
instead makes other thoughts (as St. Thomas also had) as if he were far
away from me, above heaven, and therefore no longer useful to me, and
seeks other paths and ways. Thomas also had), as if he were far away
from me, up in heaven, and no longer of any use to me, and thus seek
other paths and ways: Oh, if I had lived this way and that, done this
and that: Ah! that God would grant me my life, then I would become
pious, and lead a strict life 2c. So already the way (of the Lord
Christ) is miserably lacking, and even come out of the road into vain
astray, which there lead into the abyss of hell. For thou shalt not make
false this text, which saith, I am the way, 2c. and no other. Now let
all the Carthusians, monks and saints undertake and do what they will
and can, and you will hear that he himself says here: \"Why do you seek
other ways and paths? I

1\) Wittenberg and Jena: \"much\" instead of: the.

know no other to show you but me; where you know me, you know the way.
For I and the way are one thing. Therefore, where you lack me, you will
never find the way, even if you search and walk to death.

83 Therefore learn to understand this beautiful saying, that it says,
\"I am the way,\" 2c. that one does not think of such a way or road as
one treads and walks on, but that one treads and walks on it through the
faith of the heart, which holds on to the Lord 2) Christ alone. For
there are many ways of walking or going on earth, and there are also
many paths and ways. First, bodily or natural, from one place to
another, as cows and horses go, and all living things move and move for
the preservation of this natural life and its necessities; of which the
Scriptures and God\'s Word teach nothing.

84\) Then there are other ways and courses that also belong to this
life, which is called the worldly or civil nature and life, where we
walk among ourselves outwardly before the world in good honorable
conduct, manners and virtues, to maintain this temporal regiment, peace,
honor and discipline, by which one comes to good and honor 2c.
Philosophers give all kinds of good teachings from reason, and rulers
make all kinds of laws and commandments. These are all such ways and
courses that remain and cease in this transient life.

But above all this there is another way and journey (of which only the
Holy Scriptures and Christ speak here), how to get out of this life into
the other life to come. There one must have many other ways and paths.
As when one lies on his deathbed and is now to part with body and soul,
or is condemned and executed to be hanged, beheaded, burned, or drowned,
he also has a way before him that he must go, and can never stay here,
and a way that he cannot see, nor walk with his feet, nor ride on carts;
and yet one says: He goes away, he is gone 2c. But not in the flesh, nor
in the body.

2\) \"HErrn\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlangen.

3\) \"zu\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

302 Eri. 4g, 4S-47. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
54-57. 303

Wise. For here eyes and ears are closed, all senses are fallen, hands
and feet are bound, so that here nothing is done with our works and
abilities. For this reason, there is neither a way nor a footbridge that
can be called ours, nor can it be conceived or seen by us, since (as I
said) all our reason ceases here, and nothing everywhere knows or
understands how such going from this life to that is done, much less
does it know how and by what means it should get there.

Therefore, there is no need to listen to or follow any reason or law, or
anything that men may devise, as if it were to show the way. For even
though it thinks and pretends to do much of this, and practices all
kinds of ways, so that it thinks it is going to heaven, it is all in
vain and lost. As I have said: A Carthusian monk builds such a way that
he wants to go to heaven: I will leave the world (as it is evil and
unclean) and crawl into a corner, fasting all the days and not eating
flesh to torture my body; 1) such a strictly spiritual life God will
look at and make me blessed. This is also called making a way and
walking spiritually; for he does not want to go there with his feet, but
with his heart, which thus thinks: if he lives and does thus, he is on
the right path to heaven. Another monk or priest, who also wants to live
spiritually, makes a different path for him: \"If I say mass and pray so
much, want and go barefoot, I walk on the right road, and as soon as I
close my eyes, I ascend from my mouth to heaven.

\(87\) These are and are called all ways, made of human imagination and
discretion, and founded in our deeds and works, which belong no further
than this life. Therefore they are not ways to heaven, but vain error
and seduction, if they are made of opinion. For what should or can my
cap, plate, barefoot rope and the like help the soul, if it comes about
that I am to take the leap through death into that eternal life? After
all, it is all a physical thing, and such

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: \"zumartern\" \-\-\-- zermartern.

Works that even those who are not Christians can do. And even though
they do it in the best way and mean it, it is still the worst, so that
it is even corrupted, that they do everything without faith in Christ;
just as if they were allowed to be nothing everywhere, and these words
were even lies, since he says that he is the way and the truth 2c.

\(88\) Behold, all the world walks in its blindness and darkness, and
the way remains unsuccessful, however many and various it undertakes and
does, since each one paves his own road and builds a special bridge to
heaven. And just by seeking so many different ways and always choosing
one over the other, they show sufficiently that they do not know the
right way. And even if they have tried everything, they can never be
sure of the matter: the longer they work and the more they seek ways,
they always remain in doubt: Who knows whether God will thus please him,
or whether I have done enough? They can never get to the point where
they want to build on it as a certain foundation.

\(89\) Now, if you want to get there so that you can go right and get to
heaven, you must know and have a certain way and road on which you will
stay. For there can be no more than one way and right road. Only God\'s
word shows such a way, namely that the Lord Christ Himself is the narrow
road and the right way, on which our heart should and may be based and
rely. Therefore he concludes: \"Whoever wants to play the game of
conscience, and not run to eternal harm and destruction, let him listen
to me alone, and let this word be imaginary to him: \"I am the way\"
2c.., that he may not hear from any other, nor know what is said of
paths or ways to that life, as they are certainly all first of all vain
ways and wrong ways, since it is said to run through hedges and bushes,
yes, over sticks and stones, that one\'s feet are crushed, mouth and
nose fall apart, leg breaks, and finally the neck falls.

90\) Just as the devil tempts people in the flesh with falsehoods, when
they think they are walking on the road and the street, so that they may
enter the world.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

304 **Erl. 49, 47-4g. Sermon on Joh. 14, 5. 6. W. vm, s?-\"\".** 305

Falling into water and drowning, or coming into a wild forest and not
being able to get out again: thus and much more he seduces and charms
people spiritually with his false words, which he puts into the heart,
so that he makes them a false delusion and conceit: if they do this or
that, live this way and that, they are right and go straight to heaven;
and yet he leads them straight to hell with this.

\(91\) So it goes and must go, where one does not hear Christ, who alone
should and can show and lead the right way and the road to heaven, as he
alone knows it, and has gone it himself before all, and for this very
reason came from heaven, so that he showed us the way and brought us up
by himself; as he says John 3:13: \"No one goes to heaven except he who
has gone from heaven. Experience should also teach us this. 1) For there
is no one who has descended from heaven, or who has ascended by his own
works and life, and could tell us with certainty (as if he had
experienced it himself) how or by what means we might ascend. For this
reason no one can boast that he knows the way, much less that his work
and deeds are the way by and through which we might come to heaven,
except this one Christ alone, who alone descended and ascended again, so
that he might also lead us up there.

92\. The world is still so blind and mad that it always seeks and
searches for other ways; it can believe, accept and follow all kinds of
things as it is directed and led; it wants to try and rely on all kinds
of ways and works that are suggested to it; but it alone cannot and is
not able to adhere to this one certain way with firm, undoubted faith;
And even if she hears about it and it is preached to her that Christ is
the way, she will not let it remain pure, so that she should not also
seek other side paths and byways, so that she does not leave the glory
pure to him alone, but she also puts her own to it, so that she can also
do something about it and find the way herself.

93 Therefore, although such and such sayings are used, and people are so
far away from the

1\) In the editions: learn.

that they let it be right and true, then comes the master of all things,
yes, the devil himself with his pointed reason, and wants to help the
cause, so that it will keep its ways, and make these beautiful sayings
dull, and so pretends: it is to be understood that Christ has given us
good teaching and commandment, how we should do and live; item, good
examples, which we should follow, and if we keep and do this, then we
will find the right way to heaven 2c. Make of Christ, therefore, a pure
Moses, who speaks no more than of our doings and works, and points to
ourselves.

That is to say, it completely lacks the right knowledge and shamefully
obscures, even perverts, this salvific saying. For this is not the way,
the truth and the life by which one comes to the Father, that one alone
gives good teaching and examples, which the disciples already knew well,
and all the people had learned from Moses and others, were not allowed
to ask about it or complain (as they do here), as if they did not know
the way; Otherwise Christ would be of no more use to them than Moses, or
John the Baptist, or any of the saints, and they would have nothing to
comfort or rejoice in, because he leads from them up to heaven, leaving
them alone behind him. Thus all his suffering, death and resurrection
for us would be in vain, so that it could not be called crucified,
suffered and died for us 2c. What then, that he alone should point them
to himself, and remove them from all thought, that they might be anxious
how they might come to the Father, and follow Christ, and desire to know
the way? For they knew Christ without this before, as their Master and
Teacher.

95 Therefore beware of such shameful and deceitful talk and deception,
which holds Christ alone up to you as a teacher of works, as if he had
taught and shown us nothing more than how we should live and what we
should do? For from this he could not be called the way, but would be no
more than a cross or torture 2) by the way, who knows well where the way
is, or where one should go, but does not himself lead or carry. For
though he teaches much and shows us how to live, he does not lead us.

2\) Martyrdom - martyr image.

[306 Erl. 49, 49-SL Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
so-SS. 307]{.underline}

If we were to follow him as he did and went the way, it would not have
been done or gone by a long shot. The example is delicious, but it is
far too high for us to be able to follow it ourselves. Moreover, I have
said that all our works and deeds still belong to this life.

But this walking and the way, of which one speaks here, is no longer of
this life, but a walk and a leap, through which one must step and cross
over into that life. Therefore it is the same here as if I came from the
land to a shore, where the road and paved way stopped, and I saw water
before me, and could not cross over, nor could I dare to do so, unless I
had firm, certain footbridges or bridges, or someone to lead me across.
It would be of no help to me if someone showed me where I had to go,
since it was all impassable and no one could help me across; but if I
were to get across, I would have to have something on which I could step
safely and rely on it to carry me.

97 So it is here also, when it is a matter of coming from this life
through death into that one, there is more to it than our life and
deeds, however good they can always be. For there I and all men\'s work
and ability are far too weak that it could help me to redeem sin, to
reconcile God, to overcome death 2c. Therefore I must have another
certain ground, or firm and secure bridge, which will carry me over. Now
this alone is Jesus Christ, who alone is to be called the way by which
we come into that life, and (as he says) to the Father, if we cling to
him with steadfast faith.

Therefore, when it comes to going this way, you must, in short, forget
all other ways, and only put far from your eyes and heart what you are
told about the doctrine of works, good living, and example. This you may
and shall do, because you walk here on earth, that you practice a fine
chaste life, obedience and works of love toward your neighbor. For
these 1) are also good and godly ways, where-

1\) \"this\" is missing in the Erlanger; on purpose, because it is
quoted as Walch\'s variant.

You must continue and increase in this life forever. But that thou make
not of it the way that shall carry thee out of this life, that is, that
thou comfort not thyself with it, nor rely upon it, when thou shalt die.
For all things are not yet Christ, who was crucified and died for thee:
neither shall they have the glory that is due unto Christ alone, neither
shall they be able.

Therefore, when the hour comes when our work must cease, and we no
longer have to remain here, and this disputation is concerned, where do
I take a bridge or a footbridge that will surely enable me to cross over
into that life? When you get there (I say), look around for no way
called human way and our own good, holy life or work, but let all this
be covered with the Lord\'s Prayer, and over it said: \"Forgive us our
trespasses\" 2c., and keep only to this one who says: \"I am the way\"
2c. And see that you have then firmly and deeply imagined this word, and
so, as if you heard Christ say to you presently, as he says here to
Thoma: \"Why do you look and gape for other ways? Here you must look to
me and stay, and leave no other thought to yourself how you might get to
heaven; but put everything purely and far from your heart, and think
nothing else than as I say to you, \"I am the way.\" Only see that you
step on me, that is, hold on to me with firm faith and all confidence of
heart; I will be the bridge, and carry you over, that you may come in a
moment from death and the fear of hell into that life. For it is I who
have paved the way or path myself, and have gone and passed over myself,
that I may bring thee and all that cleave unto me over; only that thou
mayest sit down upon me without doubt, venture fresh upon me, and go
thither confidently and cheerfully, and die in my name.

\(100\) Behold, thus we must learn to look upon and know the Lord
Christ, not as being of no more use to us than by his doctrine and
example, and now gone from us (like other saints), but as always being
and abiding with and in us (especially at the hour when this life
ceases), and so near,

308 Erl. \"s, \[s-st. Sermon on John 14:5. 6. W. vm, \"2-s\". 309

That he alone may be in our hearts; which is done, if I firmly believe
in him, that he is the Savior, passed through death for me unto the
Father, that he also may bring me thither. So I am on the right road, on
which one walks and drives from this life to that. This is the course
that begins in baptism, and because faith is there, a person continues
on the same road until he passes through death. For faith does not err
nor lack; but where Christ abides, to which he is attached, there he
must be and abide. And the stronger the faith is, the more surely this
road is walked. For this walking means nothing else than always
increasing in faith, and the longer, the more certain of eternal life in
Christ. If I now remain in such faith, and death attacks me and throws
me down, or otherwise freshly chokes me by sword, fire, etc., and takes
away all five senses, then the way is already spent and directed, so
that I come there, where I am supposed to go, and jump into that life.

This is the true, certain, and indeed a fine, sweet, comforting doctrine
of the gospel of the Lord Christ; and it is easy to grasp by itself, so
that no one may run far after it, nor take great pains and rotten work
to do so; only that he may accept it with faith, and firmly cling to it
with his heart: nor does it take pains and work to receive this
doctrine. For the devil and the world oppose it with all their might,
will not hear this preaching nor suffer it, and condemns it as the worst
heresy. So the dear Lord Christ must always hear the contradiction, and
let his mouth be punished, where he says: \"I am the way and the
truth,\" 2c. that the devil and the world speak against it: it is error,
lies and seduction. And because we say that only through faith in Christ
can one go to heaven hanging on, they cry out that good works are
forbidden; although we do not teach against good works at all, but
rather urge and exhort that the way on earth be well built, so that here
we live chastely, obediently, patiently, and servant-like toward one
another.

102\. But besides this, we must say: If this way stops, and we are to
get away from how

Then the way will be made, so that we can set foot with certainty and
know where to step. Just as when I come from the land to the water,
where the earth never carries me, and yet I must cross over: if there is
no crossing, bridge or ship, then I must either drown in the water, or
remain here on this side and return again. So also, even though I have
lived well here and have gone my way on earth, when the hour comes for
me to leave this life, I must have another way and footbridge to carry
me over there. This is none other than this Christ, who suffered and
died for me, so that I might attain eternal life through him.

This is taught by Christ, the Son of God Himself, whom we should believe
as He is the Truth Himself. Whether the world does not believe this
because of the devil\'s inspiration, and considers this teaching to be
lies and heresy, we must suffer and allow ourselves to be blasphemed and
persecuted. But when their hour shall come, and death shall also come
before their eyes, that they must leap out of this life, then they will
well know what their own ways will help them to do: and they will have
to confess with their loss that this is the truth which they have
blasphemed. Summa, it is to be said: Take this path alone, or be drowned
eternally in the abyss of hell.

104 Behold, we have this saying, and the mind of the Lord Christ, how he
will lead us from all other wandering, wandering, and flying thoughts,
and draw us to himself alone, that he may accustom us to walk this way,
that we may be found out of it, when all other ways cease. For with this
he wants to equip and prepare his disciples and Christians, so that they
will always wait for the way to that life. As if he should say: It will
now become much different with you, because I depart from you. Death
will daily strike you under the eyes, and you will have to wait all
hours that they will torture you, strangle you and drive you out of the
world, so that you also have to go the way that I now go from this life.
Therefore see to it that you then know where you should set your foot
first and meet the way that will carry you.

310 Erl. 49, 34-SS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SS-SS. 311

This is that you cling firmly to me, 2c. that you do not fidget and
wriggle like those who know nothing about me and lead their rhyme:

I live, and I don\'t know how long.

I\'m dying, and I don\'t know when.

> I\'m going, and I don\'t know where. 1) I am surprised that I am
> happy.

Thus should those say who will not hear this teaching, nor accept the
way, and seek other ways all their lives in vain. For thus the heart of
man (if it is without Christ) stands and must stand, that it always
hangs and struggles in such eternal doubt, terror and trembling, when it
thinks of death, that it does not know which way to go, would gladly
escape from death and hell, and yet does not know how, as they
themselves confess with this rhyme.

\(106\) But a Christian, knowing this way, and having already begun to
walk in it, shall turn the page, and cheerfully say thus, God forbid
that I should die, and go hence, and know not whither. For I have been
baptized into Christ, and believe that he is my Savior and the way by
which I shall go to heaven. Therefore, though I do not know 2) how long
I shall be here, or when I shall put off this maggot sack; yet I know
that I shall live with him for ever. Whether the old sack closes its
eyes and all its senses, and does not know where it will remain, there
is nothing the matter; for it shall neither know nor feel it, but shall
be carried on its back to the churchyard and be scraped under the earth
and become powder, until God shall raise it up again. But still, as a
Christian, I know (praise God!) where I am to go and where I am to stay;
for it is promised to me through baptism and absolution; item, in the
Sacrament. Therefore, a Christian should only confidently reverse this
rhyme and say thus:

I am alive, and I know how long.

I die, and know well how and when (namely all days and hours before the
world).

> I am going, and I know, praise God! 3) Where to, I am surprised that I
> am still sad.

1\) The Wittenberg edition offers: \"Ich muss sterben, weiß auch nicht
wann, Ich fahr von dann, weiß nicht wohin\" 2c.

2\) Wittenberger: nothing.

3\) Erlanger: \"Wohl\" instead of: GOOD praise!

For a Christian ought to be sure of his things; and because he has
Christ, he has all things, that he may walk in leaps and bounds every
hour; but all these things according to the spirit and faith in Christ,
that he may begin to walk in this way. For according to the flesh and
bodily feeling it is still covered up and altogether hidden. For, as

\[It has been said that human reason and senses can neither understand
nor comprehend anything less than that this should be a way, since it
neither sees nor feels anything that it can hold on to, but badly above
and beyond its feeling and understanding, it can only go and venture
there as into a great wilderness or a wide sea, since it cannot find a
place to stay with itself. Therefore, here must be the faith that seizes
the word and can hold on to it, and confidently sail on the man,
although the old Adam goes to failure over it.

\(108\) Behold, this is the part where the Lord Christ alone calls
Himself the way by which we, following Him, come to the Father, that He
may keep our heart and trust purely and completely in Him when it is
time to depart from this life, and promises that He will surely carry us
over and bring us to the Father, if we only hold fast to Him; as He now
goes on to say:

**I am the truth and the life.**

These words we also want to act in the most simple way, and leave other
sharp speculations. It is almost, to speak of it in German and roughly,
all one thing, without it getting other names, if it goes in the work,
namely in the transition or passage. For it is all one Christ, and yet
it has various names, after which it feels various, if one is to cling
to it, and finally come through it. For, first of all (as has been
said), to our feeling and understanding nothing seems less here than
that this is the way to come to the Father in heaven, since one is to go
through a vain cross and death, and sees neither footbridge nor bridge,
neither counsel nor help for souls; yes, everyone is afraid and
frightened of the crossing, and does not know how he is to begin to
cross over, as one who has crossed a wide ditch.

4\) \"so\" is missing in the Erlanger.

312 **Erl. 4S, SS-S9. Sermon on John 14:5, 6. W. VIII, 68-70.** 3 13

or deep water before him, since he must cross, and yet sees no
footbridge or bridge.

\(110\) Just as the children of Israel were terrified at the Red Sea,
when they heard that they had nowhere else to cross over, and either had
to go through it or remain in the hands of the enemy; so that they also
might say, \"Is this a way out of death and prison, 1) since we are
sinking everywhere, with great mountains on both sides and waves and
water in front of us? Yes, if we were birds or fish, that we could fly
overhead, or swim through the sea! Still there had to be a way, for the
sake of God\'s word, and the sea had to separate, and let them go
through dry. So there is nothing to be seen here, nor to be understood,
that there should be the way and the passage into eternal life, since
man feels nothing but fear of death and terror. But Christ stands
against this with his word, when he says: \"I am the way\" 2c., and
thereby makes a way and bridge out of the waylessness, yes, out of
destruction, so that man should step on it freshly and without doubt,
and come through it; just as those at God\'s word went bodily through
the sea dry-footed and unhindered, since otherwise there was no way.
This is one thing.

Secondly, when one comes onto the path and has dared and begun to
believe, then it is necessary that one becomes certain of the matter,
remains firm on it, and does not allow himself to be drawn back again or
deterred from it. For here the devil once again has his ghost and
heartache to work on, throwing all kinds of trouble in our way, so that
he leads us out beside and to the side, so that we do not stay on the
right road. First he tries all his cunning and roguishness to seduce
these people, and does so with the very words of Scripture and under the
name of Christ; just as all the heretics come with sheep\'s clothing,
using the very same words, manner and gesture, as if they were the right
teachers of this way; boasting that they are the right teachers of this
way.

1\) So the Jenaer. Wittenberger: \"gedrengnis\". Erlanger:
\"Gezeugniß\". We have given preference to the reading of the Jenaer,
because with Luther the word \"gedrang\" for Bedrängniß occurs, but not
\"gedrengnis\".

2\) Erlanger: the.

Nothing else, but the honor of Christ and faith in Christ, and thereby
deceive the people who want to cling to Christ and would like to find
the right way. And he goes on the highway just as one goes out to the
gate, but in the same \[right way he comes to a place\], 3) where two or
three roads diverge, and some rogue comes to him, tempting him to go out
of the right way again. Therefore the piece belongs to it, which is
called: Probatio et perseverantia fide, experience, and that one becomes
completely sure of it and remains on the started way.

This is what I mean by the other part, veritas, the truth; that Christ
is not only the way in the beginning, but also the right, certain way,
and that he alone finally remains the way, to which we must always
adhere, and not let ourselves be seduced by the wooden paths that turn
us away from seeking something else besides Christ, which should also
help us to salvation. As those who first recognize Christ through faith,
then fall back into the doctrine of works, as has happened up to now
under the papacy. Item, that we do not allow ourselves to be held back
and driven back by the obstacles, as sticks and stones, which we
encounter on the way, since the devil sets up so many different
secondary doctrines, groups and divisions, annoying, evil examples, as
well as persecution, temptation and danger, that we either begin to
despair of the way, or ever become tired and weary.

For although the multitudes fall when the gospel comes, and everyone
gladly hears the sweet, comforting doctrine \"of the forgiveness of sins
through Christ,\" they do not remain with it. For the seed (as Christ
says \[Matth. 13, 4.\]) falls by the wayside and 4) since it is stony
and thorny. The grain, that is, the preaching of the gospel, is well
sown, but it has no soil in which it could remain and grow strong. So
there are many people who are fine and begin to believe, but when it
comes to the middle of the way 5) where they are to continue, they let
themselves be led astray and along the way.

> 3)\' The bracketed words are inserted by us. 4) \"and\" is missing in
> the Jena.

5\) In the issues: in the middle of the way.

314 Eri. 4g, \[s-oi. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm.
70-73. 315

They are not sure of the matter, or they are frightened to think back
again.

\(114\) As soon as the Jews \[Exodus 14:22\], when the sea had opened up
and made a way for them to stand in it, and they saw the water on both
sides standing high above their heads, they might have thought, \"What
have we done? Aren\'t we the biggest fools to let ourselves into this
wild flood? After all, we see that the water is on our necks here; how
would it be if it came crashing down on us now and drowned us all in an
instant? as happened soon after to King Pharaoh with all his army. And
if they had followed such thoughts, and let doubt and unbelief overcome
them, they would either have gone astray, and run back among the
enemies; or they would have been so afraid that they themselves would
have fallen over one another, and so would have been destroyed in the
water; as happened to many of them in the desert afterwards, when they
grumbled and despaired of getting through, and wanted to go back to
Egypt again. 2c. But because they then accepted the way (through the
sea) according to God\'s word, and thus continued on it and did not
doubt, the water had to stand still and not a droplet had to fall, and
let them go through dry, although otherwise there was no reason, and
according to all reason a dangerous, terrible, impassable course.

115 So you also, if you have taken hold of me through faith, you are on
the right path, which is sure for you and does not deceive you. But see
to it that you stay on it and continue, for you will encounter many an
obstacle and hindrance, both to the right and to the left. Therefore you
must be prepared to hold fast to me and not be challenged by anything
that comes before you that is cruel or terrible, that wants to scare you
away from me, or that wants to tempt and lure you to the side with
beautiful appearances, and know that such things are lies and deceit of
the devil, by which he leads you to destruction. But I will be sure of
you, and bring you through this wide sea, out of death into eternal
life, out of the world and the devil\'s kingdom to the Father. Therefore
I will not only be and be called the way, but also the truth and the
life.

\(116\) Behold, I understand this saying most simply, that it may always
remain the same opinion of the one Christ, that he is called the way,
because of the beginning; the truth, because of the means and
continuation; and also the life, because of the end. For He must be all
things, the beginning, the means, and the end of our salvation, to be
laid as the first stone, and to set the others and the middle stones
upon it, and also to close the vault or roof upon it. He is both the
first, the middle and the last step on the ladder to heaven, Genesis
28:12. For through Him we must begin, continue and come to life.

So all things are one thing and one Christ, without which he becomes
many things to us in experience. In the beginning it is sour to meet the
way; after that it is still sourer and more difficult, in the
continuation, that we remain on the way; but there it only becomes
sourest, when we have gone long on the way, and now have to come to the
inn. For then we have to serve the devil and death, so that he may
murder us, behead us, burn us, or, if he can no longer do so, execute us
on the bed by pestilence or other plague, and dig us under the earth.
Does this mean the right step into life or going up to the Father, that
a Christian dies with all shame, devoured by death, since all the world
sees nothing nor knows anything, but that he rots under the earth and
becomes powder? How does it rhyme with this that it should be called
coming to life and to the Father? I will keep silent that the devil
inwardly, both in the last hour and otherwise without ceasing,
especially the high Christians, tortures and torments their hearts with
his arrows and fear of hell, so that they feel nothing else but as if
they were at the mercy of death, or in the abyss of hell; as St. Paul
himself complains in 1 Cor. 15:31, and swears: \"By our glory, I die
daily,\" that is, I am in death without ceasing, as in a deep sea.

118\) So it happened to the children of Israel in the Red Sea (for this
story serves to make this saying all the more clear), that it was not
enough that they had begun and dared to go through at God\'s word, and
now they continued,

316 Eri. 4\", \"1-\"s, Sermon on John 14:5, 6. W. vm, 73-7s. 317

But when they were more than halfway through, and saw the shore or land
before them, Pharaoh the king and all his army were behind them, since
they were in as great danger 1) as before they went into the sea, and
did not help them to find the way (since there had been no way) and were
now almost through; But God had to miraculously help them out, and save
them from the death that was on their necks, so that the angel, who
reigned before them with a jet of fire and clouds, had to make a
distinction between them and the enemies 2) with weather and lightning,
because 3) those were afraid of it and hurried back; but before they
looked around, the sea fell on them and drowned them all. So they were
saved from the present danger of death, and this Christ was both to
them, the way, the truth, and the life 2c.

We must also experience this. If we now come to the shore of that life
and are to step out now, death lies before us, which we cannot escape
and must first take the most dangerous leap. If I now want to judge by
reason, it is truly called having lived badly, when I am carried out of
the gate and buried under the earth, so that I must become ashes; and
yet Christ says that only then has life been attained and I have come to
the Father in the right way. Therefore in that hour thou shalt not look
upon bodily death, the grave, pestilence, the sword, the fire, if thou
feelest it, nor upon all the arrows and spears which the devil putteth
into thine heart; 4) but look unto me, saith Christ; As I have been the
way and the truth unto thee, and have brought thee hitherto, that thou
hast not failed, and have kept thee in all manner of danger, and
falsehood, and deceit; so will I also be life in and through death, that
thou mayest have it as surely as thou now feelest death. Otherwise, if
this were not the case, faith would have nothing to do, and Christ would
not be allowed this comfort. For if God made such a bridge to heaven,
which I can see and grasp

1\) In the editions: equally large Fahr.

2j Distinction - divorce, partition.

3\) Erlanger: that.

4\) \"dir\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlanger.

From the beginning to the end, where I should both begin and end, what
should I add to the faith or this sermon?

120 Therefore the sum of this saying is said in the most simple way:
Hold on to Christ through faith, and you will be right; abide in him,
and you will be right; persevere to the end, and you will be blessed. So
that with these words he may tear our heart and turn it away from all
other trust, and fix it on himself alone, that we should neither know
nor think of anything else when it concerns the great leap into that
life. Because we still live here on earth, we have other teachings and
ways (than the Ten Commandments) how to keep the body in discipline and
obedience, how to act and walk honorably and honestly with one\'s
neighbor, because we are here among one another, which also please God;
but it is not yet called going this way. But if one asks about these
high things, how to get from this life through sin and death to eternal
righteousness and life, from the devil to God, from hell to heaven, then
this text belongs here, which teaches us that no other way, no other
safe, right and certain road, no other solid bridge or footbridge, no
other port nor passage fei, but this one Christ.

Therefore, one must learn here with diligence and distinguish (as I said
above) the ways that Scripture also calls, and is called the way of
obedience, patience, kindness or his commanded office and status,
honestly and truthfully and with a good conscience before God and the
world. Of this way, where it is said, gone and come out of death into
life, out of this worldly, sinful, into that heavenly, spiritual being,
one must speak much differently than of that. For here is no other
master nor counselor, but faith alone, which says: I believe in Jesus
Christ 2c. I live, remain and die in him alone.

But let no one understand such a sermon as if he had been given a time
limit, so that he might save himself from going this way until the day
he dies, thinking that he will still be able to do so, that he will live
in the meantime, and do what he desires, and that he will now live well.

318 **Erl. 49, 63-66.** interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 75-78.** 319

After that, when the hour comes, he will keep to this saying. Not so,
dear brother; see that you do not lack it then. A Christian is such a
man, who immediately begins to go from this life to heaven, from the
time he comes out of baptism, through faith, that Christ is prepared for
him, the way, the truth and the life, and does not cease until the last
hour, so that he is always found on this path, That he may always be
found in this way, and guided in the truth to attain life, as one who
already sees the shore whither he is to tread, and is thus sent, where
he dies on the way, this day or tomorrow, or for one, two, ten years,
that he is already brought over through Christ. For we cannot be sure of
death for a moment, and in baptism all Christians begin to die, even
into the pit.

123 Therefore, as long as the danger and uncertainty of death is there,
so long shall Christ my life be believed, even all the time that I am
here on earth; that this preaching be not reckoned by hours, time, and
year. It is not time-barred that you should say, Christ will be my life,
if I now give up the ghost; nevertheless I will live as I desire 2c.,
but know that it is already now at the time when you are to cross over,
and have already entered the sea with the children of Israel, and must
always continue until you come to the shore, lest the enemy seize you on
the way.

Let this be said of this saying for the simple, how Christ is called,
preached, and modeled in many ways, and yet is always One Thing. For
first, when the disciples asked about his going to the Father, he said,
\"If you knew me, you would know the way. After that, if you want to ask
how you can be sure of the matter, and not doubt me or fall away,
because it is to be looked at differently, and does not seem that I am
the way, also does not see, where it finally wants to go, then only do
not let yourselves be challenged, because I am also the truth and the
life, if you only stay with me. For it cannot and must not be seen, but
believed and thus experienced. So these three pieces, although they show
the same Christ, are set apart to show that he must be recognized in
this way.

and have all three things, that they may go to heaven, namely, that they
may begin aright, and continue in the same, and by such faith go on and
on toward experience and nearer, until they conclude the end also. This
is what he now says, and he says:

**No one comes to the Father except through me.**

Then he takes the three pieces in one heap, and putting them all into
one, 1) indicates with blunt, clear words what he means, and for what
purpose he has called himself \"the way, the truth and the life\";
namely, that one may come to the Father. Summa (he wants to say), I
alone am everything; if someone is to come to the Father, it must happen
through me alone, beginning, means and end.

But what is \"coming to the Father\"? Nothing else than, as often said,
to come from death to life, from sin and condemnation to innocence and
piety, from sorrow and heartache to eternal joy and bliss. This (he
says) no one can expect him to achieve in any other way than through me.
For I alone am the way, the truth and the life. This is said clearly and
plainly enough, purely excluding and setting down all doctrine of the
merit of works and of one\'s own righteousness, and badly denying and
denying all other consolation and confidence, by which one supposes to
come to heaven. For it is said in short: \"No one comes to the Father
except through me\"; there is no other ship nor passage.

This is what we say, that a man attains these things by faith alone, who
holds to Christ, and that no work of ours, nor of all men and saints,
shall have honor and glory. But not of the opinion that one should not
do good works, but that in order to obtain grace with God and eternal
life, one must first have this Christ alone through faith, but after and
in addition to this also do good works and demonstrate love; only that
this distinction be kept right, that our life and works not be
attributed the power and merit that they should bring us up to the
Father, but be directed to that end.

1\) Wittenberger: interprets it.

320 **Erl. 4g, SS-W. Sermon on John 14:5, 6. W. VIII, 78-81.** 321

that God may be praised here on earth, that the neighbor may be
improved, and that everyone may be helped.

But when it comes to attaining that life with God, I must have another
treasure in my heart, so that I can conclude with certainty: If all
things fail me and go away with me, I still have the treasure that
abides forever, and cannot fail nor perish, which is not mine, nor any
man\'s work or merit, but is and is called the way, the truth, and the
life, and only that by which one comes to the Father. I will abide in
him, live and die in him. Therefore I will neither hear nor know of all
the doctrine of the works of monks or of the spirits of the wicked,
which is hereby utterly condemned, and I have decided that whatever is
done apart from Christ, in the opinion that one trusts to come to heaven
with it, is certainly not the way to heaven, but a vile pit of murder,
not truth, but falsehood and lies, not life, but the devil and death.

And what greater dishonor, blasphemy, and denial of the Lord Christ and
his word could be said, than that against such a bright saying one would
put such power and glory in our works, and rob and obscure Christ\'s
honor? Dear one, it is not by our works that such a great thing can be
attained. What would you boast of your deeds or your ability, if you
were to go through a wide, wild sea, between waves and billows of water
on both sides, seeing nothing but certain death before you, and knowing
no counsel or help to get through, whether you torture yourself to death
with works? Just as the people of Israel had to despair utterly of all
human wisdom, counsel and help, and would never have dared to pass
through if they had not kept God\'s word badly and grasped faith. They
would have had to trample underfoot, jump and dance for a long time
before the waters would have opened up and let them pass through, if the
word and their faith in it had not been there. Much less is it done and
arranged with works and our powers, this

It is much more difficult and dangerous for you to complete this walk or
crossing than the physical one through the Red Sea, where the burden of
sins, God\'s wrath, eternal death and the devil with all of hell falls
on our necks and floods us, so that you can overcome all of this and get
through safely. There is more to this dance than red shoes. Therefore,
faith alone must rule here and do everything.

130\] But after that, if you have such faith, good works must also
follow, as they must flow and follow from faith, where they are to be
good and pleasing to God, and also cannot be done and be done, if faith
is not first there. Just as the children of Israel, though they passed
through the sea with their feet, had first to have faith in their hearts
to carry their feet, and then to venture into the sea, without which
they would never have passed, if they had trodden the water with their
feet forever.

\(131\) Therefore it is not to be heard here, that one cries out
hostilely against this doctrine of faith in Christ, 1) and therefore
cites the sayings of Scripture, which demand good works, and from this
wants to conclude that one must thereby be saved. For this is true, and
we also say it, that good works must and ought to be done; but we do not
want to have the addition added to it, that one should fall on it with
such confidence of heart, and say, This is a good work, as the Scripture
requires, therefore I will be saved by it; that is too close to Christ.
For here it is plainly written, \"No man cometh unto the Father, but by
me.\" Now this word \"me\" does not mean this or that, nor any work or
life, yours or any man\'s on earth, even the most holy; and in short, it
excludes all that can be called which is not Christ Himself. Therefore
no one can boast that he can come to the Father through his own deeds
and good works.

132 Therefore, it depends here on the right understanding of good works.
God demands good works and wants them to be done; but I speak of such
works as are demanded and praised in Scripture, not of those of men,
without

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: von Christo.

[322 Eri. 49, SS-70. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
81-8S. 323]{.underline}

God\'s word and command, by their own devotion or discretion, contrary
to right good works. But at the same time he does not want them to be
put in the same place as Christ and thereby deprive him of his glory, as
if we could thereby come to the Father, which is done through him
alone; 1) otherwise this saying and the whole teaching of the Gospel
would have to be false, and Christ would no longer be of any use to us.
But more is to be said about this elsewhere, when we consider the
sayings about good works.

This is the doctrine of the Christian faith, how we are to come to know
the Lord Christ and understand what we have through him. Which he will
now himself elaborate and explain, how we have everything in him, and
without or apart from him nothing is valid before God, and also without
him he does not want to act with him, nor let himself or his will and
work be known or understood.

**V. 7. If you knew me, you knew my Father also, and from now on you
know him and have seen him.**

Here again the Lord Christ makes a new parable and hidden speech before
the disciples, so that they first began to ask about the Father, what
and where he is? For though he has spoken plainly enough of it, and
declared himself to be the way, the truth, and the life, 2c., saying,
\"No man cometh unto the Father, but by me,\" yet the dear disciples are
still without understanding, hearing all these words, way, truth, life,
to come unto the Father, 2c., so utterly with a lukewarm reason and a
carnal mind, that they cannot judge themselves in three. Therefore he
lets them run friendly, and throws a block in their way, on which they
are to push themselves, and are caused to ask further.

135 Therefore he begins, \"If you knew me,\" 2c. How? Do they then not
know Christ, seeing and hearing him present before them, and having
walked with him so long? But this is what I said, that to know Christ
means here,

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: as if so much could be achieved that we
would thereby \.... which he alone does\....

not to know him face to face and (as St. Paul says) carnally, but to
know what he is to be held for, what we have in him, and how we ought to
be. For this is in sum his opinion, that it all depends on it, and this
alone should be the art of the Christians, that we get to know him
rightly, and picture all thoughts, nature, teachings and life, and what
can be done, and thus cling to him alone with faith, and say with all my
heart: I know nothing, and want to know nothing in divine things, except
from my Lord Christ alone; he alone should be everything that concerns
my salvation, and is to be dealt with between God and me. And though I
have many a temptation and opposition from the devil, from the world,
and from my own conscience, and must suffer death over it, yet I will
abide in it, live and die. That would be (he says) to know me rightly,
2) and through me also the Father.

136\. But if you look at me like a cow looks at a new gate, and only
take into your eyes how I walk along in the highest weakness, and let
myself be crucified, killed and buried so shamefully, then you cannot
see nor believe that I should be the way, the truth and the life, and
that you must come to the Father through me alone, but rather you will
think of me as a contradiction, as the Jewish people think of me as
error and deception, as vain lies and dreams, yes, as vain death and the
poison of hell. Therefore, if you want to know me rightly, you must not
follow the eyes and the carnal mind, as the Jews do, but take the word
you hear from me into your heart, hold on to it, and judge by it alone,
and you will experience how I pass through weakness, cross and death and
everything and come to the Father, and thus draw you the same way
through me and with me, if you hold on to me through the faith of the
word in death and all hardships.

137 This is what he means when he says, \"If you knew me, you would know
the Father. As if he were to say, \"What do you think and worry about
where I am going, and what the way is, or what and where the Father is?

2\) Wittenberger: recognized.

324 **Erl. tg, 70-7S. Sermon on John 14:7-9. W. VIII, 83-8P.** 325

Whom I go? Do you not hear that if you have me, you have me; and because
you hear my word, though you grasp and hold it weakly, you know me; and
as much as you know me, you know the Father also, and have seen him
already. Now he will explain this further and strike it out. For these
words are only (as I have said) a prelude to a new sermon, how one is to
learn to recognize the Father in him.

**V. 8, 9 Philip said to him, \"Lord, show us the Father, and it will be
enough for us. Jesus saith unto him, How long am I with you, and thou
knowest me not? Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father also. How
sayest thou then: Show us the Father?**

This is a very beautiful disputation or conversation and sermon of the
Lord Christ. For after he had told them much of his Father, how he would
go to him, and also bring them to him, that they also should see him,
yea, already know him and have seen him: Then the apostle Philip, being
somewhat more understanding and sharper than the others, goes forth with
the high question, with which the highest, wisest people have always
been much and highly concerned, diligently searching and investigating:
what God is, and how one may know and attain God, but no one has ever
been able to meet, and it is also impossible for nature and human reason
to meet. As Philip himself testifies and shows here, that although he
has heard Christ preach and say from the Father, he has never understood
anything of it everywhere, nor does he understand it yet. That makes it
clear that he still wants to grasp it with reason and attain it through
his own thoughts.

Therefore, although Christ points him to his word alone, and wants to
hang on to it, and says that he already knows him and has seen him, yet
it does not stick with him, but freely confesses how he has it in his
heart, and says: \"Oh, show us the Father, and it will be enough for us.
As if he should say: You tell us 1) well about the father, as we know
him; I have never seen him my whole life, and would wish nothing better
than to be so happy, and to see him once 2c.

1\) \"us\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

140 Thus the dear apostle lets himself be heard that he is still a
wavering, unsteady believer, like all the others, even though they do
not go out like this. For he also believes in God and has heard much
from Him. But now he hears Christ say: \"If you knew me, you knew the
Father, and now you know him,\" 2c. This is a strange, incomprehensible
language to him. So far he gets away with his thoughts, lets Christ sit
there and talk (just as St. Thomas does above (v. 5)), but cannot stick
to the Christ who talks to him, but, in spite of him, he walks aside
with his own thoughts and flutters up into the clouds: \"Oh, that we
might see him sitting up there among the angels.

The high apostle, who had heard Christ and been with him for so long, is
still so grossly lacking. But it is a great comfort to us to see how our
shameful nature and reason can hardly manage to abandon its own thoughts
and speculations about God and attach itself to Christ alone, because
the apostles themselves, even if Christ is with them personally and
speaks to them about this, cannot be rid of the filth. So that we may
also know how to comfort ourselves when we feel our weakness, but still
only begin to believe, even if we sometimes step aside or fall away and
stumble, that he can and will give us credit for it. Only that we do not
fall away from him and run away, like Judas the betrayer, but come back
into the street, like this Philip, who remains with him and does not run
against him, even though his thoughts are looking elsewhere, and how
weak he still is, along with the others in faith and 3) right knowledge
of the Lord Christ: But because they cling to him and gladly hear his
word and desire to learn as his disciples, Christ considers them his
true disciples and Christians, and pronounces such a judgment that they
have already known the Father because they know him. And so it is, even
though they do not know or understand it themselves. For because they
take hold of Christ, they truly also take hold of the Father; as he
himself says: \"He who sees me, sees me.

2\) Jenaer, Walch and the Erlanger: kennet.

3\) \"and\" is missing in the Erlanger.

326 Erl. 49, 73-7S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SK-8S. 327

they also behold the Father\"; without them still pursuing their carnal
thoughts, thus separating and separating the Father from Christ, so that
He must always draw them back to Himself.

So he can overlook our ignorance and foolishness (if we have begun to
believe in him otherwise) and tolerate that we still want to find
something in ourselves so that we can come to the Father without Christ,
and take hold of him just as we imagine him through our thoughts,
namely, that he would look at our own worthiness and devotion or good
opinion and therefore show himself merciful. For this shameful
temptation is too deep in our nature; indeed, it has even passed through
it. How I feel in myself that I would often gladly give everything I
have, yes, my life and limb, so that I might one day find a work (done
by me) on which I could rest, and bring it before God, so that he would
have to look at it, and therefore give me his grace and eternal life.

143\. I cannot come to that point (as I should and must), that I merely
surrender to Christ, without all trust and presumption of my works or my
own worthiness, and thus confess: Let my life and works be as they may,
whether they be good and pleasing to God, but I will seek no comfort nor
salvation but in the Lord Christ alone, whom the Father has sent from
heaven and testifies by his own heavenly voice that he alone is in whom
he is well pleased and wants him alone to be heard, if anyone wants to
recognize him and have him graciously. No spirit of the mob, no trusting
hypocrite will ever come to this, but only the poor, sorrowful,
disconsolate and humble hearts and consciences, but with toil and labor,
that they must be anxious and tormented about it. The others shall come
to God by themselves and by their own works, but they shall also
confidently run, bruise the head, and cast down the neck to it.

Therefore, first and foremost (all things being put aside), what one
wants to think of God or do with Him must begin there, since He Himself
begins and points us to it when He first preaches from heaven and says
\[Matth. 3, 17.\]

Son, you shall hear him. As if to say, \"If you want to be learned, wise
and prudent, and to seek and find me, you have a master and teacher
here, appointed and given to you by me, who shall tell you and show you
how to come to me; and know that if you hear him, you have heard me
yourself. Therefore, both your ears and your heart are to be attached to
Christ alone, and do not let anything else be taught or instructed to
you that is preached or practiced apart from it.

When I hear Christ, I hear nothing else but that he says: I am the way,
the truth and the life; through me alone one comes to the Father. There
is no thought, work or holiness of his own, but I am all. Do not look
any further, but cling to me and rely on me alone; where I go through my
cross and death, there you shall also remain, so that no one shall
separate you from me and the Father. He who knows and believes this goes
right and cannot err or fail. For he meets the very one who is the way
and the all, and of whom the Father himself testifies that one comes to
him through him. He leaves behind everything that is not Christ,
monasticism and work sanctity; item, all high, pointed thoughts of God,
may learn no other art, seek no other comfort, know no other way,
because he has it all in this one; and, if he stays with it, has already
come to where he should desire, namely, to the knowledge and beholding
of God in faith, and he lacks nothing, except that he only continues in
this, until he finally also comes through this to the public clarity,
where he will behold God eternally without means and without all
education 1).

This is what Christ wants with this answer, when he says to Philip: \"I
have been with you so long, and you do not know me\" 2c. \"Philippe, he
who sees me sees the Father also\" 2c. As if he should say: \"Well, I
have made you run and ask, so that you may see how you do not yet
understand as you should, since you have been with me so long and have
heard me. Therefore, once you know me well, you will know and understand
everything, and you will already know the Father.

1\) Education \-- Image.

328 Erl. 4°, 7S-77. Sermon On Joh. 14, 8. 9. W.vm, 8S-SI. Z29

For I do not want you to turn your eyes away from me and look elsewhere,
or to seek God in any other way than in me, whom you now see with your
eyes and hear speaking to you, but you must learn that in order to see
and know me, you must also look at and know the Father with the same
respect and knowledge. Summa, you shall not think or think that there is
any other way or means to grasp and know God than through me.

But the seeing and knowing must not be understood so roughly and
carnally, that whoever sees Christ (as a cow looks at a gate), that he
sees the Father with his eyes as he is formed, but according to the
spirit and faith, and yet truly so, as the words indicate. Whoever sees
Christ with his eyes \"in faith\" also sees the Father with the same
eyes, because he meets the very person in whom the Father dwells (also
bodily, as St. Paul says \[Col. 2, 9.\]) and shows all his heart and
will. So we also see and know both Him and the Father, though not with
eyes, nor with bodily sight and knowledge, but through the same faith.
For the mere bodily seeing of Christ is of no use unless it is
accompanied by the spiritual, which is the vision of the heart or the
knowledge of faith. Otherwise Caiaphas, Pilate, Herod, and almost all
the Jewish people saw him and knew him, and yet they neither knew him
nor the Father. For though they see and know the person of Christ, yet
they see not how the Father is in Christ, and Christ in him, and both
one heart, mind, and will, yea, even one, undivided, divine being.

Behold, this is how he wants to draw back Philippe and the other
apostles, who stagger to and fro and flutter with thoughts, and come so
far from faith that they do not know where and how to seek God or find
Him, even if they see Christ before their noses. Where are you gazing,
he says, and what are you fluttering and running with thoughts like an
inactive mercury? How sayest thou yet that I should show thee the
Father? I mean, you know him very well. Do you not hear: \"He who sees
me,

1\) stho \-- somewhere.

who sees the Father\" 2c.? That is, if you want to know how you are with
God, and how he is against you, or thinks about you, and summa, how you
may come to him (for to know such is actually to know the Father), then
ask only your own heart, nor reason, nor thoughts, nor Moses, nor any
other teacher, but only look at me, and listen to what I speak. To me (I
say) you must look and listen. If you take these things into your heart
when you see me and hear from me, as I show myself to you and let you
hear me, then you will surely meet the Father and have seen and known
him correctly, as he should be seen and known.

For in this person of Christ you see, first of all, that he looks upon
no one with displeasure, nor acts unkindly, nor frightens and chases him
away, but most kindly attracts and tempts everyone to himself, both with
words and gestures: he shows himself no other than a servant who gladly
wants to help everyone; thus also that he allows himself to be crucified
for your sake, and spills his blood mildly. You see this with your eyes,
and you hear nothing else with your ears, but vainly such kind, sweet,
comforting words: \"Do not let your heart be troubled,\" and so on. 2)
\"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden. \"2c. \[Matth.
11, 28.\] \"Whoever believes in me shall not perish, but have eternal
life\" 2c. \[John 3:16\], and what are more such sayings, of which the
whole gospel of John is full. From this you can certainly conclude that
he is not hostile to you, but wants to show you all grace and good
deeds. Stay with it and hold fast to it, think and see no further, and
do not be deceived by anything that seems different to you.

\(150\) Therefore, as you hear and see Christ, so you certainly hear and
see the Father manifesting Himself to you. \"For the words which I speak
unto you\" (he speaks soon after \[v. 10\]), \"are not mine, but my
Father\'s\"; item, in another place: \"This is the will of my Father,
that whosoever seeth the Son, and believeth on him, shall have eternal
life\" 2c. \[Joh. 6, 39. 40.) Now whoever grasps this with faith cannot
think that God is angry with him, or that He will reject and condemn
him.

2\) \"u. s. w.\" is missing in the editions.

330 Erl. 49, 77-79. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
or-oi. 331

want. For there is neither a word nor a sign of some disgrace here, but
only friendly, blissful words, and a lovely, friendly sight, and all in
all, a fervor and ardor of inexpressible, fatherly, heartfelt love.

151 If you say, \"Yes, but I am a poor sinner who deserves God\'s wrath,
and I hear in the law His angry wrath and terrible judgment on sinners;
how then can I conclude that He is merciful to me? Answer: Yes, Christ
knows this very well, and sees your misery much better than you
yourself. But do you not hear that he comes to you for this very reason,
and says these things to you, that you should not judge according to
your thoughts and feelings (also drawn from the law), but rather hear
and take to heart what he says to you, and know him rightly, against and
contrary to what your conscience tells you, and the law terrifies you?
For this is not to know the Father, when he is thought to be an angry
judge, and to shrink from him. For he is not of such a mind that he
would be angry and condemn, or that it would please him that one should
flee before him; nor has he given the law (though it should bring to the
knowledge of sins and frighten the impenitent) to keep in it those who
know their sins and are now terrified, but this is his final opinion and
will, that you should be helped out of all misery, sin, death and
damnation; He also sent his Son Christ to you, crucifying him and
shedding his blood, so that he might proclaim and reveal these things to
you, that you should not be condemned because you are a sinner and
unworthy, but that for the sake of Christ he would forget all wrath and
sorrow and show you all mercy, requiring no more of you than that you
recognize and believe these things.

Behold, this would be the right art (who could do it), so to compel and
tame his thoughts, to bind and staple them, and not to know, think, or
hear anything else than how Christ shows Himself against us; by this all
heavy dangerous thoughts would soon fall away from eternal destiny, and
all sad evil arrows of the devil 2c. For there must be

1\) Wittenberger: den.

2\) Walch and the Erlangeners: \"now undaunted\".

you conclude without doubt: I know of no other God in heaven and earth
but this one, 3) who speaks and testifies against me as I see and hear
in Christ. Now if any monk, devil, or spirit of the mob comes to
frighten you and says: God is a serious, angry judge; and instructs you
otherwise, that you should call upon Mary to be your intercessor, and
say: Mary, dear mother of all grace and mercy 2c. (as they all
unashamedly prayed themselves and sang daily), or bid thee make so much
pilgrimage, run to the monastery, or into the deserts 2c., until you
atone for your sin and come to mercy, you can judge from this and say
that such doctrine and thoughts of the devil are lies and deadly poison,
or your own false dreamed thoughts, which, contrary to Christ\'s word
and God\'s command, teach you to look to yourself, and neither pay
attention nor want to hear how he shows himself against you in Christ,
and thus cause a real idolatry and blasphemy.

153\. Therefore, if you let Christ go, and follow the lying devil\'s
deception or your own dream and monkey game, and blindly drive off the
bridge and jetty, it is just that you break your neck over it and go
into the abyss of hell, because you hear and see how he so faithfully
admonishes you and so kindly entices you to listen to what the man
Christ says to you; But thou, as if he were a fool or a child, not
knowing what he speaketh, puttest him from thee with his words and
works, and rather wilt thou follow the devil\'s promptings, or thy own
thoughts.

But, as I have said, it is and remains a great and difficult art to
learn this and to bring it into living practice and experience. For the
devil drives and agitates too strongly against it, presses us as hard as
he can, so that he only tears us away from Christ and leads us astray,
so that we do not think of him. So it is in our nature that we want to
deal with God through ourselves. When I turn my eyes from Christ to
myself, I am sure to find such thoughts: O, I am a poor man!

3\) Erlanger: \"this\" instead of: of this.

4\) Erlanger: \"give us to what\".

332 **Erl. 49, 79-82. Sermon On Joh. 14, 8-10. W. VIII, 91-97.** 333

I am a sinner, therefore God is hostile to me and wants to condemn me;
therefore I must fear and tremble. So the devil leads me on, and teaches
me how I should atone for sin; thus he takes care of me in two ways.
First, he makes me look at myself; second, he makes me think of my own
way to make atonement for God. Both the Word and Christ are gone. For
this I should learn to leave both, my own and God\'s reputation (without
this means, presented by God), and to take only this word of Christ,
which says to me on God\'s account: What have you to do with your own
thoughts and gazing toward heaven? Do you not hear what I say to you? He
that seeth me seeth my Father also: and as I speak and do unto you, so
speaketh and doeth the Father 2c.

Therefore let us take this text against all the other grievous ways and
paths, which we ourselves build out of our own devotion, and thereby
undertake to deal with God, that we may yet be accustomed to cast about
in the grievous temptations of our thoughts, and remember and admonish
ourselves, as Christ reproves Philip: How sayest thou: Show us the
Father, if thou seest me and hearest me? As if he should say: 1) Are you
not a great fool, that in the name of the devil you want to find out
yourself how you are with God? Do you not know that he himself must tell
you from heaven, and you must hear from him? Now he says nothing else to
you, but: \"This is my dear Son, whom you shall hear\" \[Matth. 3,
17.\], the Son speaks nothing else, but: \"I am the way\" 2c.; he who
sees me, knows me, seizes and meets me, seizes and meets me, sees and
knows the Father. So then you would be on the right track, and should
not fear that you would miss or run into trouble.

156\) He will now 2) elaborate on this with many words, so that one may
see how great and important it is that one should grasp this, who
certainly wants to meet God, so that he can say, \"This is what God says
and does, this is His will and work against me; that He should open His
eyes and His will to me.

1\) The words: \"As if he should say\" are found only in the Wittenberg.

2\) Wittenberger: only.

3\) and even hold to his mouth, and know that whoever seeks, thinks or
intends otherwise has already failed and can never come to that which is
called knowing or seeing God; How all monks and works saints, and what
thinks or writes about God or His counsel and will without Christ\'s
word, walk in blindness and lying dreams, seek and strive without
ceasing, how they would like to take hold of God and do something that
He sees, and yet never come to it, fluttering and wavering without
ceasing, and always falling from one to the other, can never make their
heart firm and certain, and goes to them as Christ said before: \"Many
shall come in my name, saying, Behold here, behold Christ\" 2c. \[Matth.
24, 23/\]

For where the name of God and of Christ is, everyone falls to it, soon
thinking it to be a divine thing, and they go to the devil with it. For
it must be so that the world is deceived and seduced by the name of God.
Therefore it is also said: In God\'s name all misfortune is sewn up. For
the devil cannot sell his lies any other way than under the dear name;
therefore he must adorn them with the beautiful appearance, and smear
the holy names over it, God\'s word, God\'s service, divine life 2c.
Therefore we must be warned here to beware of this, and not to be
deceived, but to listen carefully to his word, as he speaks here and
elsewhere, and to judge according to it alone.

**V. io. Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in
me? The words that I speak, I speak not of myself. But the Father who
dwells in me does the works.**

\(158\) All this is said so that he may well imagine and inculcate this
main article (as I have said), that one may learn from the eyes and
heart everything that may be taught and preached, even in the Law of
Moses (but rather from human understanding and one\'s own thoughts),
when it comes to man\'s being concerned with God and wanting to find out
His will, and only that some of the things that are taught and preached
in the Law of Moses may be taught and preached in the Law of Moses.

3\) Instead of this phrase, the Wittenberg has: \"der hefte und binde
seine Augen und Herz allein an Christum\" 2c.

[ZZ4 Erl. ts, \[s-84. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
97-99. ZZ5]{.underline}

He is to take hold of this piece, so that he can model this Jesus Christ
for him, and not allow anything to be contested against it, nor to err,
whether it is done and lived well or badly, holiness or sin.

This is the art, of which St. John, as a covenant evangelist in this
piece, and St. Paul before others teach, that they bind and fasten
Christ and the Father so firmly together, that one may think of God
nothing but in Christ. Paul before others teach that they so firmly bind
together and attach Christ and the Father, that one may not think of God
except in Christ; and as soon as we hear God\'s name mentioned, or His
will, works, grace or disgrace spoken of, that we do not judge according
to what is in our heart, or what some man\'s wisdom disputes, or even
what the law prescribes, but wrap ourselves up and wrap ourselves in
this Christ alone, and 1) neither see nor hear anything else, except how
He shows Himself to us as a gentle babe in His mother\'s arms and womb;
item, as a faithful Saviour on the cross, his blood mildly shed for us;
item, how he looks again, throws the devil and hell under himself, and
tramples death underfoot, and proclaims and gives you these things, both
himself and through his apostles, so that he may sufficiently testify
that he has neither wrath nor disfavor toward you, but does everything
for your help and comfort that he should and can do, if you alone will
believe and accept it.

Yes, I see and hear that, but who knows if God also means it with me?
Answer: Beware of that, for that means Christ and God divided and
separated. Just as Philip does here, who leaves Christ behind and seeks
God up in heaven, thinking, \"I hear that Christ is speaking to me, but
how do I know what God is thinking or has decided about me up in heaven?
What is this but unbelief and secret denial of God, that Christ must
punish him with this, so that he may tear him from such shameful
delusion, saying: \"Philip, what is this, that you tear the Father and
me from each other, climb up into the clouds with thoughts, and let me
talk to you here in vain? Do you not hear what I say, that he who sees
me sees the Father himself?

> 1\) Instead of \"and\" the Wittenberger has: \"so that we\". 2)
> Erlanger: \"he\" instead of GOtt.
>
> I in the Father, and the Father in me; item: The words I speak are not
> mine, but the Father\'s words? These are kind, but serious words of
> the Lord. For he will not suffer us to gape and flutter about in vain
> and uncertainty; but will have us wholly bound to himself and his
> word, that we seek God nowhere but in him.

Thus, a pious hermit (St. Anthony) once said of the young, inexperienced
saints, who want to be clever, and with their thoughts find out God\'s
secret counsel and everything, and admonished his brothers: if they see
one climbing up to heaven, and now standing there with one foot, they
should immediately pull him down, so that he does not lead with the
other, and then would have to fall down again over his head. This is
well said against such fluttering spirits, who like to speculate about
high things, want to drill a hole through heaven, and see everything
that God Himself is and does, and meanwhile let Christ go, as if they
were not allowed to do anything.

Therefore beware of such thoughts as go without a word, and separate and
tear Christ away from God. For He has not commanded you to go up and see
what He is doing in heaven with the angels, but His command is: \"This
is My beloved Son, whom you shall hear\" \[Matth. 3, 17\]. Then I come
down unto you, that ye may see me, and hear me, and take hold of me;
that ye may meet me, and find me, and nowhere else, all that desire me,
and would be loosed from sins, and be saved. Here we should close
quickly and conclude: This is what God Himself says, and I will follow
it, and not hear any other word or sermon, nor learn anything else from
God, nor know anything else. For in this person (says St. Paul \[Col. 2,
9.\]) truly dwells the whole Godhead, and apart from him is no God, so
that I may meet him or come to him (although he is everywhere else).
Wherever one hears this man\'s word or sees his work, one certainly
hears and sees God\'s word and work.

3\) Wittenberger: that you drive up and gape.

336 **Erl. 49, S4-8S. Sermon on John 14:10. W. VIII, SS-I02.** 337

\(163\) When Christ further commands his apostles to preach and carry
out his word and work, then he himself is heard and seen, and so also
God the Father; for they speak no other word, nor carry out any other
word, without what they have taken from his mouth, and point to him
alone. Likewise, it continues from the apostles to us through true
bishops, pastors and preachers who received it from the apostles, so
that all preaching in Christendom must go to this one Christ and show
that their word and work, which they lead in the ministry of Christendom
(God grant that they may be pious or wicked in their own person), is the
work and word of the Lord Christ, and all teach in this way: You shall
not look to me nor follow me, but only to the Lord Christ, what he says
or shows you through me; for this is not my word, but Christ\'s; the
baptism and sacrament that I administer is not mine, but his baptism and
sacrament; this ministry that I lead is not mine, but the Lord\'s
ministry. But because it is Christ\'s word and baptism, it is also the
Father\'s word and baptism, because he says, \"What I speak and do, I do
not do of myself, but the Father who dwells in me.

164\) So it is all wrapped up in one cake, that through Christ it all
comes from the Father, just as Christ says: What I speak, that does not
speak I, 1) but the Father. So St. Paul and other apostles or preachers:
It is not I who baptize or absolve, but Christ; it is not we who speak,
but Christ and God Himself 2c. Therefore, if you hear this preaching,
you hear God Himself; again, if you despise this preaching, you do not
despise us, but God Himself. For it is all God who thus lets Himself
down into every Christian\'s or preacher\'s mouth, saying: If you want
to see me or my work, look to Christ; if you want to hear me, hear this
word. So Christ commands the apostles, and the apostles give it to their
descendants, bishops and preachers, and they to the whole world. So the
apostles and preachers are like pipes, through which Christ leads and
guides his gospel of the Father in us. 2)

1\) Wittenberger: not me.

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: learns.

Therefore, where you hear the gospel being taught correctly, or see a
man being baptized, administering or receiving the sacrament, or
absolving, you can boldly say: Today I have seen God\'s word and work,
yes, God Himself heard and seen preaching and baptizing 2c. The tongue,
voice, fist 2c. are indeed of man, but the word and ministry is actually
of the divine majesty itself. Therefore, it should be regarded and
believed as if one heard God\'s voice from heaven, or saw him baptizing
with his hands or administering the sacrament, so that no distinction is
made here between God and his word or ministry, given to us through
Christ, or otherwise seeking God or thinking of him.

When we get to heaven, we will look at him differently, without means
and darkness; but here on earth you will not see him, nor attain to him
with your senses or thoughts; but, as St. Paul says \[1 Cor. 13:12.\],
\"We see him in the dark word\" or image veiled, namely in the word and
sacraments; which are like his larvae or garment, under which he hides
himself, but certainly he is present there, that he himself does
miracles, preaches, gives sacraments, comforts, strengthens, and helps;
and so we see him as one sees the sun through a cloud. For we cannot now
suffer the bright sight and vision of the majesty, therefore he must
cover and veil himself as behind a thick cloud. Therefore it is decided
that whoever wants to see and grasp both the Father and Christ, after he
has been transfigured and is seated in the Majesty, must grasp him
through the Word and in the works he does in Christianity, through the
ministry and other positions.

Therefore, we should by no means become so foolish as to divide and
separate God, Christ, and His Word from one another, and to speak of God
as the pagans, Turks, sophists, or others do, according to the mere
majesty of having Him speak and work with us here on earth through
preachers, father, and mother, and meanwhile go up into the clouds and
worry about what God is doing or thinking there. That means they the
devil, and no good spirit, ask and think. Want

[338 Erl. 4g, SS-S8. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
102-104. 339]{.underline}

But if thou knowest aright how thou art with God, and whether thy nature
please him, hearken hither unto this word, and it shall soon be told
thee: He that seeth or heareth me seeth and heareth the Father also.
Therefore only see if you like from your heart what Christ preaches to
you and does through his Christianity, as preachers, father and mother
and other pious people: If you hear this from your heart and stick to
it, then you are already sure of the things and must not doubt. For what
these tell you, God Himself truly tells you.

But if you go there like a reprobate and do not want to respect this,
and yet investigate and find out through your own head how you are with
God in heaven, then you are lost, and it serves you right, because you
do not want to accept that which God presents to you, and for this you
fight against something else. For He is here precisely to tell you and
show you these things, so that you may know for certain what His mind is
toward you, and He has arranged all the offices and positions in
Christianity so that the whole world may be full of God\'s work. And you
leave all this as if it were nothing, thinking: God is up in heaven
among the angels, and has other things to do; what can preachers, father
and mother help me? if I want to hear or see him myself 2c. This means
that God and His work, Christ and His Word, are separate and distinct
from each other, and should be united and joined together in the
strictest way.

Therefore, let every man take heed that he never seek after God with his
own mind and thoughts, but learn to cleave and hold fast to the word,
and judge and conclude according to it, so that he cannot fail. Now thou
hearest nothing else therein, but: Believe in me, that for Christ\'s
sake I forgive your sin and am merciful to you, and be baptized into it;
be obedient to your father and mother, and do what your office or
position demands, and you will have it all, and God himself as well. O,
sayest thou, is this what God hath seen and heard? I thought he was up
in heaven and must have special revelation from him 2c.

1\) \"in\" is missing in the Erlanger.

No, not so; but, if thou wilt meet him, behold him beforehand in the
word under the shell, and afterward thou mayest see him in the majesty.
For he will not do anything special for you now, except and contrary to
his command which he gave in the word.

170 But this is the shameful plague, that such things are despised,
because they are common and everywhere among us. Just as the trustworthy
spirit of Muenzer and the Anabaptist mob in our time brazenly said,
\"They would not look upon Christ, who preached and baptized no more
than the gospel, and would not speak to them himself. This is certainly
the right kind and characteristic of all false, erroneous spirits, that
they throw away the outward word and baptism; they are not satisfied
with the common order of God, which he has given to the whole of
Christendom and governs them by it; they do not want to hear from him
what he has to say and proclaim to them, how they should meet him, but
want to teach him and master him, how he should do it with them.

But he will not do it, for he is not the man who will take hold of his
beard, and make a special thing for any man, or give a new gospel,
baptism, sermon, or revelation for your sake. For he hath once decreed
and said of this Christ, Here is the man whom ye shall hear, if ye will
come unto me, and be saved. I will give you no other sign, for you are
well aware of it. Therefore think that ye receive him, or else ye shall
be lost. This he has said plainly enough, and earnestly commanded: yet
it will not help the unbelieving world; so even is it ruled by the
trusting devil, who takes hold of God in his majesty.

First of all, the Turks also began to make something special and did not
want to stay with the common gospel: O! said Mahomet, Christ has now
gone to heaven; I must have an angel through whom God speaks to me. He
went thereafter and made a new Bible (that is, his Alkoran) and did not
want to have baptism. So the pope has also done with his priests and
monks, let Christ and 2) the word of faith go, leave the Bible

2\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

340 He\>.\", \[s-si. Sermon on Joh. 14, 10. W. vin, 104-107. 341

He is sitting above as a terrible judge, therefore one must have Mary
and the deceased saints as intercessors, and reconcile God through the
sacrificial mass. Item, baptism and Christian ranks are low things,
therefore they must accept special higher ranks and orders, make a
higher monastic rank, and summa, raise up vain especially self-chosen
holiness, apart from and against the common word and order of God, and
the common divine ranks, by which alone they want to get to heaven, or
even help the others to get there through them. This shines like a
precious gem. The other essence of the common baptism, sacrament, father
and mother, authority, pious lords and women in the house, servants and
maids had to stink and be nothing. This is what the world has come to
know, that the true light and high honor of Christianity is obscured and
trampled underfoot.

Therefore we must sweep out and throw away such devil\'s filth, and
purify this doctrine again and drive it into the hearts, so that one
teaches and believes: \"I shall not hear or see any work, any service,
any spirituality or holy life, without only what this man said to Christ
or commanded the apostles, and the apostles left the preachers after
them: when I hear these, I hear him myself; but when I hear him, I hear
the Father. So that all things may be interwoven and joined together,
and always remain in the cord (where it should go right), as one goes
after the stream or little water up to the fountain; so I drink of the
water out of the tube, and further out of the little stream, until I
always come after it also to the fountain.

This is to be spoken and practiced, not only in the common preaching of
all Christianity, but also that every Christian may practice and be
accustomed to this in his own temptations, when the devil strikes the
heart with his arrows from eternal destruction, or God\'s wrath and
judgment, so that I may be taken up with Christ\'s word against it and
say, \"Lift yourself up, you wretched lying spirit, and eat your own
stench, and leave me unsworn with such thoughts. For I have learned this
from Christ and God Himself.

If I want to know what God has in mind for me 1) and wants to do with
me, I should hear no one but the mouth of my Lord Christ; there I see
and hear nothing else, but that he gives me his baptism, his sacrament,
absolves me from sins and absolves me. This is not an angry sign, as if
he wanted to cast me into hell, for he does not want to drown me through
baptism, but to wash me, cleanse me and make me alive; in the sacrament
he does not put a sword to my neck, as if he wanted to strangle me, but
tells me to eat and drink; in the sermon I hear neither wrath nor
disgrace, but only fatherly, heartfelt promise and comfort. Thus he hath
appointed for me, and given me father and mother, princes and lords,
which are all signs of grace.

175Then judge thyself, and let another dispute, and inquire in vain what
God hath in store for thee in heaven above; for thou shalt not know it,
if thou speculate thyself to death. But here you have it for certain
that you must not doubt it, nor should you doubt it, for for this very
reason he let himself down from heaven and said, \"This is my beloved
Son, whom you shall hear.\" And he commanded the apostles, and they gave
it to the preachers that followed; and they to us, and to our children.
So it goes well, as God has ordained, that I always see him and hear him
through the pipes, if I follow the little water that goes out of Christ
and leads to the fountain.

Behold, this is a beautiful conversation and sermon on the question of
the apostle Philippi, so that not only he, but all men\'s flying
thoughts may be answered, so that they may be able to take hold of God;
so that you, and all the world, are hereby told through Christ: What are
you doing that you would seek God other than in me; or other word and
work than I speak and create, see and hear? Do you not know that I am in
the Father, and the Father is in me? 2c. Then you hear me in St. Paul,
Paul in Tito, or other preachers, and so on in all who preach this word,
that it is all one cake in the Lord Christ. Where Paul is, there am I;
where I am, there is Paul and all preachers.

1\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: commemorate.

[342 Erl. tg,gr-gg. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
107-IIV. 343]{.underline}

All in Christ through and through, but Christ in and with the Father;
and again, Christ in all, but the Father in Christ. What else dost thou
ask (saith he) of unintelligent reason, seeing the Father is? So no
disciple of Christ should not ask. Let others, unbelievers, pagans,
Jews, Turks, heretics, monks, and sophists, search and search; but
beware lest thou go aside. For in this way you will not find God, but
the wretched devil, who, as has been said, cannot deceive people in any
other way; he must smear the name of the Majesty on his lies.

177\. Therefore, everyone must learn and grasp this with all diligence
(who does not want to be deceived), that one should not hear or accept
where God is called or said about Him, one should raise and praise the
name as high as it is to be praised, and present oneself as glorious and
majestic as He always can (as the devil often imagined to me, that I was
upset about it, and did not know where I should stay), but stay badly
with the word, and say: Now I do not want it, even if it were the right
majesty itself. For here he has forbidden me that I should look and 1)
think after him nowhere but in Christ. Therefore, it is certainly a
devil\'s specter and deception, under the name and appearance of
majesty, which only frightens and chases me away from God, when God, on
the other hand, through Christ, most kindly lures me to Himself, and
presents the certain sign of His grace and my salvation, the Word and
baptism.

178\) The pagans have experienced this and had to testify that one
cannot attain God with any certainty by means of thoughts or research of
reason. As they write of a king who asked his most learned philosopher,
\"What is God? He took several days to consider, and when he was
supposed to answer, he brought it up again, and so for the third and
fourth time, until he had to confess badly: What shall I say? The longer
and more I think about it, the less I get. So it certainly happens to
anyone who sets his mind on obtaining something from God, that the
longer he thinks about it, the less he obtains.

1\) Erlanger: still.

2\) Erlanger: but also.

The longer he investigates, the further he gets away from it, and must
be completely lacking in God, if he does not finally get on the track,
that he takes hold of Christ and keeps to this word. Therefore, let this
saying be imaginary to you: What do you say: Show us the Father? Rather,
do not flutter with thoughts, let God be God, sin be sin, holiness be
holiness, and all things go and remain where they remain; but hear what
I say to you, and hold fast to this: \"He who sees me sees also 3) the
Father,\" and: \"The words that I speak are not mine, but my
Father\'s.\" 2c.

179 And mark how herewith he gathereth together the two things, his
words and his works, and ascribeth them both to the Father, and
expoundeth it himself, saying, He that seeth me seeth the Father; that
is, that it is nothing else, but to look upon his words and his works.
For the Jews also saw him with their eyes, as a heifer sees, and were
not corrected; but to see and to know Christianly is to look at his
mouth and at his hands, and to notice what he speaks and does; so that
such knowledge follows, that one understands and experiences that God
dwells in him and shows himself, and that his words and works are God\'s
words and works. This is what he wanted to impress upon us in this last
sermon, when he now wants to separate from them, because enough has been
said that therein lies the power, and alone is the right, but also the
most difficult art of the Christian. That is why he now steams it up and
continues to speak:

**V. 11. Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me; if
not, believe me for the works.**

If you do not believe (says he) because of my preaching that God dwells
and is in me, and I in him, believe it because of the works which you
see before your eyes, and no man can deny that they are not human but
divine works, and prove and testify strongly enough that he speaks and
works in me and through me. Now these are the works and miracles that he
performed before all the world, giving sight to the blind, hearing to
the deaf, healing to the sick of all kinds, casting out devils, and
healing to the poor.

3\) \"also\" is missing in the Erlanger.

344 **Erl. 49, 99-96.** Sermon on Joh. 14, 11. **W. VIII, II0-II2.** 345

1\) and raised the dead by the word alone; which are not only divine
works, but also witnesses of God the Father, so that whoever sees or
hears them sees God the Father in them, that one can not only draw faith
from them (that He is in Christ, and Christ in Him), but also grasp the
comfort of the Father\'s love and grace toward us.

For if he had a desire to wrath, condemn, punish, and afflict, he would
not forgive sin through Christ, and take away the punishment of the same
on the gout-broken, lepers, and others possessed and afflicted by the
devil. 2c. If he had a desire to die, he would not raise the dead and
bring them to life. But now he has done this in Christ, and has shown us
that we may rightly learn to regard him, and recognize him as a gracious
Father, who is pleased to help us and make us blessed. And he proves it
daily in all his works, which he does in the whole world, that he always
preserves his creatures, and does so many good deeds for all the world,
and pours out his goods abundantly; without having to punish and control
the wicked out of necessity and for the sake of the pious. But he rules
in such a way that we always see more of his graces and benefits in the
flesh than wrath and punishment. For where one man is sick, blind, deaf,
gouty, leprous, there are a hundred thousand who are healthy; and if one
member of the body has a defect, the whole man, if he still has body and
soul, is full of God\'s goodness.

182 Again, the plagues and miseries of the world are all the work of the
devil, who delights in corrupting and choking people, as he has brought
the whole of human nature into sin and death. But now \"Christ appeared
(as 1 John 3:8 says) to destroy the works of the devil\" and to restore
the divine works of life; which he thus proved, that even the Jews
themselves had to confess without their thanks that no man could not do
such works. And although they said that no one could forgive sin but God
alone, yet the work stood before their eyes, testifying that he had done
such divine works.

1\) Erlanger: ejected.

He would be the man who could help from death to life, from sin to
righteousness, from strife to peace, and to all that is good.

Thus we are assured not only of the article that Christ is truly God
with the Father, but also that he is a merciful God and Savior, and can
know and grasp the heart and will of the Father in all the works of the
Lord Christ, for the right blessed consolation of all miserable,
afflicted hearts and consciences. Thus, he says, my works will finely
show you how the Father is in me and wants to be known through me.

184\. But sayest thou, Can the devil perform miracles and wonders like
the works of the Lord Christ, and how can they be relied upon, and
believed for their sakes? For he can afflict people so that they lie
down, or blind them for a while, paralyze a limb (as he has often done
through his witches and devil-whores) and then make them well again. Not
that they were really blind or lame (for he could not restore the face
or limb of such), but that he bewitches people, and affects the five
senses, so that man does not know otherwise, and would take all oaths to
it, it would be truly so. Thus he also possesses a man at times, and can
be driven away again by conjuring and blessing 2) 2c. He does everything
to confirm his lies and deception and to form them in the people, so
that they are seduced into idolatry by them, as by special miracles; as
he has done up to now with the pilgrimages and the 3) holy idolatry,
here to the holy blood, there to this and that Mary 2c., and with 4) the
shameful deception he has filled all the countries, so that people have
run there with crowds, and all the world has pledged itself there, and
has put its trust in God on his lies. For it was all a devil\'s specter,
so that he deceived the people, so that they believed in it, as if they
were truly helped.

Yes, he can also make a person who is wounded, shot, or otherwise
damaged lie dead, and he can be given a

2\) In dm old editions: verjechen.

3\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

4\) \"with\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

[346 EU. 4g, gs-g?. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
112-ns. 347]{.underline}

For a while he endures in such a way that he feels nothing, and everyone
thinks that he is truly dead, but then he comes back to himself and
comes to life again, so that it is said that it happened through this or
that saint 2c. Thus I have heard of a boy who lay under water for two
days, and when he was vowed by his parents to St. Hannah 1) and brought
there, he came to life again. Are these not also miracles and wonders?
No, because they were certainly not really dead, but the devil deceived
people\'s minds so that they thought they were dead until he brought
them back to himself.

Thus, in the old fathers\' life of St. Macario, one reads how two
married couples came to him, who had a beautiful daughter, whom the
devil had so bewitched that they and everyone considered her daughter to
be a cow: 2) Therefore they brought her to St. Macario in the desert,
and complained to him that their daughter had been a virgin, and now by
sorcery had become a cow, and asked him to pray to God that she might
regain her former form. Then he said, \"How did this happen to you? I
see nothing but a beautiful, healthy virgin. Therefore, it must be a
ghost, that the devil is listening to you, and that he is touching the
five senses. At last he said a prayer over her, and made the parents
pray too. Then such a ghost ceased, that they and others saw their
daughter again, as before.

I say this because it is not necessary to believe in all kinds of
miracles and wonders. For even Moses \[in the\] 5th book, Cap. 13, 1.
ff., said before that even false prophets would perform miracles and
signs; and St. Paul clearly prophesied of the end of Christ\'s reign, 2
Thess. 2, 9. that he would come with all kinds of miracles and signs,
through the effect of the devil. Therefore, all miracles and wonders
must be directed and held against God.

1\) Erlanger: Anna.

2\) The same narrative is found in the Hauspostille, Walch, St. Louis
edition, vol. XIII, 2570, z 23, also in the great interpretation of the
Epistle to the Galatians, in the Latin Erlangen edition, Dow. I, p. 278.
From the latter, the same is quoted by Aurifaber in Cap. 24,? 38, of the
Table Talks. In our edition of the Table Talks, this piece is omitted.

Word, whether they are in accordance with it and agree with it. For if
you are led to something else, by which you should be helped, except by
the teachings or works of the Lord Christ, you may freely conclude that
it is the work of the devil and a false sign of lies, so that he may
deceive and seduce you; as he has done until now under the name of Mary
and the saints, since Christ was never really recognized nor taught. God
also allows this to happen to tempt the false Christians, so that they
have to believe the lie (as St. Paul says 2 Thess. 2, 11.) because they
did not want to believe the truth.

Therefore we should be wise to test and judge such signs, because God
has warned us that such signs should be done, and we see that they are
done apart from and without Christ, even against his word and faith,
that they are certainly the devil\'s own signs. For neither can he do
righteous miracles or wonders; but as he is a liar and a murderer from
the beginning, so his works are nothing, but to deceive men and to do
harm; but to poison the air, to choke men with pestilence and other
plagues. And where he corrupts man falsely and makes a spectre before
his eyes, he can then desist; but where man is righteously strangled and
dead, he cannot help again, and though he might, he is so wicked that he
would not.

But Christ alone performs true divine signs and wonders: as when he
raised Lazarum, who had lain four days in the grave, and restored to
life and health those who had been strangled by the devil, or were
corrupted and wounded, and exposed the devil\'s deceitfulness, lies, and
ghosts, so that he was known and had to cease. For he does not like to
attach himself to the Christians with such deception. For he is a
hopeful spirit, and only wants to have hearts and consciences believe
his lies and worship him for God; where he does not find such, he does
not stay long. Just as before these times, there were plenty of
poltergeists and rumblers everywhere, who frightened people into doing
whatever they asked of them. That makes him

3\) \"the\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

348 Erl. tg, p7-100. Sermon On Joh. 14, 11. 12. W. VIII, IIS-IS2. 343

but thought they were poor souls. Now, however, now that he is known, he
leaves the game again 1) and seeks other ways to enchant and seduce
people through his bodily poltergeists and hordes.

**V. 12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me, the
works that I do shall he do also; and greater works than these shall he
do, because I go unto the Father.**

190\. Here he returns to the comfort he began to give the disciples,
that they should not be afraid or grieve that he would depart from them
bodily or visibly and leave them in the world, but that they should look
at it and take comfort in the benefits and blessings they would receive
for their slight bodily lack, namely, that he would prepare for them
much more glorious dwellings and yet be with them, that he would also
bring them where he is, where they otherwise could not go; item, that
they already knew the way, and knew the Father, so that he now
accomplished that, wherefore he had been with them, and was no more
permitted to teach them; without now accomplishing it, and helping them,
whither they should come. Moreover, he now sets this also, that they may
have the more consolation, and feel that they have no lack nor harm of
his departure, but are much more abundantly and gloriously graced than
before; namely, that they may thereby come to do the very same works
that he did, and moreover greater than he did bodily with them, or will
yet do. And as he has now said that he does such works, so that they may
believe that the Father is in him, and he in the Father, so he now
brings it down, and says that they also should do such works, so that it
may be felt that they also are in Christ, and Christ in them; as he will
say further on. For with this he indicates what he will do and
accomplish in them and through them in Christianity, as we shall hear.

191\. But if thou sayest, Now that he hath said that we should believe
because of the works which he doeth, 2c. what is it then that he saith
here, that they should do the same works? What then may they do for his
works?

1\) \"again\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

for the sake of believing? Answer: This is what he said before we become
Christians. For he speaks of the works by which he makes us Christians.
But this he saith of the works which must be done by them that are
become Christians. Therefore he says, \"He who believes in me,\" 2c., so
that we must first cling to him through faith and remain, no matter
what. He therefore that believeth on me, saith he, shall then do the
same works, yea, even greater works. How then is this to be done? It has
been seen in the dear apostles and holy martyrs, who raised many from
death and helped in other ways.

192 But what shall we say, that he speaketh not of the apostles only,
but of all them that believe on him? And what works are these that are
said to be greater than those of the Lord Christ? What can be called
greater than making the dead alive, redeeming souls from the power of
the devil and death, and giving eternal life? Are these not His own
works alone, which He does for us by His divine power and might? Who can
say that we should do greater things?

193 Here I accept the common sense of this saying. How then it cannot be
otherwise, that it is called greater works done by his Christians, that
the apostles and Christians come further with their works than he came,
and bring more to Christ than he has done bodily on earth. For he took
but a little corner before him, preaching and marveling, and for a
little time. But the apostles and their descendants came throughout the
whole world, and continued as long as Christianity stood; so that Christ
only began it personally, but through the apostles and the following
preachers it had to be spread further and further until the last day. So
it is true that Christians do greater works, that is, more and further
than Christ himself; but they are the same, and the same works. For in
saying, He that believeth on me shall do greater works, he denieth not
that such works must be done by his power, and flow out of him as the
head; but showeth himself both here and there.

350 Eri. 4g, loo-ios. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin,
122-12s. 351

He says: \"He who believes in me\"; and in the following words: \"For I
go to the Father\"; item, v. 14: \"Whatever you ask, I will do\" 2c.,
that such things do not happen, but only from those who cling to him
through faith, and he works his power in them and proves it through
them.

194 For here it is not necessary to separate the head and his members,
that is, Christ and his apostles and the whole Christianity. Every
individual Christian is such a man as the Lord Christ himself was on
earth, and does such great things, 1) that he can rule the whole world
in divine matters, help and benefit everyone, and do the greatest works
that are done on earth. For he is also more highly esteemed in the sight
of God than the whole world, that for his sake God gives to the world
and preserves all that it has; that if there were no Christians on
earth, neither city nor country would have peace, indeed, in one day all
that is on earth would be destroyed by the devil. But that grain still
grows in the field, and the people recover, have their food, peace and
protection, they have all to thank the Christians.

We are poor beggars (St. Paul 2 Cor. 6:10), but we are the ones who are
rich; we have nothing, but we have everything 2c. And it is also true
that what kings, princes, lords, citizens and peasants have in the
world, they have not for the sake of their yellow hair, but for the sake
of Christ and his Christians. Therefore, because there are still
Christians on earth, the host of the guest must enjoy, just as the guest
(that is, Christianity) must pay the host as long as it is here. As the
story of Jacob the patriarch, Genesis 30:30, shows, who, before he came
to Laban, his brother-in-law, was not rich; but afterward, when Jacob
served him, he was filled with heaps; so God blessed him for the sake of
his pious Jacob, who brought nothing to him, nor received much from him.
So even today, lords, citizens and farmers must have their land and
people, power, honor and property for the sake of the Christians who are
with them.

1\) In the old editions: \"und so groß Ding ausrichten\".

whether they do not recognize it and thank evil for it.

But what are the works of the Christians by which these things are done?
For one sees nothing special that they do before others, especially now,
because the miraculous works have ceased, which are still the least
works, as they are only bodily and happen to few people. But let us see
the truly great works, of which Christ says they have from God, and
thereby accomplish all things, which also continue forever, and must be
done daily, because the world must stand.

197\. for first, they have the gospel, baptism, and sacrament, by which
they convert people, cut off souls from the devil, snatch them out of
hell and death, and bring them to heaven; item, by which they comfort,
strengthen, and preserve the poor, afflicted, challenged consciences (of
the devil and otherwise); item, that they may teach, instruct, and
counsel all men of all ranks how to live therein Christianly and
blessedly. 2c.

198\. These are vain works, which all the kings and emperors, mighty men
and rich men, scholars and wise men in the world cannot do, nor can they
pay for with all their goods. For none of them can comfort and make
happy a single conscience that is oppressed and afflicted by sin; nor
can they teach a man rightly how to come to Christ and live before God;
but they do well to contradict God\'s word by spreading lies and
idolatry, seducing and tearing souls away from the truth with
persecution, plagues and murders, as can be seen in the reign of the
Pabst and the Turk.

Therefore, where such works are done, that someone is converted to
Christ, strengthened in the faith, and kept in godly life, one may well
boast that it is such a work, which is done by no emperor or king, but
only by the power of the Lord Christ, and is as great and greater than
that he raised the bodily dead; for he himself does not consider such
works great, but testifies here that he wants to do much greater works
through his Christians. For it must certainly not be human, but God\'s
own almighty power and might, to raise the devil from the dead.

352 **Erl. 4S, ios-104. Sermon On Joh. 14, 12. W. VIII, I2S-I28.** 353

Destroy the kingdom and power (which, as the Scripture says, is the Lord
and God of the world).

Secondly, Christians also have prayer, of which Christ Himself will
later say, by which they also obtain everything they desire from God for
themselves and others, even in bodily things. This is also one of the
highest works, so that they help the world and preserve it, although
they would do nothing else. Thus, when a Christian prays (under a
prince), and the prince obtains victory over his enemies, who has
defeated the enemies and obtained such victory? No one but the
Christian; though no one blames him, and has neither name nor honor from
it. But God did not give such victory for the sake of the prince (if he
is not a believer), but for the sake of the prayer of a few Christians.
A few pious men can benefit a whole country or kingdom so much that for
his sake all others must be helped; as we read in Genesis 14:14 ff.
about Abraham; item, Genesis 19:22, about his brother Lot, that Sodom
and Gomorrah did not have to perish because he was still there. Thus we
read in 2 Kings 5:1 that God, through the one Naaman, gave happiness and
victory to the whole kingdom of Syria, which was idolatrous. item, Gen.
41, 46. ff., through Joseph the whole land of Egypt was helped;
likewise, through Daniel the kingdom in Persia; item, the individual
prophet Isaiah by his prayer of the emperor of Assyria struck the army
to death. Thus, in ancient times, the Romans, Persians and others often
had great 1) fortune and victory in war, solely for the sake of the
Christians 2).

\(201\) And summa, it is not the fault of kings, lords, and princes that
they have the rule, peace, and obedient subjects, nor of some men on
earth, without Christians alone; though they think: I wear the crown and
wield the sword; therefore for my sake it is so. For, even by reason, it
would be impossible for one man to rule and keep in obedience a whole
kingdom, where there are so many heads, or for a mayor to rule and keep
in obedience a whole city, unless there were some other help and help.

1\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: so large.

2\) Wittenberg: of believers and Christians.

protection around him. What is a mayor against the whole rabble? or a
person who is a sovereign, among so many evil 3) boys and villains, whom
he has under him, even beside him, both at court and in cities and
castles, who take money from him and gladly help him, if God Himself did
not keep His order, and there were Christians who pray? Therefore they
are helped only by secret help, which they neither see nor know, namely
God\'s word and order, and the prayer of Christians. But as little as
they know that their government is God\'s order and work, which is not
in the hands of men, so little do they know that God alone considers the
prayers of the devout Christians and lets them be and remain lords for
their sake. Therefore, they also give thanks that they persecute both
God\'s word and His Christians.

Nevertheless, reason also understands and must testify that it is not
possible, of course, that so many heads should be caught under one head.
For this is seen and experienced all too much every day, that the common
rabble among citizens, peasants, nobility does not like to be subject by
will, and would much rather be free and free of obedience and coercion.
That is why there must be another power behind that keeps kings and
lords in power, and the mob, however wicked and disobedient it may be,
nevertheless remains below; otherwise everything would soon go to ruin.
How it happens when God becomes angry, and \[it\] is so overpowered by
the tyrants and the people\'s wickedness, with ingratitude and
persecution against His word and the Christians, that they come away,
and no longer pray, that it must have an end one day. God also puts his
fingers before his eyes and lets it go itself, as it goes. Then prince,
mayor, mob, and everything lies in a heap, like an old house falling
over each other, so that one can see how the world itself can rule, and
how well it stands, when God shows his hand, and the Christians do not
pray. However, they go there not knowing nor recognizing it;

3\) Jenaer: more evil.

4\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

5\) \"the\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

[354 Erl. 4S, 104-107. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
128-180. 355]{.underline}

for the world is blind, and possessed with the devil.

But we as Christians should know that the whole physical government and
being stands and remains as long as it is to stand, solely through
God\'s order or commandment and the prayer of Christians. These are the
two pillars that support the whole world. When these will fall away, it
must all fall to the ground, as one will see towards the last day, and
already sees that now all kingdoms and regiments are weakened, and
almost begin to fall, because the two pillars almost want to sink and
break. For the world does not want to have it any other way, because it
does not want to suffer God\'s word (which honors and sustains it),
persecutes and strangles the innocent Christians, and does not stop
raging against their pillars that support them; as if it wanted to tear
everything apart itself, like a senseless householder. Well, we will
hold on as long as we can, even though we have no thanks; but if the
word of God and the prayer of Christians should cease, let the devil,
the god of the world, have mercy on them.

\(204\) I say this so that this text may be understood all the better,
how the greatest works are done in the world by Christians without
ceasing, although they are not to be seen or recognized, both in
spiritual and also in bodily nature and government, namely, the
destruction of the devil\'s kingdom, the redemption of souls, the
conversion of hearts, the victory and preservation of peace among
nations and people, help, protection and salvation 1) in all kinds of
plagues and hardships. All these things (he says) are to be done through
Christians, because they believe in Christ, and all things proceed from
him as the head; yes, also through each one in particular, so that he
may say, \"The works that I do, these do every Christian who is baptized
today.

Therefore the Christians are vain helpers and saviors, yes, lords and
gods of the world; as God also says to Moses in Exodus 7:1: \"I have
made you a god over Pharaoh\" 2c. Hence also the 8th Psalm, v. 7, says:
\"You have put everything under his feet\"; namely emperors, kings,
princes, authority, honor and

1\) Jenaer: Rescues.

Yes, even the cattle of the field, the oxen, the sheep, the wild beasts,
the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea. He also does not want to
forget to show that what the world has and is able to do, they have to
borrow from the beggars (of which St. Paul says in 2 Cor. 6:10): \"Who
have nothing, and yet have everything\"; and everything that is given to
the world by God, he gives for its sake, so that it is all called the
works and miracles of the Christians, which they do and will do until
the last day, so that when they cease, God will also put an end to the
world and burn everything with fire.

However, they are the legs that carry the whole world, for which it also
gives them the reward that they must be despised, oppressed, walk in the
muck and filth, desecrated, blasphemed, condemned, yes, chased out of
the world. As can be seen, peasants, burghers and noblemen trample their
pastors and preachers underfoot and do not grant them their morsel of
bread. Some even tear off their heads. We have to suffer such
displeasure and stench from them now, as the limbs that have to carry
the belly and stomachs. But in that day they will have to look at us
much differently, 2) that not they, but every Christian has been emperor
and lord over all the lords of the world, not because of his person,
according to which he is a man like the others, but because he has
believed in the Lord Christ, as he says here.

Now this is not for the world to believe, nor is it preached for its
sake, for it is not worthy to know it, otherwise it would be too
blessed. But it is said to us, both for teaching and comfort, that we
should not regard Christians as lesser than other people, but see how
great and glorious they are praised by Christ and held up by God. The
world only looks at what seems to be high and great, rich and mighty,
and therefore rides in glory and splendor, and yet cannot recognize
where they got it from. But if thou art baptized, saith Christ, and
believest on me, thou art the man that hath and is able to do much more
and greater things, yea, that doeth the very works and also greater
things, than

2\) The words: \"But \... have to look at\" sehlen in the Wittenberger.

356 **Erl. 4S, 107-IOS. Sermon on John 14:12. W. VIII, IS0-IS3.** 357

I am doing now. For I will make you lords, if you believe in me, so that
your works shall be more worthy and shall do more than any king or lord
on earth; that you shall create and do what you will, and help me to
rule, both spiritually over souls to salvation, and also bodily through
your prayer obtain and keep all things, They must take and have it all
from you, and thus enjoy your ignorance, so that they now, like swine in
the pen, are well fattened and fat until the last day, when they shall
be slaughtered, that the devil may make his roast of them, and devour
them again, as they now want to devour you.

Behold, this is ever a great glory and honor of Christians, that we have
to comfort and rejoice against the devil and the world. What would I
take for it, if I knew for certain that I could save a man from death?
But what is this 1) but that through Christ I should and can comfort and
save hearts and consciences, and snatch them out of the devil\'s jaws;
and help all men with my prayer? Should I count all the gold and silver,
power and honor of the world, if it lay in a heap before me, for dung
against it and spit on it. Now it is certain and true, because Christ,
the Son of God, says it; without that one does not believe it, because
it is only a bad word. But if it were gold and silver, and what glitters
in the world and fills the eyes, then everyone would run to it and think
much of it.

But he who would be a Christian could defy this and say: Well, dear
world, be rich and count your florins: I, as a Christian, have nothing
on earth, but nevertheless you have from me or through my prayer what
you have. For my Christ is your 2) feudal lord, without whom you can
have nothing. And even though I am a beggar before you, I have such a
high treasure, compared to which all your possessions are not worth a
penny, that I can help anyone to know where he should stay in death and
all hardships,

1\) \"but\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

2\) In Walch\'s old edition and in the Erlanger: \"a\" instead of
\"your\".

and may have enough forever. You will not do this for a long time with
all your goods, crown 3) and splendor.

But where are they that can thus believe and boast? But we are told to
begin to learn what we should have and expect from Christ, and to
consider our Christian state as higher and more glorious than the world
considers its things. For he does not say, \"If you believe in me, you
will have great treasures of gold and silver, cities, castles, lands,
and kingdoms to possess and hold,\" for this would not help Christians,
but that we should have power over sin, death, and the devil. As he says
to the apostles Luc. 10, 19: \"Behold, I have given you power to tread
on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and
nothing shall hurt you,\" for I have put the word in your mouth, which
is my word, and have given you baptism, which is my baptism, and by this
I will prove my almighty power.

Because we have such treasure, we have all things, and are lords over
all lords. Beggars we are on earth, as Christ himself was, but before
God we are lavished with all goods, so that the world is wretched and
bare against us, and without us it cannot keep its goods; But I, when I
die, have such goods as shall remain with me, for I have the Lord Christ
Himself sitting up in heaven; but thou must then depart naked and bare,
and not take a thread with thee, and there also be deprived of all good,
though thou wert a mighty king, and hadst all the world\'s goods. But a
Christian should not leave his goods one bit behind him, for he already
has his treasure up in heaven, in and with Christ; as St. Paul says in
Ephesians 2:6 that we are already \"seated through him in the heavenly
realm. It is not evident now, but on the last day all the world will
have to see what riches and eternal glory poor Lazarus, who did not have
the crumbs that fell from his table at the rich man\'s door, will have
in heaven, when the rich man will have his treasure in heaven.

3\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: Korn.

[358 Erl. 4S, I09-I1I. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
Igz-iss. 359]{.underline}

The belly together with all the unbelieving world will lie and burn in
eternal fire \[Luc. 16, 19. ff\].

Now, what is the reason why Christians should do as great and greater
works than he himself? None other (says he) but this: \"For I go to the
Father.\" How does this rhyme? Is the man drunk, or is he talking in a
dream? But this is what I said, that we do not do such works of
ourselves. But that Christianity does such great works throughout the
whole world (which he did on earth only in 1) the little people), that
is because (he wants to say) that I go to the Father and take my
kingdom, that is, through my suffering, dying and resurrection I
overcome the devil, death, flesh and blood, the world and all that is in
it, and sit down at the right hand of the Father, that I may reign
mightily and make all things subject to me, and may say to death, sin,
the devil, the world, and all that is evil: Be at my feet, and never be
death, sin, the devil, and the evil world, as you were.

213\) This is Christ going to the Father, to be exalted to the Lord, to
be seated on the royal throne at the right hand of the Father, and to
have all authority and power in heaven and earth given to Him, as He
said in Matthew 28:18. This will be done, so that you will have
authority to do these works, because you are my members and believe in
me, that you will be in me and I in you. For by the power which I shall
have at the right hand of the Father, in the same divine majesty, and
publicly glorified as the true God and Lord of all creatures, I will
work in you who believe in me, have my word, baptism and sacrament, and
abide in the same. And as I am the Lord over sin, death, hell, the
devil, the world, and all things, so shall you also be, that you may
boast of the same power; not that you have it from your own worthiness
or power, but only because I go to the Father.

214\. And for this very cause (he says) I go to the Father, that I may
begin and accomplish these things. For now I am weak, because I am still
on earth in this flesh.

1\) \"in\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

and still do little and small works; as that I have raised some from
death, or helped a handful of Jews, and must now be crucified and put to
death; but after that, when I am crucified, dead and buried, I will
first take a leap out of death into life, out of the cross and grave
into eternal glory and divine majesty and power, and then, as he says
elsewhere \[John 12:32\], I will draw all creatures to myself, that I
may say to you apostles and Christians, You Peter or Paul, go and
overthrow all things. 12:32\], I will draw all things unto me, that all
creatures may be subject unto me; that I may say unto you apostles and
Christians, Thou Peter, or Paul, go and overthrow the Roman empire in a
heap, where it will not receive my word, and be obedient unto me.

215 So it will be seen that you are doing much greater works than I am
doing now. For I have not yet properly entered my regiment, and have not
yet attacked a kingdom or principality, even among my Jews, but let them
overthrow and execute me. But after that I will rumble among them, and
reproach them to you, that you should deal with them as with old sheets
of cards. But not by the sword, nor by bodily coercion, but by the word
and prayer, by which I will be strong in you, and so press on, that
either they will have to accept your gospel, or go to ruins over it, so
that by you what stands there shall stand, and again, also fall to the
ground, if you no longer hold; that yet they must not \[live\] 2) as
they will, but must live without their thanks of your grace.

**V. 13, 14: And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do,
that the Father may be honored in the Son. Whatever you ask in my name,
that I will do.**

This is a piece of consolation. For herewith he shows what power it is
to have and to accomplish that he goes to the Father. And now he points
out to himself again what he said: that they should do the same works
and greater works than he has done; namely, that all these things should
be done through him, because he is now coming to the place where he can
give them and do whatever he wants.

2\) \"live\" inserted by us.

360 \". 4s, ni-iis. Sermon on John 14:13, 14. W. vin, izs-i \"8. 361

They need, and all things shall be granted them, and have what they ask
or desire. Greater works shall ye do, saith he, than I have done now;
because I go unto the Father, that neither the world nor the devil be
able against you, but that they depart from you, and leave you to be
their lords.

217 And if you still feel weakness, and lack something, that it seems as
if it will go much differently than I have told you, and the devil along
with the world will be incumbent on you, as it will seem according to
the feeling of the flesh, and all the world\'s outward appearance: let
this not frighten you nor make you despondent, but the more you feel
need and weakness, the less you should turn away and let go, but know
that I will give you what you ask and need. Therefore, only begin to
pray confidently, and call upon me with the confidence that I will give
it to you. For I go to the Father for this very reason, because I can
see all your needs and infirmities and hear your prayer.

218\. And just by this, that he calls them to pray, he wants to show
that they do not have the power to do such great things (if he means to
do greater works than he himself has done) from or with themselves, but
that they will have weakness and all kinds of hardship and lack,
resistance and hindrance in their ministry, nature and works; and
therefore he allows these things to happen to them, so that they do not
become proud and presumptuous, nor rely on themselves as if they now had
it all and could no longer be, but remain in humility and knowledge of
their inability, and practice faith in Christ all the more strongly by
calling and pleading, and thus experience his power all the more surely
through weakness and suffering, which drives them to call and pray, as
he says to Paul, 2 Cor. 12, 9 \[and Paul also confesses afterwards (v.
10)\]: 1) My power becomes stronger through weakness.

219\. with these and the following words, he also shows what the actual
ministry and work of Christians is, and how necessary it is in
Christianity, of which the prophet Zacharias Cap. 12, 10. says that
Christ should pour out and give the Spirit, who is called a Spirit of
grace.

1\) Inserted by us.

and of prayer. For these two things he is to establish and create in all
Christians: first, that their hearts may be assured and certain that
they have a gracious God; second, that they may also help others through
prayer. The first part is to be reconciled to God and to have for
themselves everything they need. When they have this, they shall then
also become gods and healers of the world through prayer, and thus
become God\'s children themselves through the spirit of grace; then act
as God\'s children between Him and their neighbor, and serve and help
others, so that they may also come to this.

220 For when a Christian begins to know Christ as his Lord and Savior,
through whom he is redeemed from death and brought into his dominion and
inheritance, his heart is filled with such godliness that he would
gladly help anyone to do the same. For he has no greater joy than in
this treasure, that he knows Christ. Therefore he goes out, teaches and
admonishes the others, praises and confesses the same before everyone,
asks and sighs that they may also come to such grace. This is a restless
spirit in the highest tranquility, that is, in God\'s grace and peace,
so that it cannot be quiet or idle, but strives and strives for it with
all its strength, as one who lives solely to bring God\'s glory and
praise to the people, so that others may also receive such a spirit of
grace and pray through it to help him. For where the spirit of grace is,
it makes it possible and permissible for us to begin to pray.

Therefore Christ wants to say here 2) If you believe in me, and have
received the spirit, by which the heart is assured of the graces of God,
of which he said above \[v. 9\]: \"He who sees me, sees also the
Father\" 2c., then it will certainly follow that you must also pray. For
this is the right, proper, and only work of Christians. For before we
become Christians and believe, we do not know what or how we should
pray. And even if a man prays most earnestly, the Spirit of grace is not
there. For the heart stands only thus: Dear Lord,

2\) Jmaer: \"also\".

362 Erl. 49, IIS-119. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
IM-141. 363

You also wanted 1) to see that I live so much, suffer so much, or this
and that saint\'s merit, pious people\'s intercession and good works 2c.
There is no faith in divine grace and mercy through Christ, and yet the
heart always remains uncertain, so that it cannot conclude that it is
certainly heard; only wants to act with God on his or other people\'s
holiness, without Christ, as if God should humble himself before him,
and let his grace or help be taken away from him by ourselves, and thus
become our debtor and servant; that such is not called mercy, but
deserves wrath, and is not prayed for, but rather mocks God.

But a true Christian prayer should and must proceed from the spirit of
grace, which says: \"I have lived as much as I can, so I pray that you
will not look at my life and deeds, but promise your mercy and goodness
through Christ, and for the sake of it give me what I ask. So that in
prayer we may fall from ourselves in right heartfelt humility, and cling
to the promise of grace alone, with firm confidence that he will hear
us, as he has commanded to pray and promised to hear.

For this reason, he himself clearly adds this little word: \"in my
name\", to teach that without faith no right prayer can take place, and
apart from Christ, no one is able to pray a letter that is valid and
pleasing before God: just as the prayer of all Turks, Jews, monks and
hypocrites is. For they all come before God with the opinion that he
should regard their own or other people\'s merit and holiness, and
therefore celebrate and crown them: just as the hypocrite prays Luke
18:11, \"I thank you, God, that I am not like other people,\" 2c., just
as if he were to say, \"I am not entitled to your grace and mercy, but
have well deserved it; I do not want to take from God, but give to him
so that he has to pay, and be glad that he gets such a holy man for a
friend. But he says no to it above \[v. 13\], and will neither hear nor
accept anyone\'s prayer, for he who comes on his mere grace and mercy in
Christ\'s name, and says with the publican, \"God be merciful to me poor
sinner.\" \[Luc. 18, 13.\]

1\) Jenaer: the.

So learn here that through the Lord Christ alone we have the two things:
grace and an answer to prayer; that we first become children of God, so
that we can call upon Him, and then also obtain for ourselves and others
what we need. Therefore, where there is a Christian, there is actually
the Holy Spirit, who does nothing else but always pray. For even though
he does not always stir the mouth or speak words, yet the heart, like
the wrists and the heart in the body, goes and beats without ceasing
with such groaning: \"Oh, dear Father, that your name may be hallowed,
that your kingdom may come, that your will may be done for us and for
everyone\" (2c.); and after that the blows or temptations and hardships
press and drive harder, after that such groaning and pleading goes the
stronger, even verbally. That no Christian can be found without prayer,
as little as a living man without the pulse, which never stands still,
stirs and beats for itself forever, whether the man sleeps or does
otherwise, so that he is not aware of it.

\(225\) But what more is to be said of prayer, and how it is to be done,
is often said elsewhere, and will follow hereafter. Here it is enough to
show how highly and gloriously the Christians are praised: that they
alone are able to pray and thereby accomplish everything they want. And
Christ so kindly incites and exhorts his own here and elsewhere, and
shows that he is heartily pleased with them. This is the glory and
comfort of Christians who have grace and the Spirit, that they
understand and know what has been given them by God in Christ. The
others understand and do not respect it anymore, even if one says much
about it, because if one plays the harp of a sow.

226 But what is it that he speaks here thus: \"What you ask in my name,
that I will do\" 2c. Now he has said, \"You shall do the works and
greater works than I do: What you ask, that will I do? Who then is the
I? I cried, so he should say: What you ask the Father in the name of the
Master, He will do; so he shows it to himself. These are strange words
of the man, that he can speak so highly with simple words. For

364 Eri. 49, 116-118. Sermon on Joh. 14, 13. 14. W. VIII, I4I-I4S. 365

With these words he clearly indicates that he himself is the true,
almighty 1) God, together with the Father. For he who says, \"Whatever
you ask, I will do,\" is saying as much as: I am God, who can and should
give everything. Why else should Christians ask in His name? Why do
people call on the saints to help in emergencies: St. George for
protection in war, St. Sebastian against pestilence, and one here, the
other there? without thinking that they should give such things. But now
he takes them to himself and says: \"All that you ask, I will not
command anyone else to give, but I will do it myself; so he must be the
one who can help in everything we need and be more powerful than the
devil, sin, death, the world and all creatures.

This is such power that no creature, neither angel nor man, has ever
had, nor will have for eternity. They can pray, and God is able, through
His word and promise, to give and do what we need; as the apostles,
item, the prophets, Elijah and Elisha, raised the dead through prayer,
and the angels in the prophet Zechariah pray for the people. But it is
not written with them that they should give and do such things by their
own power, or save us from some distress of sin and death. But he takes
from him all the power and might of the divine majesty, and gathers
together in one heap all that is to be asked of God. Say not, If ye ask
for gold, or silver, or any thing that men also can give; but: All that
ye ask, nothing excluded. Now we know what we are to ask of God; not
only for the beggary on earth, that is, all the necessities of this
temporal life, but that we may be saved from all present and future
misery, be made righteous, holy, free, alive and glorious, out of sin,
death and the grave. Since he is called to ask all these things, and
promises that he will give them, it follows irrefutably that he must be
the true God.

Here we can see how this evangelist St. John establishes this article
about the Lord Christ being in One Person.

1\) \"omnipotent\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlanger.

both true God with the Father, and true man born of the virgin.
Therefore we must also drive and purify the same, so that he may be kept
pure against the devil\'s mob and heretics. For this is the article on
which the devil has always clung, and is still contested, and suffers
distress through various manifold heresies until the last day. For some
have blasphemed that Christ was only a semblance or a ghost, and not a
true man; some that he had no human soul, but in its place the divine
nature; some that he was only a so-called God; some that he was a real
man 2c. And so the devil has always stirred up something so that only
the doctrine of Christ would not remain pure, as he now also stirs in
some and gets pregnant with his troublesome thoughts. 2)

229 And for this purpose also his bride, the woman of displeasure,
serves him, the sharp reason, which seeks various expedients and
evasions against this article, and can twist itself masterfully, so that
it is not caught by God\'s word. Where is it written, she says, that
Christ boasts or calls himself truly God? If he is truly God, why does
he not come out freely and say: I am God? If it were so certain, and
such great power were attached to believing such things, he would have
said it plainly, and expressed it by name, and so on. 3) This is what
some wise men and scholars have now begun to mumble about, and they make
it out as if it were a great thing, and as if it were a special high
wisdom; just as if it were nowhere in Scripture that Christ is and is to
be believed to be the Son of God and Savior of the world, Lord and God
above all; of which, however, the whole Scripture, especially the New
Testament, is full, without having invented such a little word of
defense that they must not believe.

230 For what could be said or written more clearly and certainly than
that even the children confess in their faith and that the

2\) It is not improbable that Luther thought of Agricola with these
words, because in June 1537 one received news of Agricola\'s antinomian
theses, Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XX, Col. 1624 ff\" No. 31, and
already on July I Luther gave testimony against this doctrine in a
sermon (St. Louis edition, vol. XI, 1328,? 42 ff.). Compare the
introduction to the 20th volume, p. 50b f.

3\) \"u. s. w.\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

[366 **Erl. 49,IIS-IS\".** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, I4S-I4S.** 367]{.underline}

All Christianity sings, says and preaches: I believe in Jesus Christ,
his only Son, our Lord? But what good has it done? Is it not clearly and
plainly enough expressed in Scripture the article of our salvation, that
we are justified and saved through Christ alone? that all churches,
priests and monks have sung and read it daily above the altar, in the
choir and in the pulpit. But what good did it do? For they themselves
have preached and taught against it, and have not yet stopped barking
against it. Dear, complain that it is not written that he alone is the
Lamb of God who bears our sins \[John 1:29\], item, that through his
name alone those who believe in him have forgiveness of sins \[Acts
10:43\], item, that there is no other name under heaven in which we can
be saved, Acts 4:12. Yes, if you put the Bible under the bench, or
willfully disregard what the Scriptures say and follow your own
thoughts, neither this nor any other article of faith will be clear and
certain.

Item, is it not clear enough that the angel Gabriel is sent to the
virgin Mary and says \[Luc. 1, 31.\]: \"Behold, you will conceive in the
womb and bear a son\" 2c.? How could one speak more clearly and
distinctly? Who does not understand what it means to conceive, and to
bear in the womb or flesh a child, and to give birth? There are still
some who say (as also in our time the Münster Anabaptist revolt) that it
is not written that Christ is a natural son of the virgin from her blood
and flesh; they want to persuade people that such words, to be bodily
pregnant and to give birth, do not mean to be a true mother; and that a
child or son is not called a natural child, but a moncalf or changeling.
Yes, if this were to apply, that one allowed them such courage, that
they might say and interpret as they wished, and be unbound by God\'s
word, then anyone can well reject what he does not like, and say: it is
not clear enough, one should present him with a clear text. For it would
have to be a clear speech, which the devil could not mix up with his
interpretation.

1\) Erlanger: \"in your\" instead of: im.

232 And what is clear enough, if one does not want to let the public
word of God, given to us to enlighten and teach, be clear, even if it
penetrates our eyes? It is just as if a man with a mind would close his
eyes in broad daylight before the bright sun, or would shut the door and
the window, and yet complain that he could not see. What else should you
be told or instructed, if you do not want to hear or accept what God
Himself tells you? Or do you think that your own thoughts, drawn from
blind reason, should be clearer and more certain about God and His
mystery than His own word? But it is nothing but a mischievous devil,
who does not want to be told, even if he is tangibly convicted, but
knowingly and willfully resists the truth.

What would it be if the Holy Spirit had spoken everywhere with such vain
words? Christ is truly God and man, as he has often done, without the
heretics having any cause to blaspheme against it: it would not be clear
enough. For although such words, God and man, were said of Christ, it
could not yet be concluded with certainty that he truly had both divine
and human natures. But because the mere names were there, and nothing
more was written about him, this would prove that he truly had human
nature and work, item, divine majesty and power, so he alone would be a
so-called God or man. As the heretics did when such texts and sayings
were held up to their noses, in which Christ is called the Virgin or the
Son of Man: O! they said, man is not called here in this place a true
man, of the mother\'s blood and flesh, but a ghost or image of a man,
who passed through the Virgin\'s womb, as the sun casts its ray and
brightness through a painted glass on the wall. Just as the Jews say of
the word virgin: it does not mean an intact virgin, but a young harlot
or maid.

234 So, the Arians, even though they were shown this little word \"God\"
and \"Son of God\" from Christ in the Scriptures, said against it: He
was not a natural or essential God, but a named God; and

368 **Eri. tg, 120-122. Sermon On Joh. 14, 13. 14. W. VIII, 14\"-149.**
369

the little word \"Son of God\" would mean 1) in that place nothing more
than a lord or prince, or a glorious creature above all creatures. Well,
dear, who could not do that? If it were true that wood should be called
stone, that a man should not be called a man, but a changeling; item,
God and the Son of God should not be called what it is 2) called, but
what they wanted to make of it: what would remain clear and certain in
all Scripture, yes, in all languages 3)? So I could also say: If a
florin would be presented to me, it is not a florin, but a number penny,
or it is not a penny, but a tin.

For this reason, the Holy Spirit has kept it safe on both sides, so that
the reckless spirits would not have to interpret and juggle with the
words \"God\" and \"man\" of their own volition, but that they would
actually interpret what they should mean and interpret in all language:
God, what God means; and man, what the word man means. For he not only
put the name of God and Man of Christ, but also defined, that is,
actually and clearly expressed, how such words are to be interpreted and
understood, so that each one did not make his own gloss on them and make
of them what he wanted, describing him, both by name and by work or
deed, so that, even if the name were not enough, it would be proven from
the works written about him that one would have to say: This is God;
although he would nowhere be called a God.

236 Nor are they such wanton sinners, that they scrape and blaspheme
against it, whether such public testimonies of Scripture are placed
before their noses, that they cannot pass them by; or they turn away
from it, and slobber, saying, There are not these words there, that
Christ is God; thus they want to have a quandary and a free evasion on
both sides. Once they want to have the little word \"God\" shown; but if
this is also pointed out to them, they run out of it: there must be
another mind. But it is the devil who

1\) Wittenberger: hot.

2\) Wittenberger: he.

3\) Thus the Jena. Wittenberg and Erlangen: sayings. The reading
\"languages\" is confirmed by the beginning of the following paragraph.

so gaukelt and dice-plays with the writing, and it turns, as he wants,
that, where one attacks him, one shall have caught the eel 4) by the
tail.

237\. Therefore, against such a devil and his wanton offenders, we must
hold the Scriptures firmly, and not let them twist or flutter about as
if they were not clear or powerful enough to prove our faith, but rather
drive and bluff the two pieces, so that the Scriptures put both the
name, \"God\" and \"man\", from Christ, and in addition the words and
works that belong to God alone, or are said by God, that he is called
God and is God, and does what the true God should do.

238\. for this name \"GOD\" also stands for Christ in a clear and
concise way; Joh. 20, 28. says St. Thomas: \"My Lord and my GOD\"; and
Rom. 9, 5.: \"Christ, who is GOD above all, praised forever\", as the
ancient fathers also used it; item, Ps. 2, 7. \"Thou art my Son, whom I
have begotten,\" that is, my right natural one, not only a chosen or
named Son; item, Luc. 1, 32. \"He shall be called the Son of the Most
High.\"

But of the divine power and works there are many more sayings; just as
it is necessary that the same be done and demonstrated more strongly
than the name, and not be interpreted and twisted as they do in those
sayings. As we have already heard \[v. 1\], how he says of himself, \"If
ye believe in God, believe also in me\"; item, v. 6: \"I am the way, the
truth, and the life\"; item, v. 9: \"He that beholdeth me beholdeth the
Father\"; and v. 10: \"Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me?\" In which sayings (as St. John does almost
everywhere) both things are said of him, that he is truly man and also
truly God.

240\) For the spirits of the wicked would gladly hear the little song
that he said badly, either that he was a pure God, or a pure man. But
now the Scripture combines both; as it should be, that one should

4\) In the old editions: \"Ael\".

5\) \"a\" is missing in the Jena.

370 Erl. 49, 1SS-IS4. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
I4S-ISI. 371

Christ gives both works, namely God\'s and man\'s, in the same person:
and so he makes them into one, so that the words are as of a true man,
and yet also as of the right, true God. For when he says, \"Believe ye
in God,\" he speaks as if God were alone, and yet immediately says,
\"Believe ye also in me.\" There he also sits down by the word
\"believe,\" and takes from him 1) the very same Godhead. For if one is
to believe in Christ, he must be the true God. So when he says, v. 10,
\"The words that I speak are not mine, but the Father\'s,\" 2c., you
hear nothing but a man speaking loudly; but that he also says, v. 6, \"I
am the truth and the life\"; item, v. 9, \"He that beholdeth me
beholdeth the Father\"; this cannot be said of him by a man speaking
loudly, nor by any angel, nor by any creature, but is actually the word
of the divine majesty alone.

241 So also here, when he speaks: \"What you will ask the Father in my
name, that I will do. Should he not speak thus, if he were pure man:
What ye shall ask the Father, that will He do? For, as I said, to give
such things as we may ask, as forgiveness of sins and eternal life,
belongs to no one but God alone. But now he says. He confesses that he
is the true God, boasting not of the name but of the work that no man or
angel has ever done, nor will be able to do for eternity. And lest
anyone think that such a word had escaped him by chance, or that he had
spoken it in a dream, he repeats it again, and confirms it with the same
words: \"Whatever you ask, that will I do\" 2c. For the Lord Christ saw
that this article would be difficult for human reason, and would be
highly and severely challenged by the devil; therefore, he often speaks
it with many words and strong proofs of his divine power and majesty.

242\. What is it then, that one still salivates against such clear words
of God and says: Yes, does he not call himself a God? For if he does not
call himself by God\'s name here

1\) \"takes to him\" that is: he takes for himself.

(which he elsewhere also lets say of him), he nevertheless sets and
calls everything that is due to God alone, and is said of him, of which
he is to be called and be called God; which, where it would not be so
clearly expressed and testified, it would not help, whether he called
himself a God in all places. For one would still say like the Arians: he
would only be a named God. But now that the definition and the work are
there, and thus clearly proven, the name of the deed or the work itself
should also follow, so that he is called and is called the true God,
even if he is not called so anywhere in Scripture. For he does not want
the mere name, without work and deed, to be praised, as the world plays
and deceives with false praise of mere names.

243\. And even though it should be enough to believe, even though
nothing more would be said of Christ, than such a name, the Son of God
and God in eternity, and we are not guilty of getting involved with the
devil any further, because, as has now been said, God does not play with
mere names, but as he calls himself and all things and is called, so it
must be true in work and in deed; but still, in defiance of the devil
and his scales, he gives us so many sayings in which he praises his
divine power and might, and assumes the same honor and majesty and all
works that belong to God alone.

244 Therefore we stick to this article of Christ as taught in the
Scriptures, that he is called and described as both true God and man,
which they themselves must read, sing and preach as a testimony to the
truth against themselves. If others do not believe this, and blaspheme
against their will, then we let them go with their God, the devil, and
yet we will believe it and remain with the text, which they themselves
cannot deny, and keep it unchanged and 2) unaltered, along with our
faith, in which we say: I believe in Jesus Christ our Lord, the only Son
of God, and, of the Virgin Mary, true-born of man, crucified under
Pontius Pilate, dead and buried; thus,

2\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

372 Erl. 49, 1S4-1S7. Sermon On Joh. 14, 13. 14. \' W. VIII, ISI-I54.
373

that 1) the words all mean what they say. For they are not intended to
be words of uncertainty, but to establish and confirm our faith clearly
and assuredly. Whoever does not want to hear and believe them, we will
let him argue and argue as long as he wants, as the devil will give him
enough. But we want to be masters enough for such clever ones, so that
they do not have to turn their noses up at the Scriptures as they wish;
but if they do, let them turn it on their own heads, and let no one
overturn this text and these sayings.

245 Let this be said of this text, to establish this article of Christ.
This is not only for the purpose of knowing what he is according to his
nature and essence, but also for the benefit and fruit of it. For Christ
remains for his own person a Lord and God above all things, even though
you and I do not believe this, and all the world is ignorant of him: for
the sake of your unbelief or blasphemy he becomes no less than he has
been from eternity. But for this reason it is necessary that we make use
of this article, as all our salvation and happiness is based on it.

246\. For if this reason stands, and is grasped by faith, that Christ is
both the true Son of God and the true Son of the Virgin in One Person,
yet of two different natures, divine in eternity from the Father, and
human born of Mary, then I already have everything I am supposed to
have, and may no longer flutter with thoughts toward heaven, and inquire
what God\'s will and thoughts are; and I am already above all
disputation of the Jews, Turks, pagans and all the world, about God, how
to seek and meet Him, or how to serve and please Him, in addition to my
own care and fear of heart. For when I hear this article, that this
Christ is the one, true, real God, and no other, then I come to the one
(of which Christ says Luc. 10, 42) that Mary has mentioned, and shall
not be taken away from her. Then I can be sure that I may not look for
anything else, nor draw any other thoughts, but look only at this one
person, yes, at his hand and mouth, then I can grasp a certain comfort.
Otherwise the

1\) \"that\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

2\) Wittenberger: des.

The heart, swaying and wavering, cannot stop fluttering with its own
thoughts and vain inquiries as to what God in heaven thinks of us, until
it finally falls into despair, or is ever seduced by the right knowledge
of God into idolatry and false worship. As happens to the monks and
faithless saints when they paint God after their own hearts, as if he
were just as they dream or think of him, and thus make a false god for
themselves. For there is no knowledge of Christ; and because Christ is
not known in the heart, neither can the Father be known.

247 For our faith is completely in this Christ, as he said above \[v.
9\]: \"He who sees me sees the Father\"; and St. Paul Col. 1, 19 \[Col.
2, 9\] says that in Christ the whole Godhead dwells bodily and
completely; so that apart from Him there is no God, and where He is not
known, God is never known nor met. The Father and Christ are distinct
from one another in person, but in relation to us and in our faith and
heart they must be one.

No man can attain such an understanding of this article without being a
Christian, and no pope, monk or doctor has ever been able to teach it,
as I have not been able to either, although we have read, taught and
debated daily about the divine essence and nature. But we have known
nothing of the custom taught in Scripture, for we are full of other
thoughts, of plates, caps, and our works, and have painted God before us
according to them; indeed, in order that we should learn to recognize
God in Christ, we have made the dear Savior a judge, and have run from
Him to the Virgin Mary and other saints, as intercessors and mediators;
item, by our works, masses, monastic life, fasting, and praying, we have
sought reconciliation. These are just the thoughts that lead from this
article, that it cannot be understood nor used; although one speaks and
disputes about it 3) above, but like the blind man about the color.

3\) So the Jenaer. Wittenbergers: \"the same\". Erlanger: \"ob man
obenhin\". That after \"man\" in the original \"probably\" or
\"equally\" had been missing, one sifts from the different addition of
the Jenaer and Wittenberger.

[374 Erl. 49, IS7-1S9. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
154-I5S. 375]{.underline}

But he that learneth and understandeth that which is 1) That Christ is
both true God and man, from the sayings which we have heard, and shall
hereafter hear; as, \"He that seeth me seeth the Father;\" item,
\"Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? 2c.,
who can certainly judge from this, and say: I do not want to know or
hear any other God, but only look and listen to this Christ. If I now
hear him, I already know how I am with God, and must seek nothing more,
so that I may have troubled myself beforehand, how I am to reconcile God
or become one with him. For in this image all anger and terror
disappear, and nothing but grace and comfort shine, and I can now have a
right hearty confidence in God, comfort my conscience against all
temptation and distress, judge and judge rightly of all kinds of beings
and lives, teach and instruct everyone. For since Christ speaks in this
way, who is one, undivided person, God and man, it is certain that both
God the Father and the Holy Spirit, that is, the whole of God, are also
here and speak. Spirit, that is, the whole divine majesty; so that God
is completely attached to this person, and you must not seek further nor
ask how or where he is to be found or met? What the devil then presents
to you with other thoughts, of God\'s wrath or grace, sin or godliness,
2c. you can say against it: Here I have Christ\'s word, which is spoken
by the true God, and no other. For truly there is no other God, and
\[I\] cannot speak otherwise than I hear from this mouth.

Item 250: Here I see the work of the Lord Christ, that he sheds his
blood for me, and dies, and rises again, and gives me his baptism and
sacrament. All this is truly done by my God. For this is the person,
both true\' God and man, and of one divine essence with the Father, both
One God; and therefore also one speech, or word and work, so that one
can and should rightly say: God was crucified and died for me 2c. And if
there is a God who did not suffer and die for me, I do not want to know
about it. For although the per

1\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: that.

The Father suffered for me, yet Christ is the very same God, and in One
inseparable being with the Father, so that in this Person of God one
cannot lack, and again, apart from it, cannot meet any God for our
comfort and blessedness.

**That the Father may be honored in the Son.**

This is a marvelous man with words, so that in the sight of reason and
worldly wisdom they sound like the words of a dreamer or a drunkard. But
I have not set them, nor any man on earth; and even if we were so wise,
and studied them all our lives with all scholars, we could not set them
thus. Therefore, though they be foolish in the ears of the wise and
prudent, let us be fools with Christ. For those who know and have
experienced what they are able to do will certainly not consider them
fools; just as I, praise God, have also tested in part what they are
able to do and give, as they have often comforted and sustained me, and
still do. 2)

Now we have heard in the previous words how he assumes the honor and
authority that is due to God alone, and says that he himself will give
and do everything that they ask. What then is it that he now says,
\"That the Father may be honored in the Son\"? How then does he transfer
honor from himself to the Father? Shouldn\'t he justly say, according to
the natural consequence of the speech: What you ask, that will I do,
that I may be honored? To whom does the honor belong more cheaply than
to him whose deed and work it is? For it is natural and right that he
who does something should be praised. Now he speaks: I will do the work
and give what you ask, but the Father shall have the honor. He then
changes the words so that he mixes them together, the father and
himself. For as he did not exclude the Father in the preceding words,
\"What ye ask, that will I do,\" so also herewith, when he says, \"that
the Father may be honored,\" he does not exclude himself from the same
honor that is to be given to the Father.

2\) Wittenberger: hold.

376 **Erl. 49,IS9-1S1. Sermon on John 14:13-16. W. VIII, IS8-I5S.** 377

253 But he speaks thus, that this article may be established, how he is
truly God with the Father in one, divine essence, yet in a distinct
person. He thus divides himself and the Father from one another, and yet
brings them together again, and testifies that the Father is another
person in the divine essence, and that he is also another person, but
still a single, eternal God, of the same works, of the same honor; so
that in German it is said nothing else than: What I do, that does the
Father, and the Father\'s honor is my honor 2c. Binds thus by such
alternation of the words: I will do what you ask, and: \"that the Father
may be honored\", binds both persons, the Father and his, to each other.
For by saying, I will do it, he shows that the honor is also rightly due
to him; and yet in the following words of his honor he is silent, and
gives it to the Father. But if the Father is to have the honor, he must
also do the same work that Christ does; and again, if the Father is to
have the honor, Christ, as he also does the same work, must have the
same honor at the same time as the Father.

254 So from this it is decided that in the divine being there are two
distinct persons, but not two or two different natures, but only one
divine being and majesty. Summa, the work that I do is the Father\'s
work, so that the Father is honored in the Son (that he does this), and
so there is one honor: He who honors the Son because of the works that
he does does not honor the Son alone, but in him the Father.

255 What then is meant by the Father being honored in the Son? Nothing
else, but that the Father may be known and considered as a gracious and
merciful Father, who is not angry with us nor condemns us to hell, but
forgives sin and gives us all his grace for the sake of his Son Christ,
as has been said enough. This is the right honor, so that God may be
honored. For from this arises right trust in the heart, that it has
refuge in him, and can call upon him for comfort in all troubles; item,
gives thanks for his grace and benefits, confesses and makes known his
name and word before everyone, which are the right honors of God.

services that are pleasing to him and by which he is praised. But such
things cannot happen unless, as he says, \"in the Son\" alone, that is,
where Christ is thus known and believed, as it is said that through him
we learn to see God, and to know his grace and fatherly heart, and to
know what we shall certainly be granted and receive from God in his
name.

**V. 15, 16: If you love me, keep my words. And I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever.**

These are vain words, as of him who wants to depart from them and gives
good night, that he comforts and admonishes them, so that they are not
frightened or distressed by his departure. As if he should say: I must
now leave your sight, therefore I say this to you for the last time, and
this should be my valete, that you only are not afraid nor frightened,
but believe in me and grasp what I say to you. For I will not leave you
without comfort and help, even though you have no help or comfort in the
world. Yes, I go to the Father for this very reason, that I may take my
power and rule and prove it to you. And though I come from you in the
flesh, yet will I send you another Comforter from the Father, who shall
be with you always. For I know that you cannot remain in the world
without a comforter. Until now I have been your comforter through my
bodily presence, of which you have confessed 1) and have been secure and
without fear, and still gladly remain with me; but now, when you hear
that you are to lose such comfort, you are grieved and distressed. But
it shall not hurt you. Only remain my disciples, and hold fast to me,
and I will abundantly supply the want. For I will pray the Father
himself, and he shall give you the Comforter, which shall abide with you
for ever: and the world shall not take him from you, nor the devil,
though they be mad and foolish. He shall strengthen you, and make you
strong and bold, more than I can do in the flesh, and wiser and more
understanding than all the world.

1\) \"\'gefreuet\' is missing in the original\" (Erlanger Ausgabe).
Wittenberger: comforted.

[378 Eri. ts, im-interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. viii,
iss-i\[2. Z78]{.underline}

You shall have no lack of comfort, strength, courage, or wisdom.

This is the consolation. But he does not preface it with these words in
vain: \"If you love me, keep my commandments. For the dear Lord saw that
when he would be gone, the game would be up in Christendom, especially
among the preachers and teachers, that they would not all remain one,
but would set up divisions and bands among themselves. 2c. Now he has
set aside the whole of Moses for his Christians, and wants to leave us
unburdened with the unbearable burden of the law. For it is always this
way: where one rules with laws (especially the consciences), there is
never an end nor measure to the rules and doings: One law makes a
hundred others, and a hundred become a hundred thousand. Therefore I
impose nothing else on you,\" he says, \"I ask and desire nothing more
than this, that you preach faithfully from me, and let my word and
sacrament be commanded to you, and for my sake keep love and unity among
yourselves, and suffer with patience what befalls you.

258 These are the short commandments, which are called \"my
commandments,\" which I do not interpret unto you otherwise, except ye
love me, and do gladly for my sake. For I will not be a Moses, driving
you and afflicting you with dread and terror; but I give you such
commandments as ye can and shall keep without fail, if ye love me
otherwise. For if this is not so, it is in vain that I would command you
much, for it is not kept. Therefore only consider this: If you will keep
my commandment, that you love me, and consider what I have done for you,
that you should love me justly, as I lay down my life and limb for you,
and shed my blood for you, then do it for my sake, and remain united and
friendly with one another, that you may hold fast to me at the same time
with your preaching, and bear one another through love, and not cause
divisions and factions. For I have honestly and well deserved it; it is
heartily grievous to me, and costs me my life and limb to deliver you. I
throw myself under the death and into the devil\'s jaws, so that I can
save the

Take away sin and death from you, destroy hell and the power of the
devil, and give you heaven and all that I have, and will gladly bear
with you, whether at times you err and fall short, or fall grossly, and
are weak and infirm: only that you cleave to me again, and enter into
love, forgiving one another also, as I also do toward you, lest love be
divided among you.

This exhortation he gives here, but afterwards he will drive them
further and stronger than he would have imagined them to be at the last.
For he well knew, as I have said, that there would be many of them who
would \"also boast of his name as Christ\'s disciples and preachers of
the gospel, to whom their own conceit, honor and glory would be dearer
than Christ\'s blood and death, and would not so highly esteem his grace
and unspeakable love, and everything, and all that he has done to redeem
us, that they should put their enjoyment, honor and power in danger for
it, or let it go, or not spout their own art and wisdom, as they would
be more interested in being considered clever, wise, learned and praised
than in Christ and the pure teaching of the gospel. This already began
with Judas, as the head and predecessor; then the false apostles among
the Jews, and the same disciples and heretics, each of whom wanted to be
the smartest and rule Christianity over the apostles and their true
disciples; until at the end there were almost as many wise men and
masters as parishes and churches 1); and the longer Christianity stood,
the angrier and angrier it became, down to the last basic soup of the
papacy, since Christ with his word was completely forgotten and
extinguished, and this admonition could no longer find a place.

**V. 16. And I will ask the Father.**

If you therefore keep my commandments, living in unity and brotherhood,
feeling that you love me, you must consider that the devil will befall
you, the world will become hostile to you, and all plagues and sorrows
will befall you,

1\) Jenaer: Church game.

380 He,. 4\", iss-ise. Sermon on John 14, 16. W. vm, i \"2- uu. Z81

In addition, the false Christians and the mobs will prove all kinds of
evil treachery for your love. But do not let this deter you, but only
continue and remain in my love, there shall be no need, you shall not be
abandoned. For I will not sit idle in heaven and forget you, but will do
nothing else, but be your dear priest and mediator, asking and pleading
with the Father for you, that he may give you the Holy Spirit, who shall
comfort, strengthen and sustain you in all troubles, so that you may
remain in my love and cheerfully endure everything that befalls you for
my sake.

But how do these words: \"I will ask the Father\" 2c. rhyme with what he
said above \[v. 13\]: \"What you ask in my name, that will I do\", so
that he shows that he is the true God and wants to give what they desire
from him. But here he says that he wants to ask the Father to give them
a comforter 2c. How can such a thing be said of one who is truly God,
that he should ask something of another? For this does not belong to
God, that he is subject to another and must take something from him, but
that he himself is able to do, give and do everything.

Therefore, when the clever reason and sharp heads hear such words, said
by Christ, they quickly go: Oh, these are not God\'s words, but the
words of a loud man; for if he were God, he would have to say: I will
send you the Comforter 2c. So they want to lead the Holy Spirit to the
school, and therefore they cleverly use their grammatica and logica, and
teach us: The word \"ask\" does not belong to God; therefore he cannot
be God 2c. And after that, with the rhetoric, they strike out such
things, and make up that the Holy Spirit must be a child, yes, a fool,
who does not know how to speak. And how he does it and speaks it, it
must not be right; can blame and master it all. But they are not so
pious as to hold the sayings against one another, but they pinch a piece
here and a piece there, and where they have a word or two, they fall
upon it, making a noise before the people\'s eyes, that they should not
see what the Scripture says more and more. Yes, if this should be valid,
that one word should be

If I wanted to tear one or two passages out of a whole text and leave
aside what is written before or after it, or what is said elsewhere in
Scripture, I could interpret and turn all Scripture and speech as I
wished.

263 But it is said: \"Look at this text in its entirety, both with what
follows and what goes before, and you will find that Christ speaks both
the Word of God and the Word of man. From this it is powerfully proved,
as our doctrine and faith hold, that he is both truly man and also truly
God. For how can this be understood in the same speech and words, that
he should speak at the same time as a god and as a man? because they are
two different natures. If he spoke everywhere as God, one could not
prove that he was a true man; but if he spoke everywhere as a man, one
would not realize that he was also a true God. Therefore he must mix it
up, and take other times and words that belong to the divine nature, and
others that belong to the human nature; and yet the one person of both
speaks, sometimes as if he were pure God, sometimes as a pure man. For
since he is both God and man in one person, why should he not also speak
of him without distinction, both this and that? Here, however, he soon
brings both words and sayings together in one sermon. For the same one
who just before \[v. 13\] says: \"What you ask, that will I do\", the
same one also says here: \"I will ask the Father\" 2c. That this article
may be certain and clear, that in this Person, Christ, there is neither
pure divinity nor pure humanity, but both, divine and human nature, are
inseparable in One Person.

For as we have said above \[§254 ff.\] we have said enough that in the
divine nature, Christ and the Father, there are two distinct persons, so
also here, if we say of Christ, we must also teach clearly that he is
one person, and yet there are two distinct natures, namely, divine and
human; and again, just as above the nature or divine essence is united
in the Father and Christ, so here the person in Christ remains
undivided, so that both the human and divine natures are ascribed
attributes to the whole person, and

[382 **Erl. 4S, ISS-ISS.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, I84-IS7.** 383]{.underline}

says of him: The man Christ, born of the Virgin, is omnipotent, and does
all that we ask; yet not because of the human, but because of the divine
nature; not that he is born of the mother, but that he is the Son of
God. So again, Christ the Son of God asks the Father 2c. not according
to the divine nature or essence, according to which he is omnipotent
like the Father, but because he is truly man and the Son of Mary; so
that the words are drawn together and compared according to the unity of
the person, so that the natures are always distinguished, and yet the
person remains undivided 2c.

Since he is therefore believed to be one person, God and man, it
behooves us to speak of him in the same way, as both natures demand,
that some words indicate the human, 1) but some the divine nature; that
one may see what he speaks according to the human nature, and also
according to the divine. For if these things be not perceived and
rightly discerned, there must follow many a heresy, as there were in
times past, when some said, He is not truly God; and some, He is not
truly man. For they were not able to distinguish clearly between the two
natures of the two kinds of speech. For He has often spoken in a way
that the least man on earth should hardly speak; when He says, \"I have
come, not to be served, but to serve.\" There he even makes himself a
servant among all men, although he is the true God and Lord of all
creatures, whom everyone should serve and worship; item, in the 41st
Psalm, v. 5, he makes himself a sinner, and says: he is punished because
of sin; which cannot be according to the divine nature. Again, when no
angel nor creature should speak, he often speaks with the high majesty
of the Word, and yet in the least weak form and shape, as he walked on
earth; as John 6:62: \"How if you see the Son of Man ascending to where
he was before?\"

266 Yes, everything that the Scriptures speak of Christ, they speak in
such a way that they describe the whole person.

1\) In the original: \"human word\". Instead of \"word\", which is an
accidental repetition of the just preceding \"word\", the Wittenberg
inserted \"nature\".

as if both God and man were one and the same being, and often the words
are confused in such a way that both are said of every nature for the
sake of personal unity, which is called communicationem idiomatum, that
one may say: The man Christ is God\'s eternal Son, through whom all
creatures were created, and a Lord of heaven and earth 2c. Again,
Christ, the Son of God, that is, the person who is truly God, was
conceived and born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate,
was crucified and died; item, the Son of God sits at table with tax
collectors and sinners, washes the disciples\' feet. This he does not do
according to the divine nature; but still, because the same person does
this, it is rightly said that God\'s Son does this. Thus Paul says 1
Cor. 2, 8: \"If they had known it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory 2)\" 2c., and Christ Himself Joh. 6, 62: \"How, when ye
shall see the Son of man ascended before him?\" This is actually said of
the divine nature, which alone has been with the Father from eternity;
and yet is also said of the person, as truly man.

267 And summa, what this person, Christ, speaks and does, both true God
and true man speak and do, so that all his words and works always remain
on the whole person, and are not thus torn apart from each other, as if
he were not true God, or not true man, but so that the nature is
recognized and believed differently. For if one wants to speak of them
actually and differently, one must say: God is a different nature than
man; and the human nature is not from eternity, like the divine; so the
divine is not born in time, nor has it died, like the human, and yet
they are both mixed together in the person, so that it is One Christ,
and of him it may be said: Man is God; and man is he who created all
things.

268\. just as in a natural, clean human being, body and soul are two
different things.

2\) In the Wittenberg is added here: \"or glory\".

384 **Erl. 4S, 1S8-140. Sermon on Joh. 14, 16. W. VIII, 167-170.** 385

The two natures are one person or one man, and both nature, work, and
office are said of the whole man. For thus is every man spoken of: Man
eats and drinks, feeds, sleeps, wakes, walks and stands, works, etc.,
which he does not do according to the soul, but only the body, and yet
is said of the whole person, who has body and soul. For he is a man, not
of the body alone, but both of the body and of the soul. Again, it is
also said of him: Man thinks, writes poetry, learns. For according to
reason or soul he can become a teacher or master, judge, counselor,
ruler, which the body, nor the limb of the body, gives him. And yet one
says, \"This is a skilful head, sensible, learned, wise, eloquent,
artistic. Thus it is said of a woman, \"The mother bears, gives birth
to, or nurses the child,\" although she is not called a mother by her
soul, but only by her body; yet this is given to the whole female
person. Item, if one strikes a man before the head, one says: This one
has struck Hansen or Greta. Thus, if a limb is injured or wounded, it is
called the whole person wounded.

269 I say this for the sake of a rough comparison, so that it may be
understood how in the person of Christ the two natures must be divided
differently, and yet the person must be left whole and 1) unseparated,
so that what Christ speaks and does, both God and man have spoken and
done, and yet each according to the One nature. Whoever keeps such a
distinction can safely and rightly drive, so that he will not be misled
by the heretics\' erroneous thoughts, which come solely from the fact
that they do not rightly join together what belongs together and is one,
or do not rightly separate and divide from one another what should be
distinguished.

270\. Therefore, we are to stick to the Scripture speech and word, and
keep and confess the article thus, that this Christ is true God, through
whom all things were created and exist; and again, the same Christ, Son
of God, is born of the virgin and dies on the cross 2c. Item, the mother

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

Mary does not bear, give birth to, suckle and nourish man alone, or
flesh and blood, for that would be a separate person; but she bears and
nourishes a Son, who is the Son of God. Therefore, she is not only
called the mother of man, but also the mother of God. Just as the
ancient fathers taught this against the Nestorians, who wanted to make a
point that Mary should not be called the Mother of God, and did not want
to say that she had given birth to the Son of God.

271\) Against this we must say how our faith is: I believe in Jesus
Christ, the only Son of God the Father, our Lord, born of Mary the
Virgin, suffered, crucified and died, 2c. always the same only Son of
God, our Lord; that it is truly said: Mary is the true mother of the
right true God; and the Jews have crucified not only the Son of man, but
also the true Son of God. For I do not want 2) such a Christ, in whom I
should believe and call as my Savior, who is a true man; otherwise I
lead to the devil. For pure flesh and blood could not blot out sin,
reconcile God and take away his wrath, overcome and destroy death and
hell, nor give eternal life. Item, because the angels in heaven worship
Him and call Him their Lord, lying in the manger, as they say to the
shepherds Luc. 2, 11: \"To you is born the Savior, who is 3) Christ the
Lord\" 2c., so He must be true God. For the angels do not worship mere
flesh or human nature, therefore both God and man must be with each
other in this person; and when one calls Christ, one calls an undivided
person, who is both God and man, so that whoever sees, hears, or meets
Christ with the faith of the heart, certainly does not meet man alone,
but the true God, so that one does not leave God sitting idly up in
heaven among the angels, but down here, lying in the manger and in the
bosom of the mother. And summa, where this person is met, that there
certainly the divine majesty is met.

272 This is for the purpose, as is often said, that we can fight against
the devil.

2\) Wittenberger: \"will and desire\".

3\) \"which is\" is missing in the Erlanger.

> 13

[386 Erl. 49, HO-I4S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
170-172. 387]{.underline}

and overcome him in the throes of death and other hardships when he
terrifies us with sin and hell. For if he were to accuse me of seeing
Christ as a righteous man, crucified and dead for me, I would be lost;
but if I attach the treasure and the weight to the fact that Christ,
both true God and man, died for me, 2c. that weighs and beats far above
all sin, death, hell and all sorrow and heartache. For when I know that
he who is truly God suffered and died for me; and again, that same true
man rose from the dead, ascended to heaven, 2c., then I can certainly
conclude that my sin and death through him has been redeemed and
overcome, and now there is no wrath nor disfavor with God against me,
because in this person I see and hear nothing but a vain sign and work
of grace.

273 Behold, therefore, learn to understand this article, that this
person of Christ may be wholly retained, and the work of both natures
may be intertwined, although the natures are distinct. For according to
the divine nature, he was not born of man, nor was anything taken from
the virgin. And it is true that God is the Creator, but man is a
creature; but here they are joined together in One Person, and are now
called God and man One Christ; that Mary bore a Son, and the Jews
crucified such a Person, who is God and man. Otherwise, if he were only
man (as other saints), he would not be able, with all his holiness,
blood and death, to take away one sin from us, or to extinguish one drop
of the infernal fire.

This is our art, doctrine, and consolation from the Scriptures which we
have from Christ, though it is regarded as mere foolishness in the sight
of the world and of sharp reason. But let others be wise in their
God\'s, the devil\'s, name, and have heartache with their untimely
grammatica and rhetorica, if they want to master the Scriptures with it
and tear them apart, or ever make them void. They are poor grammarians
who want to speak and judge these high things from their art. Other
people belong to them than these 1) Vocabulists and

1\) Erlanger: such.

Grammarians, that is, who have often wrestled and devoured with sin and
death, or bitten and fought with the devil. Let them teach their rule,
how to speak Latin rightly, and interpret their poets, jurists, medicos,
and there be wise and learned, as in their craft; but of these things we
will have none to judge, for they have tried and experienced what force
this article has.

They are morose, unhappy spirits, who have never been in any battle, nor
tasted anything of spiritual things, and yet want to be masters of the
Scriptures out of their heads, and judge such high things. Just as they
do in other matters, with baptism, the gospel, and the sacrament. Water
is water, they say, bread is bread! What can such things help the soul?
What is it more that the preacher says, but a perishable breath 2c.?
They think they have shown great skill in bringing forth such things
from their children\'s school, that water is not called fire. But if
they had ever experienced baptism, sacrament, and the power and effect
of the oral word, they would keep their mouths shut.

I have, praise God, experienced a little what this article is and is
able to do, and have preserved it before other spirits, who are more
learned and wiser in the smallest finger than all such grammarians, and
have also experienced that this article has remained for over a thousand
years against all the pointed heads and devils in hell who have opposed
it; it shall also remain well before all. Therefore let us do the Holy
Spirit so much honor that he may be more learned and wiser than we with
our childish art, and keep this article pure and true according to the
Scriptures.

**And he shall give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you
for ever.**

He speaks all this for the greater and greater comfort of his beloved
Christians, so that they will not be so frightened or despondent at what
they will encounter after his bodily departure, because he shows enough
how they will fare, namely, that they are set on earth to endure, not
only the world, which hates and despises them, but also the world, which
hates and despises them.

388 **Erl. tg, its-145. Sermon on John 14:16. W. VIII, I72-N5.** 389

They not only follow the devil and put on all kinds of heartaches, but
also the devil and their own heart and conscience, which feels its sin
and weakness, and everywhere they are so miserable and forsaken in the
world that they find no comfort anywhere, and would even have to
despair, both in the world and on their behalf, if they were not
especially sustained by strong divine comfort from heaven. The world
lives freely and securely, without fear and terror, respects neither
God\'s wrath nor mercy, and has no need of comfort; but this poor little
group, who are called and baptized to believe in Christ and remain with
him, are in great need of a comforter to strengthen and sustain them, so
that they can bear and endure such things.

Therefore, because I am now departing from you (he says) and can no
longer be visibly with you, and now it will come about that you will
have to suffer, I still do not want to leave you so that you should be
abandoned and without comfort. Until now you have had joy and comfort in
me, but that has only been a temporal and physical comfort, which would
have to end without that. For I cannot be with you forever like this, if
I am to come to my glory in another way and spread my kingdom through
you. So that this may happen soon, I must die and go to heaven, leaving
you behind me. But you shall not be forsaken for this reason, but shall
have the consolation that I will ask of the Father and create for you
another Comforter, who will not, like me, be with you only for a time,
but will remain with you forever, and comfort you much more than I have
done through my bodily presence. And this shall begin as soon as after
my death and resurrection, and not cease until I take you to myself 2c.

279 So now he begins to preach about the Holy Spirit, who was to be
given to Christianity, and by whom it was to be preserved until the last
day. And here it is especially to be noted how the Lord Christ speaks so
kindly and comfortingly to all poor, sorrowful hearts and fearful,
stupid consciences, and shows us how we may rightly know the Holy Spirit
and receive His consolation.

that they should be. For with this he looks askance at everything that
would frighten Christians and cause them to mourn, as if to say, \"I
know that the world, the devil and your own conscience will frighten and
afflict you, but do not be afraid, for you should know that I will not
frighten you nor afflict you, nor will my Father, but whoever does it,
whether he bears my name or the Father\'s, it is surely the devil.

280 For here it is determined that he will pray to the Father, and so
pray, that he will not terrify us, nor cast us into hell; but that he
will give another Comforter, and such a Comforter as is with us for
ever, and will do nothing for us, but strengthen and comfort us without
ceasing. Now there is no doubt that the Lord Christ\'s prayer is
certainly heard, and the Father does everything that he asks of him;
therefore it does not have to be God\'s will and opinion that wants to
frighten and afflict us. For Christ does not do it, as he proves both
with words and works everywhere. Neither does the Father, who has one
heart and will with Christ. Neither does the Holy Spirit, for he is and
should be called (as Christ calls and paints him here) a Comforter. Now
everyone understands what this word means, comfort and comforter; that
one cannot shrink from it or be afraid of it, but it is the very thing
that a miserable heart desires most of all.

Therefore we must come to know and believe the Holy Spirit as he models
and describes him to us, namely, that he is not a spirit of wrath and
terror, but a spirit of grace and consolation, and thus the whole
Godhead shows vain consolation, that both the Father wants to comfort,
for he gives the Holy Spirit, the Son comforts, for he asks for it; and
the Holy Spirit himself is to be the Comforter. Therefore here is ever
no wrath, gloom nor terror over the Christians, but vain kindly laughter
and sweet consolation in heaven and on earth. Why this? Because you have
enough executioners and masters of the stocks to frighten and torment
you, and because you believe in me, preach about me and confess me. The
devil will not let you rest with his terrors and plagues, and the world
will come to an end.

390 Eri. 4s, I4S-I47. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
ns-178. 391

and take you by the head, murdering one and chasing the other out to the
country, so that you will have devils enough, even without all the
devils and torments of hell; and your own heart and conscience, which
lies there and groans, \"Woe is me, a poor sinner, and I have not lived
and done what a Christian should do! I will not give you such things,
nor ask for them, but that an everlasting Comforter may be given to you,
which shall be the Holy Spirit Himself, who shall be able to strengthen
and help you in all your mourning, anguish, and distress, that you may
overcome it, and be delivered from it.

282 You should certainly pray to the Father and to me, and expect that
when you, as Christians who believe in me and hold fast to me, suffer or
are challenged, whether by the devil or by your conscience, the Holy
Spirit will be your comforter, saying into your heart, \"Be undaunted
and do not fear, for you have been baptized and believe in Christ.
Spirit will be your comforter, and thus speak into your heart: Be
fearless, and do not be afraid, for you have been baptized, and believe
in Christ; therefore you must not be afraid, neither of the devil with
all his angels in hell, nor of your own thoughts, and worry how you are
with God, but do not think otherwise than how God\'s wrath and all hell
are extinguished. As it is in truth for those who believe, even though
they still feel sin and weakness. For this is the very reason the
Comforter is promised and sent, that he should comfort them against such
terror and fear.

283 Thou shalt not be afraid of the world, of tyrants, or of any who
would take from thee honor and goods, and the neck thereof, for
Christ\'s sake. For though they take all these things from thee, yet
here thou hast much more treasure, which the devil and the world shall
never take from thee; and because thou hast this Comforter, together
with the Father and Christ, thou hast all that thou shalt desire.
Therefore only confidently puff up your heart, and defiantly despise
everything that looks at you, and say: Now I will be undaunted, if the
devil and all the world were much more wicked.

So let the Christians be skillful, to whom also this alone is preached.
To the rest of the rough, nefarious crowd, who do not respect God\'s
word, or who knowingly persecute it, and are sure of it, it would be
better for them to have

They are afraid and flee from a rustling leaf, as the Scripture says and
proclaims will happen to them one day. For it is always the case that
those who should fear and be afraid, yes, nothing but weeping and
wailing, are cheerful and of good cheer, and do not let anything be
contested that is threatened against them by God\'s wrath, yes, they
mock and laugh at it in the most derisive way; but again, those who
should be cheerful and have no cause to fear and be afraid, they feel
the terror the most, and can never be comforted enough 2c. Therefore he
has to wake them up and always make such a promise: Only hold fast to me
with faith and confession, and remain my dear disciples, and there will
be no need, I will provide you with comfort enough; be it sin, death,
hell, the devil, the world, then I will be with you, with the Holy
Spirit, who will be comfort enough for you.

If I know that both Christ and the Father, together with the Holy
Spirit, comfort me so warmly, what will I ask for that the devil is
angry with me? If he will not cease from wrath and terror, I say, let
him go down from the wall, or put him in his downwad, 1) and hang it
upon his neck. For what should I fear, if I have this Lord, who promises
me, 2) if I believe in him, that I shall have the Holy Spirit with me as
my Helper and Comforter, and with him also the Father and the Son,
because the Father himself sends and gives this Comforter, the Son asks,
the Holy Spirit comes? Because the Father, Son and Holy Spirit want to
be praised, recognized and honored as the ones who comfort me, all
angels and creatures must laugh at this, or, if they do not want to
laugh, they must be angry in vain: That when all the world and devils
are angry and sour, yea, death and hell want to devour me, that I may
cheerfully despise it, yea, mock and defy it, and thus make a change,
that what wants to grieve and frighten me, must become great joy and
comfort, yea, everything must become sugar and malvasia.

286 For what is the devil, death, and all the

1\) \"Niederwad\" is probably as much as \"Bruch\" - pants. Cf.
Tischreden, Cap. 24, s SS. Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 734.

2\) Wittenberger: says.

392 **Eri. 4S, 147-IIS. Sermon on Joh. 14, 16. W. VIII, 178-1SI.** 393

things, against the eternal, almighty Majesty, God the Father, Son and
Holy Spirit, who at the same time are and will be called our Comforter?
For if he who is sent is called a Comforter, then both he who sends him
and he through whom he is sent must be the same Comforter, so that
surely there is no other God but a Comforter; and whoever wants to know
God from now on and call him by his right name, let him be called a
Comforter; or, as Paul Rom. 15:5. Let him be called a \"God of comfort\"
to those who are afraid and have no other comfort, so that they may have
no other thought of God than that he is a comforter of the miserable and
the afflicted, and both the devil, who is threatening with God\'s wrath
and hell, and their own heart lie, saying, \"You are a false lying
spirit,\" and to their heart, \"You are a false, unintelligent heart.
Just as the prophet David saith Psalm 42:6, 12: \"Why art thou
grieved, 1) my soul? 2c. and why art thou so sad?\" 2c. As if he should
say, \"Why do you afflict me without a cause?\" and turns around quickly
from sadness, takes comfort, and says, \"Wait on God, for I will thank
him to help me with his gracious face.\" Thy thoughts (he wants to say)
are lies and false, for thou makest me of GOD a terrible judge or
stickmaster, who yet is a kind father and comforting LORD. Go with your
anger and terror to the godless tyrants and others who are safe there
and do not ask anything about God; there you belong, and leave me
unconvinced, for I believe in my Lord Christ, who died for me and rose
again, and who asks and sends me the Holy Spirit and Comforter from the
Father, both of them. Therefore, be undaunted, let it go as it may; even
if it all falls in one heap, and thunder and lightning strike, let it
fall, tear and break, where my Lord and God remains, there I also
remain.

But blessed is he who knows and can do this. For there is still a lack
of it. For the devil is still too powerful with us, the world is too
strong, and we see so many obstacles and troubles before our eyes that
we forget about them and cannot grasp the fact that God will bring us
comfort in the

1\) \"you\" is missing in the Erlanger.

heart. For we feel only that which grieves us; this is so strong, and
occupies man so completely, that he cannot remember these words.
Therefore it is called an art for the Christians, who should learn to
rise above all terror and mourning, fear and woe, and say, like the
prophet: \"Why are you so sad? 2c. The feeling and sorrow is there, I
know it well (says Christ), and for this very reason I tell you
beforehand, that you should not follow such feeling, nor believe your
thoughts, but my word. For I will pray the Father, and he by my petition
shall surely give you the Holy Ghost to comfort you: and ye may be sure
that I love you; even so the Father, and the Holy Ghost which is sent.

Yes, your heart says against it: You have not lived rightly, and are
full of sin. That is, alas, all too true. What then? Oh, you must go to
hell, says the devil. No, God does not want that; there go the devil and
the evil world. For my Lord Christ says no, that the Father will not be
angry with me, but will give the Comforter, and he will come to me as he
asks; and so they are of one mind, that they will not frighten me nor
grieve me, much less cast me out and condemn me, but will comfort me and
make me blessed.

See, this is why the Lord Christ takes care of His Christians so
faithfully and diligently, and would gladly imagine 2) that they would
have comfort enough, and that they would come to know both His and the
Father\'s heart and mind, that He would not be otherwise disposed toward
them, nor would He want them to be otherwise, than that they should be
comforted, and that the work and ministry of the Holy Spirit, for which
He is sent by the Father, is nothing else than that He comforts them and
calls them to be fearless. And if they are comforted by God\'s word,
that they may regard and accept it as such, that such comfort certainly
comes from the Holy Spirit, and that both God the Father\'s and the Lord
Christ\'s consolation fei.

290 This is now rightly taught of the Holy Spirit, that he is called a
\"Comforter\", and

2\) \"wohl\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

394 Erl. tg, I4S-4SI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
I81-18L. 395

This is his nature, office, and attribute. For of his divine nature or
substantia we will not now sharply dispute, as the word \"Comforter\" is
a personal word; to this belongs that he is a distinct person. For
because he says, \"The Father shall send you another Comforter,\" he
shows that he is a distinct person, not the Father nor the Son. But that
he is also God, or in one being with the Father and the Son, we shall
see further in chapter 15. Now it is enough to learn from this and to
notice that he is called a comforter, and this for our sake. For for his
Godhead he is with the Father and the Son in an undivided divine
essence; but to us he is called a Comforter, so that this name is no
other, neither a revelation nor a knowledge of what is to be thought of
the Holy Spirit, namely, that he is a Comforter. But \"Comforter\" does
not mean Moses or a lawyer, who frightens with devil, death and hell,
but who makes a sorrowful heart laugh and rejoice against God, and means
you to be of good cheer, when sin is forgiven, death is strangled,
heaven is open, and God laughs at you.

Whoever could grasp this definition would already have won, and would
find and see nothing but vain consolation and joy in heaven and earth.
For since the Father sends this Comforter, and Christ asks for it, it
will certainly not be done out of anger, but must flow from genuine
fatherly and heartfelt love. Therefore a Christian should learn here
with diligence to make this title or name of the Holy Spirit useful to
him, that he may be a Comforter, and that we may be the afflicted and
the stupid whom he is to comfort. As he is then called the Comforter of
all the wretched, not of us only, but of all that are in the whole
world. As he also says here that he is to be such a comforter, abiding
forever with Christendom.

Just as in the world there always remains vain hatred, persecution,
trouble, and all kinds of misfortune, so that a Christian must finally
grow weary and tremble; as it has often happened to me that the devil
has so examined me through the world and my conscience that my breath
and life have become too short. How he now does not cease nor desist
from

and make us weary with sin and death, so let not the Holy Spirit cease
to comfort the heart against it and to inspire courage, so that we may
overcome such things and say (as the prophet David says in Ps. 118:17):
\"Now I will live, and not die,\" when I have felt more than a thousand
deaths. I still want to be righteous and holy before God, when I feel
all the sin of the world upon me. I still want to go to heaven and be
blessed, if you open your infernal dragon much wider. For my Lord Christ
is not my enemy, nor the Father, nor the Holy Spirit, because they all
contribute at the same time that I may have the consolation which the
Father sends, the Son asks, the Holy Spirit himself brings.

293 Let the Christians do this for their consolation forever, against
all the confidence, fear and dread that they feel and see, so that they
do not look at it, but keep this word, in which the Lord promises to
send them the Comforter, and has already done so, and is still doing so,
until the end of the world.

294 But it is also necessary to practice and become accustomed to it.
For it is well preached and heard, but the flesh is too disobedient that
it will not let the heart receive it. And the evil habit helps greatly,
because we are made to think of both Christ and the Father as a terrible
judge and tyrant, and the Holy Spirit as a worker, and we are not taught
otherwise than that we should reconcile him by our work. Thus the
nature, which without this is inclined, and such a habit has been beaten
together, and from it has become a twofold nature, that this doctrine of
consolation can hardly stick with us, and the mud has gone through so
deeply and so completely that it cannot even be swept out, and always
remains more of terror (also against God Himself) than of consolation.

Therefore, we must always fight against it, and learn from it that we
may nevertheless begin to feel a taste of this comfort, and learn to
have a right, heartfelt confidence in God. Until now, the names Father,
Son and Holy Spirit have been used under the papacy.

1\) Erlanger: to.

396 **Erl. tg, IS1-IS4. Sermon on Joh. 14, 16. 17. W. VIII, 183-186.**
397

and have much investigated and discussed the divine essence, but have
had only the shells of it; no one has experienced the use and benefit of
it, so that one could have known it to comfort oneself. Therefore, let
us thank God for it, and diligently keep the doctrine, and fight against
our nature and shameful habit, which alone is inclined to sorrow,
mourning and grief, as the world is inclined to security and
presumption.

296\. Therefore Christ also speaks in this way, to show that he does not
preach to the world, nor to those who are previously joyful and secure
in their being, but to those who are challenged and afflicted, both by
themselves and the devil, together with the world, that they too may
lift up their hearts and be joyful, and not follow their thoughts, but
his word, that he, as our mediator and bishop, will always pray, and the
Father, according to his request, will give us, and the Holy Spirit
himself will come and be with us forever with his comfort. Since we know
that God Himself and all the angels laugh with us, what are we afraid
of? Shall we be afraid of our own star? 1) We have no cause to fear or
mourn, but only to rejoice and be glad against the world, the devil and
all evil, if only we could believe it. This is the first part of this
sermon, about the Holy Spirit. Now follow on from this:

**V. 17: The spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, for it
neither sees nor knows it.**

297 Not only is the Holy Spirit a comforter who makes Christians defiant
and courageous against all kinds of terrors, but he is also a \"spirit
of truth,\" that is, a true, certain spirit who does not stray nor lack.
For this also belongs to it, that they become bold and fearless. For
there must not be such a foolish 2) mind, thirst and defiance, as there
is of the foolish men of war.

1\) In the old editions: \"Shall we fear for our own star?\" Perhaps it
is as much as \"to be afraid of his scheme,\" which we find in a similar
context in the interpretation of the 111th Psalm. Walch, old edition,
vol. V, 1574,? 63 to end.

2\) \"stupid\" here as much as: wrong.

and daredevils who joyfully tread against the swords, spears and rifles.
This is also a joyfulness, but a false comfort and defiance, for it
relies either on its own strength or on vain honor and glory. Therefore
there is a spirit, but not a real true spirit.

For the evil spirit can also blow people out, make them bold and
courageous, as can be seen in his tyrants and mobs, who are too joyful
and defiant; but it is not the courage and defiance that is right and
good in the sight of God. But Christ promises to give us a spirit that
will make us so courageous that it will be called a godly, holy courage
and defiance; therefore it should be called a righteous, true comfort
and courage, which is not false, nor vain, nor defiant of what is
uncertain, but basically righteous and relying on such a thing as is not
lacking nor faithful.

The world has its defiance and. Courage, when it has bags and chests
full; there is 3) such pride and defiance that the devil could not
perish with a rich peasant. Another defies his nobility and power, favor
and honor among the people. If someone is clever or 4) wise, he defies
on his head, and tears through with it, so that no one can resist him,
and no one wants to give way to the other, who has more power, honor,
art, money or goods. But if you look at it right, it is nothing but a
fool\'s or child\'s defiance, which has no endurance.

The consolation and defiance of Christianity (as the Holy Spirit makes
it) should be that it may be constant and for a right reason, and that
it may please God and His angels from the heart. Just as one reads of
the holy martyrs, how they defied tyrants, torture and suffering; as
also the young virgins, Agnes and Agatha, who, when they went to prison
and to death, were so confident and joyful that they let themselves be
thought, and also boasted, that they went to the wedding. Dear daughter,
if you can do the art of going to prison and being beheaded, if you have
gone to the dance, then there must truly be a different heart, mind and
soul.

3\) Wittenberger: is a.

4\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: and.

[398 **Erl. 49, IS4-ISS,** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 188-I8S.** 399]{.underline}

Courage, because the world has it, which can destroy life and limb,
nobility and friendship, and all that the world has, and on which it
defies, so that such courage must surely be the work of the Holy Spirit
alone, and the heartfelt favor of the heavenly Father, where there is
such a heart, which will surely and firmly lock, and remain on it: I
will not forsake the Lord Christ; let him therefore be angry who will
not laugh, but for his sake cheerfully suffer what I can.

301 And is called a godly, or Holy Spirit defiance and arrogance. For it
does not grow in blood and flesh, as can be seen in those who fall away
from or deny the gospel out of fear. Thus the world is neither able to
have nor to give such courage. For its defiance stands and goes no
further than what it sees, good, favor, great honor; and where that
ceases, where it defies (as it must all cease), then courage also
ceases, and there is nothing left but despair.

\(302\) But Christians have nothing to rely upon but Christ their Lord
and God, that they should forsake all things for his sake, saying,
Before I deny or forsake my Christ, I will forsake my neck and belly, my
honor and estate, my house and court, my wife and child, and all things.
Therefore such courage cannot be false nor deceive, but must be
righteous and sure. For he does not take comfort in any temporal or
perishable thing on earth, because he wants to do and suffer such
things, but holds only on to the Lord Christ, who was crucified and died
for us. Therefore he must certainly say to him, as he promises here,
\"Because you confess me, you have the advantage and this comfort and
glory, that such defiance 1) and pride shall certainly not deceive you;
therefore he is called a spirit of truth. All other defiance and pride
is a spirit of lies, or a false spirit that cannot please God. But what
a Christian does and suffers in faith in the Lord Christ is true and
righteous, and is called right and well done, and can truthfully and
cheerfully boast that it pleases God and all the angels; and 2) is
certain of things, that he will not be deceived.

1\) Jenaer: Consolation.

2\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

Fear neither devil nor world, nor be terrified of any dread or terror.

Therefore let it be no small comfort to thee. For there is nothing on
earth that can so comfort in adversity as when the heart is certain of
its own affairs. For where it is uncertain and doubts, it cannot
maintain courage and 3) defiance. But here the consolation is certain:
What I suffer, I suffer not because of 4) my evil, or for the sake of a
worldly thing, that I hoped for good or honor and praise from it; but it
is no other thing that is put before me, but that I believe in the Lord
Christ, and will confess his word.

304 For what have our tyrants now, who afflict and chase away their poor
people, to bring up against them? For none of them can say that they are
hostile to us because of public sin and vice (which they can very well
overlook and excuse in them and in their crowd), or that we have taken
anything from them, stolen or robbed them, or that we have done anything
else wrong, but must say that they have much good from us and enjoy our
gospel well. Why then are they so murderously hostile to us? Only
because we hold to this doctrine, and stand on the fact that we are not
saved by our own work, monasticism, masses, and holy service, but only
through this Christ. There you will find truth and righteousness, and a
certain heart and courage, so that we do not teach or live unjustly or
falsely. Who then will fear or despair, because he is sure that they can
attribute nothing else to us, but that we believe and teach the very
thing that the children also pray in their creed, namely, this principal
thing, that we are saved through Christ?

\(305\) Therefore I cannot be terrified or afraid of such, but must
despise them, saying, Go away, and be only wicked; if ye will not laugh
in God\'s name, be angry in all your lords\' names; and the more
wickedly ye do it, and rage with wrath and malice, the more I will be
merry and laugh. For I know of a certainty, even from their own
confession, that they do not afflict us for any other cause, than that
we should have the

3\) Erlanger: still.

4\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: um.

5\) Erlanger: \"und wollet\".

400 **Erl. 49, 15S-ISS. Sermon on Joh. 14, 17. W. VIII, 188-191.** 401

Preach the gospel. Because these things happen to us for Christ\'s sake
alone, he also gives the Spirit (as he promised), who does not deceive,
but is righteous and endures forever before God and everyone.

306\. So we have the comforting assurance and certain defiance that what
we (as Christians) speak, do and suffer must be truth and from the
spirit of truth; And again, everything that is done and spoken, preached
and done contrary to this must be false and lies before God, no matter
how great the pretense and pretense, as if it were pure truth, the
greatest holiness and spirituality, and the world fights with all its
might to maintain this, and blasphemes and rages against us in the most
horrible way. For our doctrine and actions are not based on ourselves,
nor are they about us, but all about this Lord Christ, from whom we have
everything, and for whose sake we preach, live and suffer. Since all
this is done for his sake, let him also take care of it, who says he
will bring it forth, and give it the spirit or courage to stand; and
what he does through his Christianity, let it be pure truth and
certainty.

**Whom the world cannot receive, for it neither beholds Him nor knows
Him.**

This is also part of the consolation of Christianity. For when they look
around into the wide world, because there are innumerable others who
despise, blaspheme and persecute our doctrine, and not bad, lowly
people, but mostly the most knowledgeable, most learned, most powerful,
and also those who want to be the most pious and most holy; this pushes
a weak heart before the head, so that it begins to think: Should such
great people all at once err, and everything be wrong and condemned,
what they do and say, set and conclude? Against this, he hereby makes
the judgment clear and concise, that we should be certain that it cannot
be otherwise, and concludes that they cannot understand it, nor can they
wait or hope that the great multitude, which are the greatest, noblest,
best, and the right core of the world, should have the truth.

308 That is to say, strongly condemned, and everything made into lies,
which the world boasts of for lukewarm

ter truth. What shall I say much, he says, they cannot and may not have
the spirit of truth, but are of the devil\'s lying spirit, though they
boast much and great, and cry: Here is the church, God\'s Word and
Spirit, holy fathers and concilia 2c. For if they boast long, they boast
against me; and though they confess and boast the faith of Christ with
their mouths, yet they deny it (as St. Paul says \[Titus 1:16\]) in
substance and in deed. For the work shows that they are lying, because
they do not want to suffer that he alone is our only mediator before
God, and that he alone saves from sin and death, and that our work and
deeds are not able to do this. For against this they have their doctrine
of the sacrifice of the Mass, monasticism, holy intercession, and want
to preserve and defend it by force.

309 What would be confessed, if I would accept and praise a prince as my
lord, and yet not hear his letter and seal, or not suffer his command,
but, notwithstanding, say against it and do what I would? That would be
a fine magistrate for me, who would sit there in the principality and
say: I am the prince\'s subject, and consider him my lord; but what he
calls me, that I will leave. No, dear man, it is not so, that you would
do what you please, and let what I call you, and yet say that it is your
lord\'s command. Let the devil suffer that from you. So these read the
Bible, pray the Lord\'s Prayer, profess faith, praise the Holy Spirit,
but it is all false and lies, because they do not have Him and do not
know Him, because they do not want to accept His teaching and preaching.

What is the cause of such a difference that they do not also have the
Holy Spirit? What are we better than they? Are they not pious and holy
enough? Do they not do many good works? What is lacking in them that
they should not receive nor know the same Spirit? Nothing else, but (as
it is said) that we accept this man (the Lord Christ), and believe that
we are absolved of sins and saved by his blood alone, and have a
gracious God.

1\) Wittenberger: pure.

402 Erl. 49, 158-160. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
101-193. 403

have and keep; and will not hear from anyone else what can be called
that sins should be taken away, and God\'s grace remain with us. This
they will not and cannot do. For it is impossible, he says, that they
should receive him.

This means that in one word the great splendid glory of the pope and his
cardinals and bishops, who cry out: what their conciliation sets and
concludes must be kept and believed, because they have the Holy Spirit
and cannot err, is strongly and powerfully struck down. 2c. For Christ
here speaks a very dry and clear no to this, and teaches us to freely
judge and conclude (according to his word and judgment) about all
things, that it is not the truth of the Holy Spirit, but the lies of the
devil; because it is publicly seen and known that their doctrine does
not rhyme with the Gospel, but is contrary to Christ and the faith, and
is based on the work of men; and not only do they teach contrary to
Christ, but also horribly persecute and murder those who confess the
true doctrine. Therefore we must conclude that they are among the
multitude, of which Christ says here, who cannot receive the Holy
Spirit.

\(312\) Yes, that is even more (he says), they are so stubborn and blind
that they neither know him nor see him, although he thrusts into their
eyes with such power and force that one would like to grasp it and
cannot deny that it is the power of the Holy Spirit. Just as they saw in
the dear apostles, and later in the holy martyrs, the work of the Spirit
before their eyes, proving itself with miraculous signs, and overcoming
all kinds of suffering, torture and pain that could be inflicted on
them, with undaunted courage and heart, so that they had to say, \"It
could not be human or natural power and ability; yet they could not see
it with open, seeing eyes, but raged and raged against it as senseless,
possessed people, just as ours do now.

313 So we have the judgment (for our consolation) that we know that they
do not have the Holy Spirit, as they boast against us, nor can they have
or know; however much they see, hear, boast, and preach of Christ and
the Holy Spirit.

they do not know him. For there lie in their way the great logs and jags
of their self-conceit, which they alone follow, and want to be so clever
themselves, to find the truth in themselves and to find the way how they
should be saved, do enough for sin, and reconcile God through
themselves, and do not want to hear any other doctrine or master, nor do
they want to suffer. Therefore the Holy Spirit cannot have room or place
there, nor can he come into the heart or eyes before the great beams,
although he already stands there obviously and knocks everywhere; for
they are so completely drowned and blinded in their own thoughts that
they can neither hear nor see nor understand anything that is said about
Christ.

314 For this cause he comforted his own. As if to say, \"Be confident
and undaunted, even though you see and experience such things; you will
not succeed in making the world righteous. It is annoying and grievous
to see so many excellent, learned, high and wise people and the
beautiful great crowd striving and raging against God\'s word and the
public truth of the Holy Spirit; But you should know that it cannot be
otherwise, there must be many and great, mighty, wise, holy people, as
pope, emperor, princes, lords, doctors, noble, fine, honorable citizens,
both man and woman (against whom you are nothing) raging against my
word. Therefore do not turn away from it, even if you are alone. For you
hear that there is such a people that cannot see nor hear the spirit of
truth; even if one preaches to death, sings and sounds before their eyes
and ears, and paints before their noses in the clearest way, it still
does no good, they cannot receive this spirit, but remain 1) with their
lying spirit. Therefore, stay with the small group who gladly hear and
accept my word and have a certain spirit, and be unafraid if the other
group does not want to follow, and know that what you do in my name must
be right and good before God and all the angels, so that even the world
will finally have to confess and praise it without its thanks.

1\) Instead of: \"remain\", which is missing in the original, the
Wittenberg has: \"obey and follow\".

404 **Erl. 49, ISO-1K3. Sermon On John 14, 17. \' W. VIII, 193-196.**
405

In this sermon, Christ always looks aside at those who want to frighten,
stupefy and despair his small group, so that they will doubt and think:
\"Should you alone be wise, prudent and holy, and so many excellent
people be nothing, nor know anything? what should I do alone, or with so
few, and suffer persecution, and let so many high and excellent people
condemn me and give me to the devil? Well then, you must be prepared for
this, and not allow yourself to be challenged; but be sure that you have
the spirit of truth, which the others who persecute you are not worthy
of, and indeed cannot see or know, if they were much more learned, wiser
and higher people: and that your actions and being should be valid and
right and remain before God, and that theirs should be condemned. Just
as the epistle 1 John 2:27 says: \"As the anointing teaches you, it is
the truth\" and right, \"and not a lie\"; only that it all goes to this
man, Christ. For this is the test, which is the right spirit or spirit
of truth, as St. John also says in the same epistle \[Cap. 4:6\].
Therefore, if you are condemned and afflicted for this reason, do not
worry about it, and only be sure that your cause is right, and that your
glory and defiance are pleasing to God, and in his time will be revealed
to the whole world. So now he interprets it himself when he speaks:

**But ye know him; for he abideth with you 2c.**

How do they know and have the Holy Spirit to abide with them? Only
because, as has been said, they cling to Christ through faith and love
and value his word. Therefore, what they do, suffer and live is all the
doing and work of the Holy Spirit, and is called rightly and well lived,
done and suffered, and is vain and precious in the sight of God. This
will be recognized (he says), if it goes in my name, and is to be done
for me, so that the name of Christ makes the conflict, and the game
rises above it. As (praise God!) we now see and grasp, go before our
eyes. Therefore we also have comfort, even though we are poor and frail
people, and sinners at that. Even though for the sake of life we may be
able to stand against our enemies.

They can boast, and they have such rough pieces on them, as they blame
us, that they may well take up with us at once. But because it is for
the sake of the Lord Christ that we preach him and exalt him, we will
stand by him and stand against all the world, and let them give us the
glory, even without their thanks, that our spirit is the spirit of
truth, and we will fight it out with them, and set our heads against
theirs.

For our Lord also has steel and iron in his head, and marrow in his
fists and legs, so that he can endure it, as he has already done to many
who have worn out and broken their heads against him, and are still to
break them: but leave ours unbroken. For the devil also has a head, and
if he had been able, he would have long since overthrown Christ with his
whole kingdom. But I will preserve my spirit, that it may abide in you,
and rule, and live, and work, and do all things: and yet the world shall
not know him, neither 1) shall it resist him. Therefore only do not ask
for the: He may be great or small, little or much, and ye shall abide,
and they not; that and no other.

318 And with these words, He abideth with you, and shall be in you;
item, v. 18.I will not leave you orphans, I will come to you,\" the
Christian church or Christianity is assured, and has the certain promise
and strong comfort of Christ, that it shall not be without the Holy
Spirit until the end of the world; that one may and should know for
certain that nevertheless the Holy Spirit abides forever and without
end, and always has and keeps his Christianity on earth; as we also say
in faith: I believe in God the Father, and in 2) Jesus Christ our Lord,
and in the Holy Spirit 2c. For as Christ our Lord abideth, and is
believed on unto the end of the world, so also the Holy Ghost.\' And
because Christianity endures, and the last day does not come, this text
must also remain, and always be people who believe and confess it from
the heart, through the Holy Spirit. As then also the words of faith
further say: I believe a holy Christian

1\) Erlanger: \"doch\" instead of: dazu.

2\) \"an\" is missing in the Erlanger.

406 Eru 4\", IS3-1W. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
ISS-ISS. 407

Church 2c. It also does not perish because the world stands; just as the
following article: I believe forgiveness of sins, continues forever, and
must not cease until the day when it will be called 1) the resurrection
of the flesh, and eternal life; although both have already begun through
Christ and in Christ.

319 And this text is well to be remembered. For it is exceedingly
grievous and hard to believe and keep what is said and preached, because
there are so few of them that are Christians, and have the Holy Ghost
abiding with them, and dwelling in them, that it seemeth before all the
world to be a lie. And not only are the Christians few, but also, as few
as they are with whom he is, they have him so weakly, and so
dishonestly, that they themselves might almost doubt whether they have
the Holy Spirit, solely because of their weakness. 2) And the Holy
Spirit is not in them. Therefore it is necessary that they be
strengthened and assured that the Holy Spirit is and remains with them
this day, from the time of the apostles, and forever.

For as ours is little (they that believe), so the Holy Ghost maketh
Himself so marvelously weak and small, that the world stumbleth at it:
but they are strong, and as sure of their things as though they were
iron mountains. For the pope leads this text mightily and strongly, and
they are the people who cry out and boast against us that the Holy
Spirit is with them forever. Item: We are the Christian church; when we
come together and conclude or order something, that is the Holy
Spirit\'s order; for it is not to be believed that the church is astray
or lacking. And have become so great, strong, and certain of things from
this text, that they stand upon it as an iron wall, and have thereby
disturbed this article, which is our highest comfort and strength, and
have shamefully perverted and corrupted this text. For this we ourselves
must believe and say, that the Holy Spirit is with the church, and that
it certainly is and abideth on earth; for there is the article: I
believe a holy Christian church, a holy congregation 2c.

1\) Wittenberger: he.

2\) \"honest-gering, puny.

321\. Now there is a multitude, great and strong, who boast of this, and
have the great appearance that they are the heirs of the apostles, and
as long as Christendom reigns, they practice great holiness and worship:
And we, on the other hand, are so small and without all appearance and
prestige, and so stupid, that we ourselves cannot believe it strongly
enough, and we think the glory is too great, and we are too unworthy of
it, that we should take such courage as they have and boast that the
Holy Spirit is in us, and what we speak and do is the Holy Spirit\'s
speaking and doing; as they do. As soon as they conclude, set, condemn
or praise something, there is vain boasting and shouting: The Holy
Spirit has done this. But they do it not out of faith, but only because
there are many of them, and great mighty lords, cardinals, bishops,
kings, princes have done such things, so they defy and insist on it. If
it only gets the name that it is called the church, then they have good
reason to boast and to insist that the Holy Spirit is there. So we, on
the other hand, are only the small, little group, or individual,
abandoned, poor, miserable people, are condemned by them, must leave
them the glory and defiance, they do right and from the Holy Spirit 2c.

Now, what shall we do? Who wants to separate us here? Because we both
confess and say: Christianity is here on earth. That is certain, and the
Holy Spirit certainly abides with it; and so each part boasts that they
are. It is a matter of proving who is right. Now they have a great
advantage over us, that they have led and still lead the name and
appearance up to this point, and the world falls to them and believes
what they say, but we, on the other hand, have nothing of this kind of
which we could boast, and the world does not believe us. Nor must we be
sure of the matter against them, that the Holy Ghost is with us; or else
we must condemn ourselves, and fall unto them. Answer: Here Christ
Himself made the distinction when He said above \[v. 15\], \"If ye love
me, and keep my commandments,\" 2c. Thither we must look, and judge by
the same alone. For when the Holy Spirit comes, this alone is to be his
office (he says afterwards in chapter 16, v. 14), that he should preach
of me, and make me a preacher.

408 **Eri. 4S,-SS-IS7. Sermon on John 14:17. W. VIII, 199-SVI.** 409

transfigure. There you can certainly meet him and separate the right
Christians or church from the wrong ones. When therefore the Comforter
shall come, whom the Father shall give you through my intercession, ye
shall surely know him, and have him with you. Why is that? Because he
alone shall preach of me, and tell you all things that I have from the
Father, and ye shall speak the same publicly by your mouth. Therefore,
if you accept and practice such preaching, you certainly have and know
the Holy Spirit, who alone transfigures me through your mouth and
ministry.

323 Let us therefore see which preach rightly of Christ, and boast of
his baptism, sacrament, and gospel, which he hath given us; and it shall
be found that the great multitude which boasteth of the church and of
the Holy Ghost, which preacheth by them, are false preaching and false
spirits, and are the church and vessel of the devil, whether they cover
themselves with the name of God, of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, and
of Christendom, and adorn themselves with it. For thus it is found in
the papacy, thus they have believed and taught, and 1) we bear witness
to it, who have thus experienced it and have thus believed and taught
with them, and thus it is also still written in their books, thus we
also still believe and teach: If a man has been baptized and falls again
into sin, then baptism (and thus also Christ) is lost, and does not come
to his aid. Because the same baptism has become unclean, he must have a
new baptism. Therefore he must go to a monastery, or give and endow so
much to the church, keep so much mass, or have it kept, buy the good
works and intercession of the monks, do such and such penance and enough
2c. that the 2) sins are forgiven him. They cannot deny this, for we are
the living testimony, along with their own 3) books, and their living
deeds. books, and their living deeds, that they condemn, persecute and
murder us (if they no longer want to keep and teach such things) 2c.
Yes, already this doctrine of the Gospel, which teaches that through
Christ we receive forgiveness of sins and are saved, and not by our work
or monasticism, has condemned us in their Concilio. But for the sake of
this

1\) Wittenberger: \"the\" instead of: and.

2\) Wittenberger: his.

3\) selb \-- own.

We are blasphemed and condemned by those who want to be called the
Christian church and holy conciliarity, which is ruled by the Holy
Spirit, because of our preaching about Christ, which is so dry and pure
that all salvation must be built on Him alone, and apart from Him we
neither have nor know any glory or defiance of the same.

324 Therefore, think and send thyself, that thou mayest say: If a
thousand times so many great, holy conciliators, popes and bishops had
so decided and ordered, and still so highly and gloriously praised the
church and the Holy Spirit\'s name, it is nevertheless a lie and of the
devil; for they preach and teach differently than Christ, and show other
ways to heaven, and invent other ranks, orders, 4) works, so that holy
baptism, gospel and Christ become vain. Yes, they are so insolent that
they may boast that they have much higher works and orders than baptism,
and can do much more than God has commanded, making counsels out of
God\'s commandments that are only for the perfect; without which other
abominations and errors are innumerable more. Thus the whole papacy
stands on vain lies and denial of the Lord Christ, that it must not be
the Holy Spirit, but the devil\'s own teaching, and is vainly cursed and
damned (as St. Paul Gal. 1, 8. speaks the judgment), even if angels from
heaven teach such things. 5)

They still go through with iron heads and hearts, persecuting us, if
they do not let everything be right and help defend us. So sure and
unafraid are they by their spirit, the devil, yet in the name of God and
the Holy Spirit. And we are so lacking that we cannot boast so joyfully,
gladly and fearlessly (that we are certain that we have Christ\'s word
and promise) and say: I have been baptized, I know that, and washed and
watered in Christ\'s blood; therefore I am certainly holy through him.
Item: I am in the right state and office, and do what I am commanded, so
I can be sure that the Holy Spirit is and remains in me, and the works
are done in the Holy Spirit. But the devil is so powerful there, driving
them, that

4\) Erlanger: and.

5\) Wittenberger: \"an angel\.... taught\".

> 410 Erl. 4g, 167-169. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
> 201-201. 411

Interpretations about the evangelist John.

they are much more defiant from their accursed hypocrisy and lies,
because we on our certain eternal truth, can draw the comforting sayings
and glorious promises so strongly upon ourselves: We are the church, we
have the Holy Spirit; that a stupid conscience might be astonished at
this, and think, who knows? How can I not grasp and boast of such
things?

But this shall not terrify us. And only therefore undaunted; however
strong and defiant they are, and however weak we believe, yet we believe
it in the Lord Christ, and therefore suffer all things. Whether it is
weak is the fault of our flesh and blood, which is all too strong there,
because the devil has possessed and blinded them; but he challenges us,
and has our flesh and blood beforehand, so that we should not and cannot
conclude so surely and cheerfully that we are children of God and the
dwelling place of the Holy Spirit, and that everything we say and do, he
works in us according to God\'s word.

327 Moreover, such things are still attached to us from the same
Pabst\'s teaching. For although they defiantly boast, as it is said \[§
320\], that their being and doing is of the Holy Spirit, yet they
themselves cannot remain on this when it comes to the meeting that each
one should say for his person that he has the Holy Spirit, and that his
life and doing is holy and pleasing to God 2c. Then they become
uncertain of things, and their glory becomes water, and falls into
ashes. For there is no one who could or should say with certainty that
he is holy 2c., but if I am not holy (they say), others are holy and do
right; it is enough that I am in the crowd, since some are holy 1) and
have the Holy Spirit. So they all set their personal life and doings in
doubt and uncertainty; yea, they teach that one should doubt, and say
that a man cannot know for certain whether he is in grace, and has the
Holy Ghost.

328 Thus I also lived and kept, being a devout monk, and such a monk
should be holy, so I was; even if I had prayed daily most diligently, to
the

1\) Wittenberger: blessed.

confessed in the purest way. If I had said Mass and done the best I
could, and someone had asked me: Do you also believe that you have the
Holy Spirit? then I (like others) would have to say: Oh, God forbid,
should I be so presumptuous? I am a poor sinner; I may have done this
and that, but I truly do not know whether God will please Him 2c. So I
and all went away in unbelief. And yet they want to boast about the Holy
Spirit and say, \"If he is not in me, he is in others; and yet no one
can say where he certainly is. Where is he at last? If you, nor anyone,
can say that he is with you, or with this or that, he will certainly be
nowhere in the end. Who are those who are called Christians? They must
be people who are sure of the matter, and say: I know what I speak and
preach now (and do and live according to the same), that it is from
Christ and the Holy Spirit. Otherwise, what is it taught that is said
about the Christian church and the Holy Spirit?

\(329\) Therefore thou shalt certainly conclude (if thou be a
Christian), I have the Holy Ghost dwelling with me, and ought and must
have him; for I know that my Christ is holy with his blood, baptism,
sacrament; so that the gospel, if I preach with my mouth, hear with my
ears, believe with my heart, is also holy. If I have this, I must also
say that the Holy Spirit is in me. For thou shalt certainly have no
faith, no good thought, joy, and comfort from him, yea, hear no sermon,
nor do any work of love, or of a 2) right Christian state, except the
Holy Spirit be with thee, and create and work such things in thee, and
mayest cheerfully boast of them against the devil, which assaileth thee
with doubts, and seeketh to take such comfort from thee, and against the
world, which boasteth its thing against thee, 3) condemneth thy faith,
word, and work. 2c.

**V. 18. I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.**

330 It would seem, then, both from the world\'s point of view and from
our own feelings, that this group of Christians is poor, debauched, and
in need of help.

2\) Erlanger: einigs.

3\) Wittenberger: to boast.

412 Eri. 49, 169-17S. Sermon on Joh. 14, 18. 19. W. vm, 204-207. 413

orphans, both of God and Christ, and have forgotten ours, because he
suffers them to be blasphemed and violated, condemned, persecuted, and
murdered, and to be everyone\'s footcloth, and to have the devil\'s
heart perpetually terrified, afflicted, and tormented, that they may
well and truly be called orphans, above all other orphans and abandoned
people on earth, of whom the Scripture says that God must take care of
them Himself, as otherwise abandoned by everyone \[Ps. 27, 10.\], and
let Himself be called \"a father of them\". Ps. 68, 6.

But I will not leave you as it looks and feels (says Christ), but will
give you the Comforter, who will give you such courage that you will be
sure that you are my true Christians and the true church. For this
purpose I myself will certainly be with you and remain with my
protection and supremacy, if I now depart from you bodily and visibly,
so that you must be alone, accused of the devil and the world\'s
wickedness and power. But let not the world be so mighty, nor the devil
so wicked; let not all the learned and wise be so wise; nevertheless let
my baptism and preaching remain and be driven by me, and let my Holy
Spirit rule and work in you, even though it is always contested, and
even among yourselves 1) seems weak.

For if the preaching ministry and the Holy Spirit\'s rule did not
continue in Christianity, it would not be possible for baptism, the
sacrament and the knowledge of Christ to remain. Who would preserve it,
if it were not driven by the public ministry? For it could not be
obtained by secret study and prayer; so others could not learn it, nor
come to it. But this is what God has done, that He has always given
preachers and spread the word, so that it has passed through the mouths
and ears of His own, even though it has been very weak. For in many
places it has faded away, or even gone astray, and in a few it has
remained and acted righteously, and most of the people have fallen away.

333\. But nevertheless, God has created the Sei-

1\) \"itself\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

There have always been some who have preached against the false doctrine
of the Pope and other heretics, even though they have been persecuted by
others and suppressed for a time. Thus Christianity has nevertheless
been preserved, both in the highest and most serious errors and
heresies, as in the time of Arii and afterwards, and also under the
terrible persecutions, as in the times of the martyrs, wonderfully
defended, that it has remained, and has kept the victory against the
world and the devil, and has persisted through the Holy Spirit, and has
spread further and further.

So all Christianity in general has this comforting promise that it shall
not be forsaken, nor without help and succor. Even though they must be
deprived of all human comfort, help and support, Christ does not want to
leave them alone and without protection, (as they must have felt and
seen during the three days that Christ 2) was taken from them, most
shamefully executed, and laid in the grave); Nor let them therefore be
deprived of their consolation, nor let them be brought to despair, but
against all such things as they feel and see, hold fast this promise,
which he doeth unto them here, saying: I will not depart from you, and
though I must now depart from you bodily for a little season, yet will I
not tarry long without, but will soon return unto you, and be with you
for ever: that ye may be preserved against all devils, and the world,
and sin, and death, and live and triumph with me: as follows:

**V. 19. Yet for a little while the world shall see me no more, but ye
shall see me: for I live, and ye shall live also.**

He always continues, the dear Lord Christ, with kind, comforting words,
to prepare them and make them able to be comforted in their affliction,
mourning and suffering, and to draw courage from Him.

2\) Erlanger: \"he\" instead of: Christ.

414 Erl. 19, 17S-17t. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
207-2VS. 415

against everything that challenges them. For this is all for him to do
at his departure and last, when he takes all from them here, and
commands them the great work, and trusts very much, namely his dear
word, and the whole government of the kingdom of heaven; and yet sees
that the whole world will sit down against them, and all the devils from
hell will rage against them.

336\. So now it is done: He who shall abide with Christ in the world
against so many devils and evil men, under so many hindrances and
troubles, must have another support than human strength, and must have a
heart that can trust in God, and be sure of things, and have a
heartfelt, fervent love for the Lord Christ, that he may gladly bear the
office for his sake, and take upon himself all the saddles of hell, when
he has no treasure on earth, and knows no restraint, except that he has
a gracious God, and lets Christ 1) be dearer to him than all the world,
and what it has, that he may do all things for his sake alone.

337 Therefore all this preaching is to make them certain that the Father
loves them, and to move them to love him (the Lord Christ) also. For he
that hath not the love of Christ cannot abide the devil\'s and the
world\'s wickedness. For example, if St. Paul did not preach out of the
love he has for Christ, he would soon tire of his preaching ministry,
because he would have to suffer daily so much driving, scorn, disgrace
and blasphemy, and all kinds of heartache and torment from the devil and
the world. So also the Christians, who were persecuted, chased away,
tormented, and most horribly martyred without ceasing, how could they
have existed and remained if their hearts had not been sure of divine
grace and burned with love for Christ? And if St. Paul should preach
now, and see the world thanking so shamefully for it, and all sorts of
mobs springing up among those who have heard the gospel; item, the
poisonous, arch wicked wiles of the pope and his scales; should he not
be moved to say, \"Now preach the devil to the world in my stead. For
who wants to

1\) \"him\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) \"Fahr\" is missing in the Wittenberger and in the Erlanger.

What can I do if he does everything and suffers to help the people, and
should I let him get his hands so shamefully for it? I would let it have
the heartache, speak flesh and blood.

Therefore it is necessary for a Christian to know above all things that
he has a gracious God, and to think to do and suffer for Christ\'s sake
what a Christian should do and suffer, and to be able to say: What I do,
I do for my Lord\'s love and service. If the world does not want it, let
it be; if anyone does not want to hear it, let him go away. We preach
nothing for the sake of ungrateful people and scorners, but for the sake
of pleasing God, and for the glory of our Lord Christ, and for praise
and thanksgiving; otherwise nothing would ever come of it.

For it is so in all things on earth: A man who is to hold office and
rule well does not have his own thoughts; even if there are many in the
world who seek only their own benefit, honor and power, they will never
have a good government. For they do not ask much about how the country
and the people are doing and standing, they think that they alone must
be celebrated and honored, they do not want to suffer any fare,
ingratitude, contempt or disgrace, or, if such things happen to them,
they become mad and foolish, start to rage and throw everything over a
heap, want to take revenge and lead their head out, if everything over
it should go to ruin, so that the regiment over it perishes. These are
not people who are fit to rule; they should remain here in the
peasantry, so that they would first have to learn to live according to
other people\'s ways and be other people\'s subjects. But he who is to
rule or wants to rule well must be so skilled that he can forget his
honor and benefit, despise and get over ingratitude and evil deeds, and
think only of how it will benefit the country and the people, so that he
prefers the common benefit to his own honor, property and estate 2c.

340\) Rather, it is 4) so in this spiritual regiment of Christianity,
since 5) it costs far and above far greater driving and effort, and
higher power lies in it. If a pre

3\) Wittenberg and Jena: heard.

4\) \"it\" is missing in the original of the Erlanger and in the
Wittenberger.

5\) Wittenberger: that.

416 **Erl. tg, 171-176. Sermon On Joh. 14, 19. W. VIII, 2vg-ln.** 417

If a man seeks to gain honor, money and good days, and wants to draw his
sermon to them, he will neither do nor stand. For where that which he
seeks is lacking and ceases, he goes back again, and becomes an
unchristian, as before; for he who rules or preaches for his own benefit
alone will never take the matter seriously, and will neither help nor
punish anyone. But if he loves the common good, then he goes through,
speaks and does what he knows is right and good, let it be or let it be
laughed at, whether it does him harm or not.

But where are they? They are vain perlein and demant among the other
great heap, both in the ecclesiastical and secular regiment. For no one
wants to open his mouth, or (as the saying goes) tie the cat\'s collar,
and walk through the office without shyness and respect for the person,
and hold his tongue as to what he should do. They seek glory and honor
from it, and need it only for their own benefit, and they do not feel
guilty about it, as if they had done it well.

342 Now it must be so in Christendom: that especially they who are to be
preachers should love their Lord Christ with all their hearts above all
things on earth, and be ready to do and suffer all things for his sake,
and so think: Let him chastise or laugh for my preaching\'s sake whoever
will: so I look and ask no man, prince, scholar, saint, but look only to
my Christ. What he has commanded me, that I do for his love, for the
sake of his precious blood, so that he bought me. Where there is no such
heart and courage, no preacher nor Christian will ever remain devout and
believing, for what he seeks otherwise will soon seduce and tear him
away.

343 For the sake of these causes, Christ first makes the beautiful,
comforting promises that we should know, if we keep His word, that we
have a gracious God in heaven, and that He will be with us together with
Him and protect us mightily. After this, he also gives this admonition
that we should and must have true love for him, if we want to be called
and remain his disciples.

344 Therefore he now says: It shall soon begin, and is still to be done
for one night,

the world will see me no more. As if he should say: It is such an evil,
poisonous thing around the world that whoever wants to put his comfort
and salvation on the people is already lost. For I have tried and
experienced it. I have come to help her, and have done all that I should
do for her; but she will not suffer me, neither accept nor know the
Father\'s testimony, nor the Holy Spirit\'s preaching and work, but will
be and remain evil of the devil.

For this reason I will also go out of her sight, so that she will not
see me, and yet make it so that she must suffer and let me reign on
earth. For though I be crucified and die from this life, yet by it I
will go and come into another immortal life, wherein I shall reign
forever; and then shall my kingdom begin aright. For because I thus go
mortally before their eyes, there is no cessation of raging and fury
against me, they will not and cannot see me alive nor suffer me until
they have brought me to death. But I will soon put an end to it 1) so
that they do to me what they want and no longer see me as they desire;
and yet just by this they bring me, without their thanks, into my glory
and regiment, which they must suffer, and no one shall prevent it. So
this is spoken in great defiance of the wicked world, which persecutes
Christ and his word, because he will not do them honor, that they should
see him more, or preach him, or do miracles; and because they will not
suffer him to be with them, he will be far enough out of their sight.

But you, my disciples and Christians, whom I now leave behind me, shall
see me and live with me. For I will rise again soon after my death, so
that you will both see me bodily (when I appear to you as a witness of
my resurrection) and spiritually in my reign forever, and feel and
experience my power in you and in all the world. For I will not so
depart that ye also shall be deprived of my face and presence, but ye
shall see me, and live with me, even as I live.

1\) \"wills\" will deß.

418 En. 49, 176-179. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
212-215. 419

347\. Now this is a great sermon to them, if not by faith, but
nevertheless a great comfort: That though they see him crucified, dead,
and buried before their eyes, yet he says plainly and clearly, and wants
to assure them, and have them believe assuredly, that they shall see
him, and that he will now begin to live, and not only he, but they also
(if, after him, and for his sake, like him, they must let themselves be
executed and killed by the world) shall live with him. As if he wanted
to say: \"It will not be otherwise with us; we are condemned to death,
and must serve the devil and the world; it will execute me, and if it
can no longer do anything to me, it will strangle and murder you, or
seek your life; as Christians must all be children of death, and either
be killed by tyrants, or by the devil himself. But there is no harm, do
not let this frighten you; I want to live; yes, I am already alive. So
certainly has he it that he calls himself alive in that, when he now
shall die and go to death. For he is the person whom death could not
devour, though it killed him after the bodily life.

Therefore he defies both death, the devil and the world: \"Let them
crucify me, kill me and bury me; nor let them strangle and devour me,
but I will drown death in myself and devour it in my life, and overcome
the devil by my power. Because they cannot keep me in death, even though
they run to me with death, I will not leave you in death either. They
may kill me in the flesh, but I still want to live; and if I live, then
it will be good for you that you also live with me. For I will restore
death and choke it, so that it will not be conquered in me alone, but
also in you, if you believe in me, so that you will live as long as I
live.

349 Thus we have the comforting promise given to Christians who are
terrified by death and all kinds of calamities, that they may defy the
devil and the world, saying, \"When you kill me, you do not kill me, but
help me to live; when you bury me, you pluck me up from the ashes and
give me life.

Dust to heaven; and summa, thy wrath and raging is all grace and help,
for thou givest me but cause and the beginning, that Christ may bring me
to life, as he saith here, I live, and ye shall live.

\(350\) Yes (says flesh and blood), I must nevertheless take the head.
Yes, that does you no harm (says Christ); they also crucified me,
strangled me, and laid me in the grave; but as they have kept me in the
grave and in death, so shall they keep you also therein. For it is said,
and shall be said, 1) As I live, so shall ye also live; neither devil
nor death shall hinder me. A Christian must learn to grasp these words,
and thus know his Christ in his comforting promises, whether death stabs
him with his spear, and the devil opens his infernal mouth against him,
so that he is not frightened by it, but can again defy the devil through
faith, on these words: Knowest thou also, how thou also didst eat the
Lord Christ, and yet hadst to give him back, yea, he did eat thee again;
so shalt thou leave me also uneaten, because I abide in him, and live
and suffer for his sake. If they drive me out of the world and scrape me
under the earth, I will let it happen; but for this reason I will not
remain in death, but live with my Lord Christ, as I believe and know
that he lives.

351 Christians have this comfort and defiance in the Lord Christ, whom
we believe to be risen from the dead and seated at the right hand of the
Father. So that they may learn to put death out of their sight and cast
it far away, knowing and thinking nothing but life itself, that they may
remain alive even in death, and that death may leave them undead, eating
Christ Himself first, who lives and reigns above in divine majesty,
which he will have to leave undone.

But it is and remains a high art to grasp and believe such things, which
is difficult for them and costs them many a hard struggle, and yet can
never be learned enough for the sake of our flesh and blood, which
cannot be without the terror and pursuit of death. But it must be begun,
and the consolation must be grasped.

1\) \"so\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

420 **Erl. 49, 179-181. sermon on Joh. 14, 19. 20. w. vm, 215-217.** 421

For if we did not have this, no one could stand by the gospel and
persevere, because the devil is so murderously hostile to us, and the
world so horribly afflicts us, and everywhere so happens that there is
no more despised thing on earth than a Christian. Therefore we must have
a higher, stronger and more certain consolation than all their defiance
and power.

**V. 20. In that day you will know that I am in the Father, and you in
me, and I in you.**

When it comes to pass that you shall see me risen from the grave and
death, and going up to the Father in heaven, and you shall preach these
things of me, then you shall know by the Holy Spirit and your own
experience that I am in the Father, and you also in me, and again, I in
you, and so we shall be one cake with each other, so that it is life
itself, through which you live in me, just as I live in the Father, and
the Father lives in me. For I live in the Father, and such life that I
strangle death in my own person, that you must say that I am God\'s Son,
as the one who proves such work, which belongs to God alone.

354 Afterward also ye shall say that I am in you. For as the Father
raised me up, and I have eaten death, so will I also eat death in you;
that believing in me ye may be masters of death, and not fear the world,
the devil, nor hell, neither all the despite of them. Then you will have
to say, \"I did not have such power in me before, because I, as well as
the others, would have to remain under the devil\'s power, death\'s
terror and power. But now I have another courage, which Christ gives me
through his Spirit, by which I feel that he is with me and in me, so
that I can despise all the terrors and dreads of the world, death and
the devil, and on the other hand joyfully and gladly defy my Lord, who
lives and reigns above with the Father.

355 You will then feel this in you, how my (yes, the Father\'s) power
will work in you and show itself, so that life and the conquest of death
will be strong in you, and your heart will thus be taken in.

I will have you in my power so that no terror will chase you away from
me and no death will kill you, but you will remain defiant against it,
so that death, both in me and in you, will be completely subdued and
eradicated, and life will be the only thing in its place. Then you will
be called true Christians, abiding in me, and I, in turn, in you, so
that neither devil, nor death, nor misfortune shall have any power over
you, but you shall blithely put a stop to all of them. As one reads, the
holy martyrs despised their tyrants to the utmost with all their cruel
raving and raging through all kinds of torment and torture; yes, even
the young virgins mocked them, and made their joy out of torture and
suffering, as if they were going to the dance.

356 Now this belongs to the Christians to know, and should be their art,
that they thus learn to put death out of their sight (as has been said)
and to despise it in Christ, and to model nothing else but vain life. No
wise man, scholar, saint, except Christ, can ever come to this. And in
sum, the world never knows or learns of it; indeed, it does not want to
hear or suffer it, for it considers it the greatest folly and heresy.
Therefore, it is and remains the art of Christians, and is precisely the
right Christian main doctrine and understanding, that they be certain of
this, and (as he says here) recognize that the man, Christ, is truly and
actually in God, and God in him; thus, that he himself is truly living
God; and then that the same, who is in God and God in him, is also in us
and we in him. He who has this and knows it, has it all.

357 For here all things are, as we always say, that they come down from
above, from the Father, through Christ, and go up again through him. For
the Son comes down from the Father to us, and attaches himself to us,
and we in turn attach ourselves to him, and through him come to the
Father. For this reason he became man and was born of the Virgin Mary,
that he might be mixed with us, be seen and heard, and even be crucified
and put to death for us, so that he might draw us to himself and hold us
to him, as if he had been sent to draw those who believe in him up to
the Father, just as he is in the Father. This chain he has made between
him and

422 **Erl. 49, 181-183.** interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 217-220.** 423

us and the Father, and have joined us together, that we are now in him,
and he is in us, even as he is in the Father, and the Father in him.
Through such unity and fellowship our sin and death is taken away, and
we have life and blessedness.

This you will learn (he says here) on the day when I rise from the dead
and am transfigured, that you will be certain and have no doubt that I
was sent by the Father, and that everything I say, do and suffer is in
the Father, so that it is said that God Himself says, does and suffers
these things; so that no one may continue to gaze toward heaven, or even
on earth seek anything else than is necessary for salvation. As it has
been done up to now, and is still done, when one has run to this place
and the other to that, so that he might seize and attain God, and have
undertaken to propitiate the Father by their own work and holiness; but
they have accomplished nothing, without only dividing and separating
themselves into innumerable superstitions and vain services, and have
allowed themselves to be led by all kinds of wild ways and teachings,
how one should come to God, and yet have completely missed the right way
1). For thus God Himself concludes through the mouth of His dear Son:
\"This you must learn, that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me.
There it is, and there it is: If anyone is to meet the Father and come
to Him, he must first meet Me and come to Me; otherwise there is neither
way nor means, as He has also said clearly and plainly enough above \[v.
6\]. But now you cannot yet understand nor recognize these things; you
are still too weak to do so. But I preach it to you beforehand, and the
Holy Spirit will teach you (after I am transfigured), so that you will
understand and experience it.

359 For this shall be, and it shall be, as it is said, the right
knowledge and high art of Christians, that they learn and grasp only
that which is necessary to take hold of God, that is, how to be freed
from sins and to live and be saved forever, and that there is no other
way or way but by the one door, that ye take hold of me, and fall on me,
and cleave unto me; and if ye do this, ye shall fear no more, neither
shall ye fear any more, neither shall ye fear any more, neither shall ye
fear any more, neither shall ye fear any more, neither shall ye fear any
more, neither shall ye fear any more.

1\) \"Weges\" is missing in the Erlanger.

God\'s wrath, law, devil, death nor hell. For you are in me, and because
you are in me, I am also in you; so surely the Father (who is in me, and
I in him) is also in you: who then can harm you?

360\. Now we do not want to argue sharply here (as some of the old
fathers did about this text, against the Arians), how both the Father is
in Christ, and Christ in the Father, according to the unified,
uncontaminated divine essence, but speak now only of the custom or
benefit of the same article, how we should send ourselves against God
and Christ, that we may meet the Father and know his will, so that a
Christian (as we have always heard) may learn to say thus: I know of no
God, but of the only one, who is called Jesus Christ.

Therefore, if the devil wants to frighten you with God\'s wrath and
judgment, death and hell, and accuses you that God is angry with you and
wants to kill or condemn you, you can tell him again that he lets such
thoughts pass over the stubborn heads and reckless, hardened hearts. But
I will hear what the gospel tells me. In it I find a man called Jesus
Christ, to whom I will bind myself with my heart and ears, and I will
grasp what he says and does. In it you will find how God the Father sent
him into the flesh to be crucified and die for you. If this is true, why
should you fear or flee from him? So this Christ, or such faith and
thoughts of Christ, takes away in your heart all the terror of sin,
death, the devil and the race.

362\. Behold, therefore, you must understand this saying, when it says,
\"You shall know that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me\";
that is, you must look not only at my flesh and blood (which you already
see, as the Jews also see), or at my substance and nature, that I am God
and man; but at what I speak, do, and create, or at what my ministry is,
and why I am there. When you look at these things, you see and hear that
I speak to you from the Father of all comfort, love, grace and mercy,
and in addition prove these things by deed, because I die for you and
rise again. If you see these things in me

424 **Erl- 49, 183-186. Sermon on John 14, 20. W. VIII, 220-223.** 425

you see the Father in me, and me in the Father 2c. For this is actually
the Father\'s opinion, heart and will 2c.

363 This is the first main point and the most important article, how
Christ is in the Father, so that there is no doubt what the man says and
does, that what is said and done is called and must be called in heaven
before all angels; in the world before all tyrants; in hell before all
devils; in the heart before all evil conscience and own thoughts. For if
one is sure that what he thinks, speaks and wills, the Father wills
also, then I can defy all that wants to be angry and evil. For then I
have the Father\'s heart and will in Christ. But where God is for us and
with us (says St. Paul \[Rom. 8, 31\]), what is there that should harm
us? Therefore, we must look to Him alone and not ask what another God
says, or what other ways and means are preached or taught, about angels,
saints, death and life. In short, if you grasp and see this, you see and
grasp 1) Christ in the Father, and the Father in Christ, and see neither
wrath, nor death, nor hell, but only grace, mercy, heaven, and life.

364 The other part, when ye know and have these things, ye shall come
further, and know how I am in you, and ye in me, 2c. That ye may know
that ye have me for your salvation, and so know me, as the Father hath
sent me unto you, and from this prove and know that ye are in me; even
so, what ye are, what ye lack, and what ye lack, how ye are sinners and
reprobates, and are in death, all these things are in me; wherefore it
is right. Now I am in the Father, and what is in me is also in the
Father, whether it be death or life, sin or righteousness. But what is
in me must be righteousness, life and blessedness. Now you also come by
faith to be in me, with your death, sin and all unhappiness. If then you
are sinners in you, you are righteous in me; if you feel death in you,
you have life in me; if you have strife in you, you have peace in me; if
you are condemned on your account, you are blessed and blessed in me.

365\. for if I am a Christian, dear, where

1\) Wittenberger: so you have.

am I? Nowhere, because where Christ is. But where is he but in heaven
and 2) eternal joy, life and blessedness? For he will certainly no
longer be condemned as a sinner, nor die of death. Therefore, since no
sin can condemn him, no devil condemn him, no death devour him, no hell
devour him, they shall leave me also (if I am in him) uncondemned and
undevoured. So away is sin, death, and all calamity that is in you. For
such I devour 3) in myself, for it cannot abide in him. Because he is
and remains in the Father, it must also have no power in us, because we
are in him 2c.

This is indeed a glorious sermon; but 4) you understand it and do not
yet know it (he says). For it is too high an art and understanding,
which no man can comprehend or understand of himself; but hereafter,
when I am transfigured by the resurrection, and the Holy Ghost shall
come, ye shall know it finely, and shall know it in your hearts, how
that I am in the Father, and have swallowed up all things that are
deadly in me; and ye also shall feel it in you (who are in me). For
since in the Father all things are dead, and there is nothing that can
kill sin, death, and the devil, so shall it also be dead in me, and
likewise in you, because you are in me. Finally, you will also learn
that I will be in you. For you will not only have such comforting
confidence or assurance, undaunted heart and undaunted courage, through
me toward the Father, that he will be gracious to you and will be as
little angry with you as with me, but when you know and have these
things, you will also be sure that what you speak, preach, live and do
will be and be called right and good, yes, my own word and work. For it
is I who speak, preach, baptize, and do all things in or through you,
even as the Father does all things in me and through me.

This is also a consolation above all that the world can console itself
with, as I also said above \[§ 347 ff\], who could only believe it. For
here the devil has the infernal sorrow; the more one preaches such, the
more

2\) Erlanger: and in.

3\) Here the Wittenberg edition has inserted: (says Christ).

4\) Wittenberger: \"but, dear disciples, you\" 2c.

426 Erl. 49, 186-188. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
223-22S. 427

more he rages against it, not only by tyrants or sects, yes, also by
ourselves; that it looks and feels like this, that Christ is now least
in us, when he should be and be felt most strongly in us, and we almost
all live and do like this, that it must be said: I am in the world, and
the world in me; because one sets up such a being, both in governing and
preaching, that everyone does as he pleases himself, and each one wants
what he says or does to be done.

368 But this is not to be said now. For this text is too good to be used
for the benefit and comfort of Christians who need such comfort, so that
they may grasp these two things (as the highest and most necessary for
our comfort), as we are in Christ and Christ is in us. One goes above,
the other below. For we must first be in him with all our being, sin,
death, weakness, and know that we will be redeemed and blessed before
God through this Christ. Therefore, we must 1) be swung into him above
and beyond ourselves, yes, completely and totally given into him and be
his own, as those who were baptized into him and received his holy
sacrament on it. By this sin, evil conscience, death and devil are lost,
so that I can say: I know of no death nor hell; if sth. 2) is death, it
first devours and strangles my Lord 3) Christ; if hell is something, it
devours the Savior; if sin, law or conscience can condemn, it accuses
the Son of God. When this is done, I will also let myself be condemned,
devoured and swallowed up. But because the Father and Christ remain
alive, I will also remain alive; because he remains unconquered by sin
and the devil, I will also remain, for I know that as Christ is in the
Father, so also I am 4) in Christ. This is (I say) the first main thing,
by which a man goes into Christ apart from and above himself.

369\. after that it goes down again from above, thus: as I am in Christ,
so is it again.

1\) \"us\" inserted by us. In the original of the Erlanger is missing:
\"over\". Wittenberger: \"we ourselves above and apart from us\".

2\) about \-\-- somewhere.

3\) \"HErrn\" is missing in the Erlanger.

4\) Erlanger and Wittenberger: also me.

Christ in me. I have accepted him, and have crawled into him, stepping
out of sin, death and the devil\'s power; so he shows himself in me
again, saying: Go, preach, comfort, baptize, serve your neighbor, be
obedient, patient 2c. I will be in thee, and do all things; whatsoever
thou doest, that will I 5) have done; only be thou confident, bold, and
undaunted in me, and see that thou abide in me, and I will surely be in
thee again.

Whoever could practice and experience this in faith would be a true
Christian and a perfect man. But the devil has his heartache that he
does not allow this to happen. For in matters concerning God we are all
too stupid without this, since in all other matters we are all too sure,
joyful and courageous; And he is so skilled, what we live, preach or do
(as Christians), that he challenges both, by force, by mobs, and by our
own conscience, that he makes the heart full of terror, and tears,
separates and divides our thoughts from Christ, and Christ from the
Father, that we should leave both, the Father and him, sitting up there,
as if he were and did nothing in us, but let us do and make ourselves.

For if we do not know and believe this, and can boast, when I speak and
do something, that he himself does it from above, and that it is truly
his word and work, as he who is in me and I am in him, then the devil
has already won and has the right over me, and drives me wherever he
wants, so that I cannot remain nor save myself. Therefore this art must
be learned by anyone who wants to stand up to the devil, so that we may
fully conclude that we are in Christ, that is, that he is our dear Lord
and Savior, who died for us, and through his righteousness and life we
have been redeemed from sin and death. Then also that he is in us, and
speaketh and worketh out of us; which things we do and work in
Christianity, that he is called his work and work, and is our tongues,
eyes, ears, hands, heart, and all things.

But (as I said) it is difficult to grasp, and remains in learning, that
it can never be unlearned, because the devil is so opposed to it, and
tears away from each other in un-

5\) Wittenberger: me too.

428 **Erl. 49, 18S-I90. Sermon On Joh. 14, 20. 21. W. VIII, 22S-2W.**
429

He does not want Christ to be in us, nor us in Christ, nor the Father in
him, nor him in the Father; otherwise he is too diligent, too wise and
too early a master, and too joyful and bold. Then he lets preach, shout
and proclaim and praise this text. As then the pope with his multitude
publicly and defiantly boasts: We are in Christ, and Christ in us, for
here is the Christian church; but where the church is, there must Christ
be.

So the false teachers, hypocrites, and the devil\'s mob can boast of
this text to the highest degree, for they are blinded and possessed by
the devil, so that they cannot see or feel their error. But he will not
let us, who know it and need comfort, come to comfort and joy. Christ
also knows this, but still it is said: You will know it, and you shall
learn it. As if he were to say, \"You are the ones who have begun and
are dealing with it, and you shall learn that I am in the Father, and
the Father in me, and you in us, and we in you; yes, already this is
going on in you, even though you do not yet feel or understand it
yourselves, and are weak and infirm in other ways as well; yes, even
stumble and fall short. For he does not want to pay so much attention
and calculate, although his Christians are somewhat lacking. Just as
Christianity has many weak, erring and infirm among it, this must not
harm it. For he makes such a fire around the pot, which must also
consume error and mistake, however much the world rages and blasphemes
against it.

This is the comfort he gives them here: Now therefore I tell you these
things, that ye may know them afterward. Even as it is with us, though
we hear it, yet it is not received, till temptation bring it home, that
we must learn it. When death wrestles with us, or other trouble presses
upon us and distresses us, then we understand and experience it, so that
we can say, \"I am in death, and through this I have received
consolation. But now it is preached that we should begin to study in
this school, and take care of it, and continue in it until we finally
grasp it.

**V. 21: He who has my commandments and keeps them is he who loves me.
But he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him and
reveal myself to him.**

He comforted them with this great comfort, that they should be in him,
and he in them; which is the chief thing of Christian doctrine, from
which we have this understanding, that we are not justified and saved in
or by ourselves, but in Christ, and through Christ, who hath made all
things perfect for us, fulfilling the law, and overcoming sin, death,
and the devil. This you will have (he says) in me, and after this I will
also be praised in you, and you will have to confess and preach it in
the world.

376\. If therefore ye have your own in me, that whatsoever I have that
is good is yours; and again, your evil, sin, and infirmity shall be
mine, even as all my Father\'s is mine, and whatsoever is mine is my
Father\'s also; and after that ye shall appear, and handle my word and
commandments, and be apostles and preachers of Christ, or be baptized,
and hear and confess the word publicly, that the world may see and hear
that ye are my Christians, and keep my word and commandments: This will
certainly happen to you, that the evil devil and the world will hang on
your necks, yes, also your stupid conscience; item, false brethren and
the spirits of the rot, and you will be surrounded with all kinds of
temptation, terror, fear and distress. Then it will be tested and found
whether you are righteous in me, and I in you; that is, whether your
faith is sure, and whether you have received baptism and the sacrament
with earnestness, preached and heard the gospel, and let yourselves be
called Christians; the great danger and adversity will finely purify
them and prove what every man fei or not fei.

377 For the words may well lead them all, as also the pope with his heap
boasts: We are baptized Christians, and Christ is in us, and we in him
2c. But when it comes to the point that it applies the neck, yes, even
lesser, than temporal good, shame and disgrace, or other plague and
heartache, inflicted by the devil, then one speaks: I truly do not know
what to do. For it is painful,

430 Eri. tg, iso-iss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin,
232-234. 431

To be thrown into prison, to be beaten, to be beaten, to let everything
go, and to be everyone\'s towel, and to be made 1) so that there is no
more wretched creature on earth than a Christian. There the flesh is
weak and fears that the heart throbs, and the devil stirs up that it
becomes more and more frightened and stupid.

378 Therefore I will give you a sure sign, which is the true Christians
who are in me and I in them, that is, when they keep my commandments.
For this you already have, what I am to work in you, and you are to have
from me 2). I have given you all things, conquered death for you, taken
away sin, reconciled the Father, fulfilled the law, that ye should have
no more need. For there is no more wrath, no more death, no more hell,
no more devil, no more sin; all things are overcome and purged out in
me, and are even in the heavenly estate. But whether you truly believe
these things and sincerely hold to them, that will be found out, if you
also live like this on earth, preach and confess so freely and
undauntedly, and therefore risk property, honor, life and limb; item,
love one another so warmly, as I have taught you and commanded you; by
this one must feel and test where true faith in me is.

But it all depends on whether you feel and find this in yourself (as he
also said above \[v. 15\]), that you love this man. For if you truly
believe this, love will also be there, and your heart will feel this
way: \"As much as Christ, my dear Lord, has done for me, has reconciled
the Father to me, has shed his blood for me, has fought with my death
and overcome it, and has given me all that he has, should I not love him
again, give thanks and praise, serve and honor him with body and soul? I
wish I had not been born a man.

Therefore, it belongs to a righteous Christian that he loves me with all
his heart, otherwise he will not do it. The heart must be attached to
him alone, and neither love nor fear anything else. If they want to
throw you into prison, or take your body and possessions, so that you
can-

1\) Erlanger: himself so.

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: hold.

You will fearlessly say, \"I will gladly suffer this in defiance of the
devil and for the love, honor and praise of my dear Lord. So no
suffering will be hard for you, but everything will be bearable and
easy, as one can read in many examples of the holy martyrs, how they
despised all torture and pain through love of Christ. As, in particular,
of a rich citizen of Rome, from whom great goods, house and farm, wife
and child were taken; but he kept the defiance of Christ which he had in
his heart, and said: \"If they have taken everything from me, they shall
not take my Lord 3) Christ from me. Behold, thus he loved, and his heart
burned within him, and he clung to Christ above in heaven; therefore he
did not ask that he should lose everything on earth. Which, of course,
he would not have done if love for Christ had not reigned in him.

381 Therefore Christ Joh. 21, 15, when he commanded Petro to preach,
asked him three times before if he loved him. For he knew and saw that
no one could be a righteous preacher or Christian unless he had a desire
and love for him. But how can he have desire and love for him, if he
does not first firmly believe in him, that he has everything in him, and
knows without doubt that Christ is his treasure and savior, life and
comfort? Where this is in the heart, love follows and flows out. But if
love is there, it cannot rest nor celebrate; it goes out, preaches and
teaches everyone, would gladly plant Christ in everyone\'s heart and
bring everyone to him, dares and leaves over what it should and can. He
would like to drive such love into them through such heartfelt words.
Therefore he says, \"I leave you this last, that you may have in me all
that you desire, forgiveness of sins, heaven, the Father\'s mercy and
grace; but see to it that you believe these things, and you will love me
well, and keep all that I have said to you.

Now this is what we have always taught and still teach: Where faith is,
there works of love shall follow. These are the good, righteous works:
as, the apostles and preachers, that they may preach faithfully without
any

3\) HErrn is missing in the Erlanger.

432 **EU. 49, ISS-IW. Sermon On John 14:21. W. VIII, 234-237.** 433

Shyness; then the other, that they gladly hear God\'s word, and support
it with body and soul. For he does not want the other\'s work, as monks
and priests, to wear such caps and plates, to be clothed like this or
otherwise, to eat like this, to pray like this, to sing like this. For
they do not proceed from love, and are vain useless works, which even
bad boys can do, and no danger is above them, nor may they suffer for
it.

But to dare, to do, and to suffer all things for Christ\'s sake, and to
be kind to and serve all men, proves that Christ is truly there through
faith, and that there is also a right hearty love toward him. For surely
no one else does this, as he says afterwards, \"He who does not love me
does not keep my words\" 2c. This is not possible and nothing comes of
it. He who does not have his heart\'s delight and joy in me will not do
what I have commanded, that he should boldly preach me, and for my sake
cheerfully dare and suffer all things 2c.

384 But what shall they have who have such love for him, or what do they
enjoy? This I will do unto them again, saying, Whosoever shall come
forth, and show himself a true Christian, he shall be loved of my
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself unto him.

385 What is this said? He has now said how they should be in him and how
he wants to be in them; they already have that through faith. Why then
does he now say that he will love them and reveal himself to them? Has
he not already done both before? For he began it, and laid the first
stone. For he suffered for me and preached the gospel and baptized me
before I asked for it or knew about it, as St. Paul says in Eph. 1:4 and
1 John 4:19: \"He loved us before\" 2c. How then does he say here that
he would love those who love him, just as if he had not loved them
before, and would now reveal himself to them, since he said above \[v.
12\] that they should preach about him? which could not happen unless
they had the revelation beforehand and believed in him. Answer: This is
how it works: When a Christian has begun, and is now in Christ, he
believes and lives in

If a Christian who loves him begins to preach, confess and do what a
Christian should do for the sake of his Lord, the devil attacks him and
overwhelms him with such a downpour, inwardly through anxiety and fear,
outwardly through all kinds of danger and misfortune, that he feels no
comfort, and lets himself be looked at and felt as if God were up in
heaven, not with us, and had forgotten us. For he hides himself so
completely, as if it were over with us, and \[as if we\] have no more
help from him, that where he did not show himself, and let his love be
felt, we would sink and despair.

Therefore God does two kinds of work with the Christians (as I have said
in the \"beautiful Confitemini\", 1) when he says: \"I will not die, but
live\" fPs. 118, 17.)), which are called: comfort and help. The
consolation he gives inwardly into the heart, so that it may hold on to
his grace, and so that it may stand and endure in adversity and
suffering. But if it were to remain in comfort alone, no one would be
able to endure. For the devil attacks the hearts so hard, especially the
apostles and their kind, with heavy spiritual temptations, and makes it
so hard and sour for them, and for so long, that he who has begun to
believe, and is in Christ, makes himself believe that the devil is even
in him, and Christ is nothing in him, but far from him, and leaves him
here in hell, the devil in his butt, that he feels nothing at all, but
vain terror and sadness in his heart, and by heart hatred, envy,
reproach, persecution from the world, yes, even from his own closest
friends 2c., that he cannot have a good hour on earth, and does not seem
otherwise, because he is completely abandoned, that he would like to
say: What shall I do? How do I come to this misery? If I had not been
baptized and had accepted and confessed the gospel, I should not have
such heartache. Before I had good peace and shelter; now I have neither
day nor night rest from the devil and from myself.

387 Thus it goes: Whoever comes to Christ, and has his life and comfort
in him, has to be tortured and tormented over it, 2) and thinks that he
is a man.

1\) Walch, old edition, vol. V, 1778 ff,? 93 ff.

2\) \"werden\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

434 Erl. 4g, 195-197. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
237-239. 435

The devil is in his throat, and he feels vain death and anguish of
heart. Now it cannot remain like this forever, otherwise no one could
bear it; but the other part, namely the shell and salvation, must also
follow by heart, as St. Paul says in 1 Cor. 10:13: \"God is faithful,
who will not let you be tempted above your ability, but will make the
temptation come to an end so that you can bear it.

For this reason he comforts his suffering Christians, so that he will
let his love shine and reveal itself to them. As if to say, \"Continue
in your love and stand firm, even though it seems to you that I have
departed from you as far as heaven and earth. For now you have the evil
hour, and do not let me wallow in you, and the dark clouds go before the
sun, so that you are oppressed with terror and fear. As the 116th Psalm,
v. 3, laments: \"The snares of death have encompassed me, and the fear
of hell has taken hold of me\"; item Ps. 142, 5.Periit fuga a m, I would
gladly flee, and yet I cannot escape; that there is no Christ at all,
and he knows nothing of him (though he, having been baptized and
believed, is truly in Christ and Christ in him), that he must despair,
and could keep neither baptism nor gospel, unless he were comforted
higher. But do not let this 1) take away your heart. For it is not as
you feel and think, for I have other and more help, the first, the
second and the third in addition, 2) and I will keep your backs, so that
you will not sink in the trouble in which you think you have lost me,
but will make it so that the temptation, terror and trouble will still
leave you in me, and again, me in you, whether you do not see the hour
when the devil rages. But he shall not devour you, but shall only be a
temptation, whether ye believe and love aright. Yes, I will come and
reveal myself in such a way that you will feel the heartfelt love that
both my Father and I have for you.

Now this is the case in all of Christendom; as St. Paul also complains 2
Cor. 1, 8,

1\) \"that\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) Wittenberger: \"the first, the other, the third, and more besides\".

that his affliction was beyond measure and beyond power, 3) that he was
weary of life and would rather have been dead, for he was so forsaken
and without help. But this was not the opinion; but it happened for this
reason (v. 9), that we learn not to put our trust in ourselves, but in
God, who raises the dead; as he also has redeemed us from such death 2c.
Therefore he puts us to death, and lets the devil come upon us, not that
he should devour us, but that we might be tested and tested, and that he
might reveal himself to us more and more 4) so that we might know his
love. For such trials and struggles should teach us (which the sermon
alone cannot do) how powerful Christ is, and how the Father truly loves
us, so that confidence in God may always grow, and knowledge, praise and
thanksgiving for His grace and good deeds. Otherwise we would go away
with the first faith we had, become lazy, unfruitful, inexperienced
Christians, and soon rust away. As we see, many of ours fell to us at
first with great sound and joy, and held so well to the gospel; but they
became idle spirits (of which Christ says Matt. 12:44), unstruggled and
uncontested, and remained without experience, and like the seed withered
from the heat without root, remained without fruit, until they fell away
again, as sour, worm-eaten and corrupt fruit falls from trees.

But whoever remains rooted and grounded, he will often think that he has
neither Christ nor God, and feel nothing but death, devil, sin, as a
terrible weather and dark clouds pass over him. But you shall not be
forsaken in such (as it seems), for I will not remain outside, but will
come to you again, and let such light go out that you shall know me much
better and brighter than before. Yes, the more you suffer and show your
love for me; the more I will reveal and show you 5) how great the
Father\'s and my love for you is.

3\) \"been\" only in the Wittenberg.

4\) \"and more\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlanger.

5\) Jenaer: show.

436 **Erl. 4g, IS7-I99. Sermon on John 14:21. W. vm, 239-242.** 437

391 So this is a sermon, not only of words, but of experience. For he
begins with the word, that he lets us hear the gospel, baptize, and
receive the sacrament; but after that the devil is soon there, who wants
to challenge and hinder us everywhere, so that it does not remain and
continues. Now the experience must come, so that a Christian can say:
\"Until now I have heard and believed that Christ is my Savior, who
overcame my sin and death; now I also know that it is so. For I am now
and have often been in fear of death and the devil\'s snares, but he has
helped me out, and so reveals himself to me that I now see and know that
he loves me, and that it is true, as I believe.

392 Such experience makes a righteous, perfect man, as St. Paul Rom.
5:4, 5. Patience\" in affliction \"brings experience, experience brings
hope, and hope does not bring shame,\" that is, we are so taught by such
God\'s work that we know that affliction makes patient people; but from
such patience such people become who endure it, and let the devil aim at
them and spew out all his wrath, and yet they stand firm, and learn that
they are righteous Christians. Such experience gives certain hope, which
does not doubt that they are God\'s children and belong to Him.

For this reason Christ also laid down such a commandment for his own,
that they should preach of him publicly and confess freely, and punish
all idolatry and false teaching. But where this is concerned,
persecution and temptation are sure to arise. Then patience is
necessary, through which comes experience of how Christ loves us and
reveals himself. Therefore he says: \"He who keeps my words loves me. As
if he were saying, \"Not he alone who hears the gospel and praises it
with words, or can talk much about it. But whoever loves me in this way,
I will love him again, that is, at the very time when he thinks he has
been abandoned by me, and the devil is powerful, and does not feel my
love; at that very time I will show myself in such a way that he will
realize and know that I love him and the Father also.

This is a mighty, high comfort to strengthen faith and hope, when a man
knows that he believes and loves rightly, and suffers innocently because
of it, and is certain that this happens solely for Christ\'s sake (since
otherwise he might well have good days), and neither good nor honor nor
anything that is ours counts for anything. So Christ comes with such
friendly consolations: it is heartily pleasing to him, and is the
dearest and most pleasing thing we can do to him, and for this reason he
must again show us all his love. Therefore, even though suffering hurts,
it does no harm if you know that he and the Father love you. For if all
is evil with the Father and with Christ, and all is love, and joy, and
gladness; what then wilt thou fear from the world and from the devil? If
they will not love and be merciful, let them be angry and do what they
can.

395 Behold, he would have liked to instill comfort and courage into his
Christians, as they need it, because they are called and set to bite and
scratch themselves, not with flesh and blood, but with the supreme power
in hell, on which all that wants to be wise, learned and holy in the
world hangs; and with their own hearts and consciences, so that sin and
God\'s wrath terrifies them. Where then do they get such strength and
courage that they may overcome such things? Only because he says, \"I am
in you, and you in me, and they are one. Therefore only hold fast to me;
I have begun by my word and have brought you to me; and if you now prove
this and fight to remain in me, it will first be a trouble and become
difficult for you, so that it seems as if you are alone and I have left
you and leave you in all fear and misery. But just hold on, I want to
prove to you that I love you, that you will feel it in your heart, how
God is so pleased with your faith, confession and suffering. From this
you will recognize and experience more and more who I am, what I am
capable of and what I do for you, and thus I will reveal myself to you
from day to day until you are so tempted.

1\) So the Erlanger, \"noch\" is missing in the Wittenberger and in the
Jenaer.

2\) Wittenberger: feel and experience.

438 **Erl. 4S, 1S9-202.-** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 242-245.** 439

You will be able to put your defiance all the way to heaven, and strike
back at the devil when he wants to accuse you of being a sinner, and of
not having done right here or there, and say, \"Will you teach me how to
be godly? Why do you not teach yourself? Go and bite yourself with your
own stink, sin, death and hell; I have another defiance up in heaven,
there I have a Master and Comforter who tells me nothing but of God\'s
grace and eternal life. Therefore go with your mouth to another place,
and teach other people; you are not the man to teach me what you cannot
teach yourself; I can already do it better than you.

Therefore, whoever learns to put away the devil from himself, and to get
rid of his own conscience, could then stand against all the world and
maintain his defiance: Dear nobleman Pabst, rats and tyrants, scholars
and saints, you are great, learned, wise people, but you shall not judge
me whether I teach, believe or live rightly, and shall not be good
enough for me to want to learn from you, because I know it 2), praise
God, better than all of you, and your master, the devil, too. See, such
defiance follows from the fact that one thus tests and learns the
doctrine in temptation, if one believed before, but now realizes himself
how we are in Christ, and Christ is in us. And if there was wrath or
disgrace before, it is no more; for Christ is 3) our dear bishop and
mediator with God, and 3) shall remain our Master and Lord alone, and no
one shall accuse us, frighten us, master us, or teach us.

397 But, as I have said, experience is necessary, through many a
struggle and temptation, that the devil may be encountered when he comes
and comes right with us, wants to have us pious, and disputes with us
out of the law, which means: rightly done or not. Before an untried and
inexperienced Christian learns this, he is driven by the devil, so that
he must be afraid and tremble, and does not know where to stay.
Therefore, one must learn to abide by Christ\'s word and comfort alone,
and to follow the

1\) Wittenberger: \"dem\" instead of: deinem.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) \"is\" and \"and\" are missing in the Wittenberger.

The devil will not confess to any disputation about our own works or
piety. Even if such a struggle is hard and difficult for us, and we
think that we will lose Christ over it, we will not let ourselves be
torn away from him, but will wait for his help, in which he will reveal
himself to us, and thus realize that he has not failed us with his word,
nor have we failed with our faith, but have rightly preached and
believed in him.

**V. 22. Judas, not Iscarioth, said to him, \"Lord, why do you reveal
yourself to us and not to Well?**

The good and pious Jude has grasped the words of the Lord, that he would
love and reveal himself to those who love him. 2c. Then he asks a
question: \"What is the difference, or what moves you to say this, that
you will reveal yourself to us alone and not to the world? Just as he
also said above \[v. 19\]: \"The world will not see me, but you shall
see me\" 2c. This is almost the question, as if he should say, \"Shall
we alone be learned, wise, holy and blessed? What will the world say to
this? Shall so many highly learned, excellent, holy people, priests,
Pharisees, and the best core of the whole people, who are called God\'s
people, and have so much more excellent reputation than we poor beggars,
all of them be nothing and damned? What are we compared to them, but as
nothing? Should you not reveal yourself to the high people, with whom is
the rule, power, honor, and in addition great holiness and worship, and
since it is to be hoped that it will take place? What should we wretched
people do? Who will believe or fall for us? We will be far too weak for
the cause.

This is just the question, since all the world is still at loggerheads,
learned and unlearned, saints and sinners. What is it then (says the
world) about this new preaching? I see nothing special there; they are
vain despised people, runaway boys and beggars, who cling to this
teaching. When do you see that great lords, kings, princes, bishops
think anything of it? That is why it must be sealed with a sausage. This
is the greatest argument and the strongest cause why our gospel is not

440 **Erl. 4g, LOS-204. Sermon On John 14:22-24. W. VIII, 248-247.** 441

shall be right: If it were true, God would have revealed it to other
people; why should not the high leaders know it, who can and should rule
and reform the world? They should do it, and it would go from place to
place.

Now it is true that it is something, and we would like to do it
ourselves; so they would also like to be considered the people who
should do it, are full of devotion, and would like to have the honor and
glory of having done it; they also have honor, power and good enough
that it seems as if they should and could do it alone. But God says no,
they shall not do it. You poor fishermen and naked beggars, you shall do
it; not Annas, Caiphas and the priesthood, who are in office, who have
power, authority and justice. Therefore we must and shall comfort
ourselves, who hear such things and feel ourselves that we are nothing,
and must confess that there are other people who do not let us wipe
their shoes. But Christ goes on, asking for no one, to be as 1) great,
holy, learned, as he wills, and indicating himself whom he wills to
choose and have.

**V. 23, 24. Jesus answered and said unto him, He that loveth me shall
keep my word, and my Father shall love him, and we will come unto him,
and make our abode with him. But he that loveth me not keepeth not my
words.**

Dear Judas (he wants to say), this thing is done in such a way that one
must not ask whether it is king, emperor, Caiphas or Herod, learned or
unlearned, but whether it is I? This is the answer to this question. In
this sermon and regiment, which I want to start, I want to be equal to
what is in the world, one like the other, I do not want to separate or
single out anyone. In the world\'s regiment there must be such
differences of persons and classes; a servant cannot be master, the
master must not be servant, the disciple must not be master, and so on;
but I have nothing to do with that, and it is none of my business. But I
want to establish such a regiment, in which

1\) \"so\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

2\) Jenaer: and.

All shall be equal to me. A king born today, who is a lord over many
lands and people, shall crawl into my baptism and surrender to me as
well as a poor beggar; and again, he shall hear the gospel or receive
the sacraments and be saved as well as the latter. So he wants to make
the people all the same and make a cake out of it, that it is a
different being than the world leads, which must also have and keep its
own. And Christ also lets it go and remain; but he is not there to
establish such a world kingdom, but a kingdom of heaven.

402\. Therefore he answers the apostle Judah thus: It is not because of
what the world is, but because of what I said to you that I would reveal
myself to you, and to those who love me; not who wears a triple crown of
gold, or a coat of scarlet; not whoever is called noble, powerful,
strong, rich, learned, wise, prudent and holy; but whoever loves me, may
God call him king, prince, pope, bishop, priest, doctor, layman, master
or servant, small or great, in my kingdom all such distinctions shall
cease.

403 And this is the very reason why I will not reveal myself to the
world; for it is so mad and foolish that it wants to teach me and master
me how I should rule. Why does he not reveal himself (they say) to the
chief priests of Jerusalem, that they might bear witness to him and
confirm his teaching? as they say John 7:48, \"Does any ruler or
Pharisee believe in him?\" As they also now say, \"Where are there any
great kings, princes and lords who accept the gospel? If it were taught
at Rome, by popes, cardinals, bishops, or the high scholars at Paris,
and accepted by emperors and kings, we would also believe it 2c. But now
Christ says, I will not do it, I will be unlearned and unmastered, and
they shall be my disciples, and shall be glad, saying, Audiam, quid
loquatur Dominus, I will gladly hear and learn what he saith unto me.
Therefore I cannot reveal myself to the world, nor remain one with it.
Let it hear me and learn from me; then it will be wiser and tell me how
to do it. There the egg teaches the chicken, and (as Christ says Matth.

442 Eri. 49, S0t-Mi\>. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
247-2SV. 443

11, 19.) \"Wisdom must lead itself\" to school and \"be justified by its
children\". Just as the pope with his monastic cloisters teaches him how
to look at their orders and special works, and therefore make them
blessed; but he also wants to remain uncaptured and untaught by them and
everyone.

404 Therefore he concludes here briefly and simply: \"I will not reveal
myself to the world, but to those who hear and accept my word, and love
me, call them what they will, in crowns of gold or in coarse,
stiff-necked garments. If any man will know me, let him think, and love
me, and hold fast to me, that he be not ashamed of me: and they shall
know that I will reveal myself unto them, and shall know in themselves
that they have believed aright, and are not deceived. Therefore (he
says) let the world be world, pope, bishops, concilia, kings, princes
make, teach, believe, conclude, what and how they want, it is said:
\"Who loves me, he keeps my commandments\" 2c. There we part.

For the world will not and cannot do this, but only does the opposite,
that it hates, blasphemes, and persecutes me and my word to the highest
degree; and yet boasts, as if it were also well off with God, righteous
and holy, yes, only the right Christian church. But do not turn away
from it; but look at those who love me, that is, who have my word and
keep it, and keep yourselves to them as to my right church, with whom
the Father and I will dwell, as follows; and they shall have in me a
faithful Savior, of whom they are sure in life and in death that they
will not lack him.

**And my father will love him.**

This is what we have often heard, that Christ with great diligence
always draws us up to the Father, against the grievous thoughts that
separate Christ from the Father, and make the heart think: I may believe
in Christ, but who knows whether the Father is gracious to me? Therefore
he will always lead us into the Father\'s heart, that we should neither
worry nor fear anything, if we only love him, and cast far from the
heart and tear away all anger and terror. For the devil has no other
arrow to draw from us,

because he exemplifies God ungraciously and wrathfully. Where he strikes
the heart with it, no man is so joyful as to be able to bear it.
Therefore Christ always looks against it, and gives us this defense
against it, that we may be sure, and that he himself is good to us for
it, if we believe in him, and are in his love, that there is no more
wrath in heaven and earth, but nothing but fatherly love and all
goodness, that God smiles upon us with all the angels, and has his eye
upon us as upon his dear children; that you should desire nothing better
than to be led away this moment: so purely does he sweep heaven from all
wrath and terror, and fills it with vain assurance and joy, if the heart
alone abideth in Christ, and keepeth his.

407 This is a fine, sweet sermon; it does not cost us any hard work, and
no one should run far after it or wear himself out with hard work. It
costs no more than we already have in ourselves, namely, that our hearts
hold fast to it with faith, and our mouths with confession, and show and
bear witness to it by love toward our neighbor. And even if you have to
suffer the hatred and enmity of the devil and the world for this reason,
you have the comfort here that you can well bear it, even despise it.
For what harm can it do you, even though the whole world may be hostile
to you, persecuting and tormenting you, if you know that, on the other
hand, you have the Lord Christ as your friend, and not only Him, but
also the Father, who promises and testifies to you through the mouth of
His Son that you are to be dear and precious to Him for the faith and
confession of Christ? Because you have this Lord on your side, together
with all the angels and saints, why should you fear or be afraid of the
wrath of the world? And what can they do with their hatred and raging
against you without incurring God\'s unbearable wrath and curse? which
they will not be able to bear, but will have to perish eternally when
the hour comes for them.

408 And this (he says further) shall not remain, that I and the Father
love him that loves me; but, \"We will come unto him, and make our abode
with him,\" 2c. that he may not be safe alone.

444 Erl. tg, rvs-Lvs. Sermon On Joh. 14, 23. 24. . W.VHI, 2SV-2W. 445

from the wrath to come, devil, death, hell and all calamities, but shall
also have us dwelling with him here on earth, and \[we\] shall be his
guests daily, yea, household and table companions. This shall be to you,
and not to the world. For it is not worthy of such honor and glory,
because it will not hear my word nor accept it, and hates and persecutes
it. But you, if you abide in me and keep my words, only be undaunted and
do not turn away from the way the world opposes me and you, but let the
Father and me take care of you; for you already have a certain dwelling
place, appointed for you by us, in heaven. Moreover, if you have to
suffer in the world (if neither I nor you want to suffer), you shall
also be our castle and dwelling place on earth, with whom we will remain
until the end.

409 That is to say, abundantly comforted, and highly honored beyond
measure. For what greater honor and glory can be called than that we
poor, miserable people on earth should be the dwelling place, pleasure
garden, or paradise of the divine majesty, even his kingdom of heaven?
And whatever you say and do shall be pleasing to him, and shall be
called spoken and done by him; and whosoever shall hurt or harm you, it
shall be done to him. And he shall defend thee body and soul, that no
man devour thee, because he hath devoured him first. And despite him
that harmeth thee a hair, except it be his will, 1) and have done it
unto him before. And in short, thy doings shall be right, and shall
continue against all devils, and against all the raging of the 2) world,
unless both the Father and Christ be no more God. So that, in short, not
only in that life are we assured of all grace, love and friendship, but
also here, what we teach as Christians must be right, and what we live
must be pleasing and pleasant to God, must continue and remain
unchallenged.

Yes, it seems to me and looks to me much different that the world is in
charge and continues its actions against the Christians, and God does
not hold with me, but with them, and dwells with them; as they can then
defy

1\) The words: \"he has him then \... his will\" are missing in the
Wittenberg.

2\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

boast against us: Here dwells God, here is the Church 2c. Yes, you must
not look here at the single piece of the present being, as it now goes
and stands before your eyes, but grasp the whole being and regiment of
Christianity before you. For they also persecuted Christianity before
and (as the histories say) murdered probably seventy thousand Christians
in one day, so that it was thought that they would even exterminate
Christianity. But what did they accomplish? It has nevertheless
continued; and the more they resisted with torture and strangulation,
the greater Christianity became. For we are at home here (says Christ),
I and the Father, and want to dwell here; you shall not resist this, or
you shall go over it in ruins, as happened to Jerusalem and Rome.

411 So now they also have it in mind against us, they counsel, decide
and think nothing else about our heads, but only purely exterminated,
hanged, drowned, beheaded and burned. But he sits above and says: \"Dear
angry lords and nobles, do it, let me also keep a little house where I
stay. They do not want to believe this, but want to make it badly pure;
and they will do it until they also lie in a heap in the ashes. But here
is the text that says: You poor Christian church, you shall be our
little house, yes, our castle and fortress, where we want to live and
stay; let them only be hostilely angry and throb, we want to see if we
can remain seated before them, and fight off both the devil and the
world; they shall also let us rule, and leave Christianity on earth
undestroyed, should they become mad and foolish. So the Christians sit
here on earth in defiance of the world, and are called God\'s dwelling
place, to the devil\'s chagrin, that they must let them remain without
their thanks. For he says: \"We built this house, we founded and
consecrated this church, and we want to keep it and preserve it,
stronger and more firmly than any wall or fortress can do.

412 We are to learn these things, that we may know what and who
Christianity is, and what we have in Christ, so that we may become
accustomed to hope firmly for certain blessedness (especially in the
last hour of death), and to be fervent and fearless before Him.

[446 Erl. 4\", sag-SII. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
W3-2SS. 447]{.underline}

Devil and his input, and against the 1) world, and to defy this. Christ
shall be our guest, and we shall remain his lodging and dwelling place
(as he promises here); they shall not refuse this, and shall not take
this guest from us, though they have taken from us life, limb and all.
But because we have him, we have all things, and will keep ourselves
from the devil, from death, and from hell. Therefore, though we die now,
yet live we; though we go to hell, yet are we in heaven; though the
devil eat us up and devour us, yet shall his belly rend us with his
everlasting mockery and hurt, and restore us alive. For he shall leave
this Lord (who dwells in us) uneaten, and his church and tabernacle
undestroyed. For he also wills to have a tabernacle and a castle, and
hath set it upon a strong rock and mountain, that no power of hell shall
be able to prevail against it \[Matt. 16:18\]. This is the proper
dwelling place of God, previously signified in the Old Testament by the
tabernacle of the congregation and the temple, namely, the dear company
of Christians who believe and confess the word of Christ; there He will
dwell and abide, be it whom it may. This house shall and must remain
unto him; and whatsoever these do, speak, and make, it shall be lawful
and good, though all men and devils condemn it; for they are the
Father\'s dear children, and the brethren of the Lord Christ.

**V. 24 But he who does not love me does not keep my words.**

413 No one does this but the world and false Christians; this is their
way, that they cannot love Christ, nor keep his word. For they seek and
love only what is theirs, that is, the world, and what pleases it; as he
says afterwards, \"If ye were of the world, the world would love
theirs.\" Therefore, those who love him must not be of the world.

Now we have heard that if any man be baptized, and cleave unto the Lord
Christ, they are as sheep in the midst of wolves (as Christ himself
saith \[Matt. 10:16\]); so that the world is not so hostile to any devil
as to such,

1\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

and such enmity far surpasses all other enmity on earth. Whoever then
should endure that he should bite with the world, and be scratched by
the devil, and bear everyone\'s hatred and envy, and what is laid to his
charge, must have a heart that thinks more highly of the Lord 2) Christ,
and that he is dearer to him than all that is in the world, with all its
favors, friendships, goods 2c., and be of this mind: What I suffer, I
suffer for the sake of my Lord 3) who shed his blood for me and saved me
from eternal death and from the power of the devil; therefore I will
remain at his service, yes, for praise and thanksgiving, and say, sing
and praise about him, whether it pleases or displeases whomever it
pleases. But he who will not do this shows that he prefers the world to
Christ and his Christianity. Therefore he cannot know what Christ is,
nor come to the glory of becoming the dwelling-place of God, nor know
it, though he would otherwise boast much of Christ and Christianity; as
the pope and the rulers do, yet know nothing of the comfort and power of
the word of the Lord Christ.

So you have briefly sketched the world here and described what its
nature is and what is to be thought of it, namely, that it cannot nor
will love Christ, nor keep his words. That is why it has its love and
desire elsewhere. As St. John 1 Epistle 2:1 says, \"That which is in the
world is the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the life
that is in hope.\" These are 4) the three things that rule the world and
have it all to themselves. \"Lust of the flesh\" means that it alone
seeks and strives for what is good and gentle for the flesh; it does not
want to suffer toil, unpleasantness, and hardship, as it is laid out for
man that he should nourish himself in the sweat of his brow. Everyone
wants to be above this, seeks and strives to be rid of it, and to live
gently according to all pleasure, to be free and at ease. This is seen
in all classes, both high and low. A husband does not want to be
satisfied with his wife, and would rather commit fornication. A
magistrate pushes the displeasure and burden to his wife.

2\) \"HErrn\" is missing in the Jena.

3\) Wittenberger: HErrn Christi.

4\) Wittenbergers: are now.

[448 **Erl. 4g, 211-2IS. Sermon on John** 14:24. **W. VIII, 2SS-25S.**
449]{.underline}

(so he should carry) from himself to others, that he may have a gentle
life only in other people\'s property, seeks only how he may have use of
it, and snatches to himself what he can.

416 Thus all the world is skilful: where someone can avoid work, he does
it, and yet wants to enjoy it. As the pagan poet says: Ingenium est
omnium hominum a labore proclive ad libidinem. They all like to have
honor and goods, and everyone wants to go up, and stand in a great
position; but when they come in, and feel the work and care that it
entails, they soon get tired, and do not go on; for they have sought
nothing but their pleasure and good chamber. Just as in the marriage
state everyone wants to seek joy and pleasure, and afterwards, when they
come to it and do not find it, they become hostile to it. So it is in
all other states, that there are strange birds in the world who keep
their state faithfully. For it has trouble and unwillingness; whoever
should lead it rightly and godly, will soon see what danger is in it,
and how hard it becomes, that he will often complain, as the world
cries, that it is a hard miserable life, and will soon say: Who would
have believed that he would have so much trouble? Oh who would be out
1)! Yes, dear, if you didn\'t want that, you should have let it stand
before. If one should have nothing else but joy and pleasure, or honor
from it, and sit on top, who would not want that? But so is the world,
that it loves nothing but carnal pleasure.

417 Whosoever therefore loveth these things is not fit for Christ. For
he who cannot suffer unpleasantness in his position, and does not want
to have work, will be much less able to hold the high office that is
called being a Christian. For if he cannot suffer a little there, what
will he do when he is to stand in battle with death, the world and the
devil, for Christ\'s sake? Therefore, whoever wants to be a Christian
must not let the world love him, because in lowly offices love must be
disregardful of carnal desires and pleasures.

418 Secondly, there is also \"the lust of the eyes. This is nothing
other than avarice, which vice is now so far ingrained.

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: Oh if it were off.

that it is almost in vain to preach against it. After all, almost no one
in any position or office has become a bully, even a public usurper 2).
What should such people do for the sake of Christ, if they do not give
their neighbor a penny for free, or without being hurt, and give in?

The third is the \"hope of life\", that everyone thinks how he can rise
high and lead others. If he is a citizen, he wants to be a knight. If he
is noble, 3) he wants to be like a prince. If he is a prince, he would
like to be emperor; and even if he were, he would not let him be
emperor. That is the rule of the world; nothing is valid and nothing
works, but only vain lust, avarice, and court. Whoever seeks this,
Christ will never be dear to him.

Therefore nothing else will come of it (Christ wants to say here),
whoever is to keep my word, must be so skilled that he is satisfied when
all three of these, pleasure and good estate, property, honor and power
are taken from him, and must leave everything that the world likes. But
this must be a heart that loves me above all things; but if it is to
love me, it must consider all such things, and be willing to let them go
and lose them. He will never do this if he thinks: \"I have my house and
farm, my wife and child, my goods, my honor and my friendship; how can I
leave them and go to them and take nothing but suffering, torment,
persecution, shame and disgrace before the whole world? Who wants to
stay with such a Lord? But if he is a Christian, he sings thus: I love
my wife, child, house and home, friendship, but not above Christ, that I
should deny him or his word for his sake, but would much rather forsake
all that the world loves, and suffer in return what it shuns and flies.
4)

421 Therefore he says here that it will happen in this way in the world,
that there will be many who will also boast of his name and word, but
they will not keep it. Because they are not so minded that

2\) Chair robber - asset robber. Chair - Vorrath, Capital.
(Kaltschmidt.)

3\) Noble - a nobleman.

4\) Jenaer, Walch and Erlanger: fleugt.

450 Erl. 49, SIS-S1S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
2S8-WI. 451

They wanted to lose something or suffer for his sake. Now it cannot be
that one could love both the world and what it has, and also cling to
him or keep his word. For both do not want to be with each other on
earth. The devil will not let it come to this, that those who want to be
Christians should keep the world\'s friendship and love. So it cannot be
that flesh and blood remain with its lust, avarice and hope, and cling
to Christ. Therefore send yourselves, if you will be my disciples, to
hold fast to me, and only dare to trust in me. If I have not deserved
that ye should love me, I will not require it of you: but I mean that I
have truly deserved it for you, that ye should love me above all things
that are in heaven and that are in earth. For I have shed my blood for
you, opened heaven for you, rent hell for you, reconciled the Father,
and given all things to you through my own one body. Your mammon, goods,
honor, sweet and gentle life can never do you as much good as I have
done. There is enough reason why you should prefer me; there is no lack
of me, I have earned it abundantly 1) and well. But it is the fault of
your Adam, blood and flesh that you would rather have a good, gentle,
glorious and splendid life, which you have here for a little while and
will never have hereafter.

422 Whoever then does not respect these things and sets his love on
other things, forsakes me and my word for the sake of a penny, yes, for
the sake of a word, what does he have against it? Again, take and count
from the top of this whole chapter, and especially what he has now said,
and you will find it. As that he promised such rich comfort to his
Christians, that he would reveal himself to them, and his Father would
love them, and come to them, and make his abode with them 2c. From this
follows here the contradiction, that the others all shall have none of
the blessed consolation and the glorious promises. The Father will not
love them, nor reveal himself to them in Christ, nor come to them 2c.
From this, count back for yourself what harm they must have,

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: honest.

if they do not love Christ. For what is it if God does not love a man,
nor wants to be with him? What has he gained if he has all the world\'s
goods and glory?

Where he does not love you, you are condemned and lost. For where God\'s
love 2) is not, there is no grace, but only wrath and hell. Where he
does not reveal himself, you are blinded and remain in eternal darkness.
Where God does not come to you and dwell with you, the devil dwells with
you with all his angels. What is a man without Christ and God? If God is
not with him, then he is the devil\'s own, subject to all wrath and
misfortune, and assigned to the hellish fire, as he lives, walks and
stands. As John 3:48 says, \"He who believes is not judged, but he who
does not believe has already been judged, and God\'s wrath abides on
him.\" For here is no remedy, the Father must either be gracious to us,
or be angry; either God must be and dwell with us, or the devil; Christ
must reveal Himself, or we remain blinded altogether.

424 Therefore, if the world does not want to have Christ, but follows
its lust, its avarice and hope, that it wants to have everything here,
to float above in honor and power, it is not helped by this, and still
has nothing from it, because it loses God\'s grace and Christ, closes
heaven to itself, and in return takes upon itself eternal wrath,
disgrace, the devil with all hell, and sinks into the abyss; in
addition, it does not keep such temporal good for long, but in the end
must also do without it. But it does not want to believe such, thinks it
is not so evil. But still it is written here, and is held up to us by
Christ himself, so that we do not also throw it to the wind, as the
unbelievers do, and think that we firmly hold on to this Lord Christ,
and do not let ourselves be too fond of the world\'s good, pleasure and
splendor, where it concerns this man and his word. For he also gives us
those goods sufficiently and abundantly, wife, child, house and farm,
authority and honor; but so that he wants to be master over them, and if
it wants to apply, to lose Christ and to avoid, or to keep this, that
one gives leave to the same all; as,

2\) Erlanger: \"the love\" instead of: God\'s love.

[452 Erl. 49, SIS-LIS. Sermon on John 14:24. W. VIII, 28I-2W.
453]{.underline}

Praise God, many pious people have done and still do. As we also see
many who only do the opposite, and only seek the pleasures of the world,
and so rage and rage for it, as if they wanted to take it all to
themselves, and be everything. But we will also see how they will
descend into the abyss of hell without any mercy, even if they do not
believe it now.

**V. 24. And the word that you hear is not mine, but the Father\'s who
sent me.**

425\. How can the man speak thus? Hard before he said: \"He who has my
word and keeps it\" 2c. and now he speaks: \"My words are not mine, but
my father\'s.\" How then are they at the same time his, and not his
words? But it is always that he is diligent to speak in such a way that
he first brings us to himself, and when we have been brought to him, he
then goes straight to the Father; so that when we hear him speak, we
immediately learn to say, \"This is what the Father speaks to me through
this Christ;\" and draw comfort, joy and love from him, that there is no
other word of God to me or from me in heaven, nor do the angels hear any
other than that Christ speaks to me.

426 Therefore it is the same, that he saith, He that keepeth my word;
and, The words which I speak are not mine, but the Father\'s. For they
are not of me, neither am I the beginning of the word; but the Father
hath commanded me, and ordained me, that no man should doubt, or say,
Yea, Christ preacheth sweetly and finely; but who knoweth what the
Father saith above? He comforts me that he loves me and will reveal
himself to me and dwell with me 2c. Yes, if it were certain? If I heard
it from the Father 1) himself, from heaven. No (he says), thou needest
not, and wouldest gape in vain for it, but shalt be sure that the Father
which is in heaven speaketh no other word than that which thou hearest
out of my mouth, that it is truly not mine, but the Father\'s word, and
is called.

This is good, that one does not separate the three persons of the divine
majesty from each other, but knows, if one has One, that One is the
other.

1\) Erlanger: \"from him\" instead of: from the father.

When you hear a person, you hear the whole Godhead. Therefore, when you
hear Christ\'s word, you must hear it as if you were hearing nothing but
God\'s word, and you must regard it as if there were no other word in
heaven and earth but this. For this sweet and sweet word, which sounds
upon me on earth, sounds also upon me in heaven, so that I must not
think that God is angry with me. For here I hear his word, which is of
all grace, love, comfort, help, and blessedness, that I should not be
dismayed or afraid.

This is not only so that I may take comfort and be sure of God\'s mercy,
but also so that I may resist the devil when he challenges me with
terror and grief, or with other doctrines, and call him a liar and a
blasphemer, saying, \"I have the word that God speaks in heaven before
all the holy angels, and on earth before all creatures and men; I will
keep it and hear no other. For it is not my poem, but the truth revealed
from heaven, which all angels hear without ceasing, and rejoice over it,
saying yea and amen to it. And I can boast that I am not the only one
who teaches and 2) says such things; but all creatures, both, all the
heavenly host, and on earth all Christians, hold with me. Such assurance
helps greatly to become confident, bold and courageous against all kinds
of temptation, as well as against the world and the devil.

It also awakens the heart to do and suffer all that a Christian should
do and suffer. For who can conclude without doubt: God Himself in heaven
says that I should confess and preach this Christ and do what He calls
me to do; he still goes so freshly and joyfully that nothing becomes too
difficult for him that is above it. And every man in his state and
profession can thus say: Here I have the word of God, that through
Christ I have a gracious God in heaven 2c., and that here on earth, as a
ruler or magistrate, I should faithfully carry out my appointed office;
as a subject, servant or maid, diligently and faithfully carry out my
obedience and service.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: or.

454 Erl. 4S, SI8-M0. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
LS3-LSU. 455

perform 2c. I will do that with all my heart. And he does it as if he
sees God Himself up in heaven before his eyes.

430 For so it is in the world: When the Lord himself is before the eyes
and looks, all that he wills is done. As also the proverb saith, The man
is himself; and the wise men have said: The eye of the master makes the
horse fat; and: The footsteps of the master fertilize the field; item:
The eyes of the housewife cook well; that is, that the master and the
wife themselves watch diligently, and keep an eye on how things are
done, and let them remember and see how they have done it.

431 So here too, the most important thing in Christianity and all good
works is to always have the word of the Lord before our eyes and to look
at his mouth, so that we not only gain love and a good heart toward him,
but also become fresh, brave and eager to do everything that pleases God
and to suffer much that we would not otherwise do or suffer. For where
the word comes from the heart, one does not do otherwise, but like a
lazy maid or servant, when his master or wife is not at home, snores and
sleeps, and as Christ says Matth. 24, 49, begins to drink himself drunk
with the drunkards, still cares nothing what he should do, or what his
master wants him to do 2c.

This is that he does not speak to them of the Father as being far away
from them, up in heaven, nor does he point to his own person or mouth,
but shows that his word is not his, but the Father\'s word, and that he
himself speaks this to them, and is also present with them in their
hearts, so that they should have no other thoughts of him, nor seek any
other word than that which they hear here in Christ. 2)

**I have spoken these things to you because I have been with you. But
the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom my Father will send in my name, he
will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all that I have
said to you.**

1\) \"Here\" is missing in the Wittenberg. Instead of \"hear\" there is:
have.

He hastens to make up his mind to get up and go away to his 2)
suffering, for he has still spoken all these things over the table. I
have told you many good things,\" he says, \"to comfort and strengthen
you, that you may be undaunted and not grieve at my departure. Now these
are such words and sayings, which you hear with your ears, because I am
present, but they are still too high for you, and yet you will not
understand them; when you see me taken away from you, then it will soon
be over and forgotten what I now tell you and comfort you. But
afterward, when the Comforter comes, whom I have promised you, he shall
teach you in detail, so that you may understand and remember all that I
have said to you. Otherwise I would have spoken it in vain, and you
would forget everything, as you do not now have it in your hearts and
cannot understand it. For you are still too weak in flesh and blood to
grasp any more than you hear with your ears; therefore the Holy Spirit
must come and press it into your hearts and make you wise by experience,
so that you may understand what I mean and receive and feel the comfort
I have given you.

434 Now this is also a very comforting saying, and well to be
remembered; as we heard above \[v. 17.That Christianity has this
promise, that the Holy Spirit will always be with it, and not only that,
but also to teach and remind it until the last day; as we also confess,
\"I believe in the Holy Spirit,\" and \"a holy Christian church,\" so
that it is testified that the Holy Spirit is with Christianity and
sanctifies it, namely, through the Word and Sacrament, by which He works
inwardly the faith and knowledge of Christ. These are the instruments
and means by which he sanctifies and purifies Christianity without
ceasing, by which it is also called holy in the sight of God, not at all
from what we do or are ourselves, but that the Holy Spirit has been
given to us, as we will hear hereafter.

435 And this is a necessary consolation for the Christians, so that they
do not doubt that the Christian church will remain in the world in the
midst of all the people.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: zum heiligen.

456 Erl. tg, \[so-sss. Sermon on John 14:25, 26. w. VIII, 2M-2K9. 457

Unbelievers, Turks, pagans, Jews, heretics, and hordes, even in the
midst of the wicked devil and his angels. For here is the promise which
is not denied nor lacking: The Holy Spirit shall teach you all things,
and bring them to remembrance 2c. That we may be sure of this, and may
cheerfully boast, and thereupon dare all things, live and die, that we
have the Holy Spirit, if we have and believe the word of the Lord
Christ, and may assuredly conclude with ourselves, Let devil, death, and
sin be against me, yet am I holy. For that I believe in Christ, and have
come to know him, and rightly understand and use the Word and Sacrament,
I have not from my own head, but from the Holy Spirit.

436 For these things are by no means to be despised, nor to be put to
wind. For they are the very means by which the Christian church is made
and preserved by the Holy Spirit, and therefore is and is called holy;
though they are common 1) and seem small, and are bestowed on some who
abuse them or make heresy of them, or boast of them only in appearance,
and yet are false in heart. And because it is such a small thing to look
at, it is despised that one thinks the Holy Spirit is high up in heaven,
and we here on earth, and must attain it ourselves by our life and work,
if we want to become holy.

437 For this reason monasticism has been raised up and it has been said:
This is a holy order; item: These are holy fathers 2c., and yet next to
it it has been made so uncertain that no one among them can nor should
be allowed to declare himself holy for his person. That is a loose,
rotten reason, and vain false glory, to call a state or order holy, and
yet none of the persons, when they all come together in one heap, can
say: I am holy. What the devil is the holy order to me, which makes no
one holy? Or, what do they serve, because they open people\'s mouths in
vain, and only hinder and lead away the right holiness to recognize and
receive, which the Holy Spirit gives.

438\. but a Christian can thus boast with

1\) \"are\" is missing m the Wittenberger and in the Erlanger.

Truth and reason: I believe in the Holy Spirit who sanctifies me and all
believers. Therefore, I am in a holy order; not St. Francisci, but
Christ, who sanctifies me through his Word and Sacrament. O God protect
me, say those monastic saints, from such presumption; I am a poor
sinner. Go on, then, run to Rome, Jerusalem, and through all the orders
and monasteries, and see when you will become holy. But it is said, If
thou wert holy thyself, thou wouldest have no need of the Holy Ghost:
but because we are all sinners and unclean in ourselves, therefore the
Holy Ghost must do his work upon us. He gives us the word and baptism of
the Lord Christ, and his power, not only that you may be in holy orders,
but also that you yourself may be personally holy, saying, \"I am not
holy of myself, but by the blood of Christ, that I may be sprinkled,
even washed, in baptism; item, by his gospel, which is spoken over me
daily. Therefore such foolish, false, and hurtful humility is not to be
commended, that thou for thy sin wouldest deny that thou art holy, for
that would be to deny Christ\'s blood and baptism; and not to me the
Christian church, wherein we should come together unto the gospel,
baptism, and sacrament, and yet not be holy, nor have the Holy Ghost.

439 But so it should be distinguished: There are two kinds of holiness,
or, being holy may be understood in two ways. First, by and through
ourselves, as there are the monks\' order and self-chosen clergy. This
is nothing but the word or name that it is called holiness, but
basically false and dishonest, and before God nothing but sin and stink.
For in us and out of us grows nothing but unholiness and uncleanness;
let \[one\] be a barefoot or other monk and workman, and he remains a
damned sinner, as he was born of Adam. Therefore I will not be called
holy by myself, nor for my own sake, nor by any man, nor boast of
holiness; but therefore I am holy, that with undoubted faith and
undaunted conscience I may say, Though I be a poor sinner, yet is Christ
holy with his baptism, word, sacrament, and holy things.

458 Erl. 4\", p22-22S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII.
WS-271. 459

Spirit. This is the one right holiness, given to us by God.

440 Yes, you say, how do I come to this? or, what is the Holy Spirit to
me? Answer: He baptized me, and preached the gospel of Christ, and
awakened my heart to believe. Baptism did not come from me, neither did
the gospel and faith, but he gave them to me. For the fingers that
baptized me are not man\'s, but the Holy Spirit\'s; and the preacher\'s
mouth and word, which I have heard, is not his, but the Holy Spirit\'s
word and preaching, which by such inward means gives faith, and so
sanctifies.

441 Therefore, as little as we should deny that we are baptized and
Christians, so little should we deny or doubt that we are holy. And it
would be good for people to think and get used to this, not to be afraid
or shy away from it. Just as I and others are so low in our monasticism
and unbelief that I was frightened by the fact that a man on earth
should consider himself holy or be called holy. For our thoughts were
only upward among the departed saints or blessed in heaven; yet in
Scripture this word \"holy\" is always said of the living on earth.
As 1) St. Paul commands almost in all epistles to greet all saints;
item: All saints greet you; and 1 Tim. 5, 10. of the widows he speaks:
\"If she has washed the saints\' feet.\" There he freely called all
Christians saints by their name. And so, in the beginning of
Christianity, for a long time they called each other saints, and should
still be so. For it is not a hope that Christians call themselves saints
after Christ, but an honor and praise to God. For by this we do not
praise our own stinking holiness of works, but His baptism, Word, grace
and Spirit, which we do not have from ourselves, but have been given to
us by Him.

442 So learn from this text how and where to look for the Holy Spirit;
not above the clouds, but where Christ is.

1\) Wittenberger: And.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: an.

and says, \"The Comforter, whom the Father will send to you,\" and \"he
shall teach you all things and bring them to your remembrance. Therefore
he must not remain sitting above, but be sent down to the Christians;
and whoever shall find and obtain him must not gape up, 3) as we have
done, as if he were hovering above the dead saints, apostles, martyrs,
virgins, 2c., but he is here on earth, as Christianity is on earth. For
where the same is, there he shall also be for ever and ever, as he said
above \[v. 17.So that he may be drawn and united into the ministry and
government of Christianity, the Word and the Sacrament, and that the
same may be highly exalted and praised, that where this is, and whoever
receives it, the Holy Spirit is certainly present, and is received, and
works through it, enlightening hearts, and giving knowledge of Christ,
or faith, and so making sinners pure and holy.

This is our consolation and defiance, that we can confidently boast on
good grounds, and say: We are holy, and among ourselves holy brethren,
in Wittenberg, Rome, Jerusalem, 2c., and where holy baptism and the
gospel is, and do not look upon ourselves differently among ourselves,
but as God\'s saints. Even though we are still sinners, and always have
many infirmities in our flesh and blood, yet if we remain attached to
Christ, and by His baptism, and rely on His blood, He covers our sin and
impurity, and makes us completely pure and holy in the sight of God.
Behold, thus the Christian church is to be honored and regarded, so that
one takes down the defilement which they have smeared upon us, and have
pointed this name only to the departed souls and to their ranks and
orders, when they themselves must say in faith: I believe a holy
Christian church, the congregation or gathering of the saints 2c., and
yet against it no living man can point out or boast such 2c.

444 But if we confess the faith rightly, \"a holy church,\" 2c. we need
not doubt that we are holy; as thou needest not doubt that thou art
baptized, and that Christ is holy.

3\) Wittenberger: gauffen.

4\) Erlanger: \"Baptism remain, on\".

460 Eri. \"9, Ms-227. sermon on John 14:25, 26. w. vm, 271-274. 461

Blood is shed for you. If you believe this, you must also confess that
you are holy. For this is the Holy Spirit, who gives you Christ and his
holiness, and works faith in you. It is true that the Holy Spirit
sometimes causes Christians to fall, to err, to stumble, and to remain
in sin; and for this very reason he does not please us as if we were
holy of ourselves, but that we learn what we are and from whom we have
holiness; otherwise we would become too hopeful and presumptuous.

445 Christ therefore says: \"The Comforter, the Holy Spirit, whom the
Father will send in my name, he will teach you all these things. There
he describes and circumscribes the office of the Holy Spirit, which he
is to lead.

Our papists have also miserably and shamefully torn up this comforting
text, and thus taken away the very thing that Christ gives here.
Therefore, we must also act to sweep out such smeared filth. For so they
have interpreted it: Christ says that the Holy Spirit is with the
Christian church and teaches it everything; this is right and true.
Therefore it follows that what the Christian church concludes, the Holy
Spirit does. Now the church has decreed that the laity should receive
only one form of the sacrament; item, that one should not eat meat on
certain days and times; item, it has confirmed the spiritual orders and
monastic vows, purgatory and masses for souls, pilgrimage and service to
saints, and all the same sweat; therefore one should keep such things
and be obedient for the sake of the soul\'s blessedness. And he who is
not obedient to the pope and bishops is not obedient to the Christian
church; but he who does not obey the church is disobedient to the Holy
Spirit.

So they have deceived the simple with such cries, and have driven all
the world and brought it into their compulsion, so that no one has been
allowed to protest against it. Yes, they have gone so far that they want
to conclude from this with all joy, yes, with all nonsense: The church
is more than the Holy Spirit and Christ himself with his gospel. For
although the Holy Spirit through Christ has taught and ordained
otherwise than that the holy sacrament in both forms should be
administered to all Christians, he has not done so.

nor should it remain as the church concludes and regulates it. Let
Christ, God\'s Word and Gospel be what they are; what the church says is
said, it is to be followed without any contradiction. Thus they have
forcibly made baptism, gospel, sacrament and everything null and void,
so that it should and must no longer be valid, as they want it to be,
and in addition they have annulled it by their monasticism and works
doctrine; everything from this saying.

448 And here they were skillful (so that they made a noise before the
people\'s eyes and were not caught) with the devil\'s art of lying, who
also uses to lead the Scriptures, but only piecemeal and falsely 1) so
that he plucks out what serves to deceive and leaves what is against
him. Therefore we must open our eyes, so that we can recognize such
devilish monkey play and blind grips, and push his lies into his jaws.

449\. There are two pieces in this text. For Christ speaks plainly:
\"The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name.\" Item: \"He
will teach you and remind you of all that I have said to you.\" Here the
most distinguished words are: \"in my name\"; and: \"what I have said to
you.\" They let them go, and flutter over, as if it were nothing, or had
been spoken by a fool. But it is not so to stumble and stumble, dear
devil, but put glasses on your nose, and look at it, or even leave it.
The Holy Spirit, he says, is to have the office of teaching and
reminding Christianity of the word of the Lord Christ; as he says
afterwards in the 15th chapter, v. 26, \"He will testify of me\"; and in
the 16th chapter, v. 14, \"He will transfigure me,\" 2c., not thus, \"He
will give the church power to conclude and set what she will over God\'s
word. He does not have the office to change baptism, gospel and
sacrament, or to make new law and order; but only my word, order and
foundation, that he shall handle and plant in you, and teach you what I
have said.

450\. from which is now easily the devil

1\) Wittenberger: carnal.

[462 **Erl. 49, W7-SS9.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 274-27.\"** 463]{.underline}

to answer: I hear well the terrible words that you speak: Christian
church, and Holy Spirit, before which everyone should bow down and say
nothing against it, but I also want to hear what and who the Christian
church is called and is; then let us become one, so that we understand
the language. Yes, you say, I mean the pope in Rome, cardinals, bishops,
doctors, spiritual fathers, when they come together and conclude or
arrange something. Yes, the devil thanks you, who calls you to abuse
such a glorious name, which is to be held in all honor, for such foolish
work, what one should eat or 1) drink on this or that day, or how long a
bishop\'s cloak should be, how wide or broad monks\' caps and plates
should be 2c., and how high or low each one should sit. Does this mean
Christ\'s word and order? or did he or his apostles ever teach a word of
it?

So you see that these boys are two-faced, taking the word: Holy Spirit,
church, and dragging it on their trumpery, and in addition not teaching
a word what Christ has said or ordered, yes, teaching and doing the very
contradiction, and leading, just under the name of Christ and the Holy
Spirit, the people of Christ and the Holy Spirit. Christ did not say
that I must believe and accept everything that pope, cardinals and
bishops decide, but I should hear the Christian church, which has the
Holy Spirit, sent by the Father in Christ\'s name, who teaches it
nothing but what he has said, that is what it should be, and by that I
should know it. So you, as an evildoer, take this name and lead it to a
boys\' school that asks nothing everywhere about what Christ has
commanded or ordained. They go beyond 2), conclude and set what they
themselves want, and then say: the Holy Spirit has done it. Yes, they
may go out so brazenly that they put such a bunch of rascals above
God\'s word, and say: the church is above the gospel. As if a Christian
church were without Christ and his Word. And because they sit on top,
and conclude without, yea, against Christ\'s word; so must the Holy
Ghost

1\) Jenaer: and.

2\) \"about that\" is missing in the Erlanger.

He shall be with them, and do and confirm all that they want him to do,
and call it the church, and command everyone to hear and obey it as God
Himself, forfeiting their blessedness. Yes, wait for it. But he will
leave it alone, for Christ describes him as a teacher who teaches and
proclaims his word.

When you hear such people preaching about the Lord Christ, acting and
practicing his word, baptism, suffering and resurrection, you can say
3): Here I hear the true Christian church, for there is the Holy Spirit,
who teaches and reminds what Christ has said; not a man\'s condition of
food, drink, clothing. - For what is that to the Christian church, or
what may the Holy Spirit be used for? Surely every householder can do it
in his house, with his servants. What should a pagan lack, who 4) has
heard nothing of Christ, the Holy Spirit, or the church, that he should
not be able to make an order to eat fish or meat on such a day, to
celebrate or fast, to wear red, brown, black or gray skirts? What kind
of art or revelation of the Spirit is it that a cardinal sits over a
bishop, the bishop over a prince, 2c. that any pagan and unchristian
could not order it himself? For for this purpose God has given reason to
rule on earth, that is, to have power to make law and order of
everything that concerns this bodily life, with eating, drinking,
clothing; item, to keep outward discipline and live honorably 5). Such
rule is not only of Christians, but mostly of pagans and Turks. For as
Christians we have nothing to do with it, and the Holy Spirit\'s
ministry is not concerned everywhere, but he deals with other things,
namely, that he 6) cleanses us from sins, redeems us from death, sets us
free from the devil, extinguishes the hellish fire, and makes us holy,
alive, and eternal children of God. This is not accomplished with caps,
platters, eating fish or meat, but it belongs to the fact that the

3\) \"Suffering \.... treiben\" is missing in the original and in the
Wittenberg.

4\) Erlanger: \"who also\".

5\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: honest.

6\) \"he\" is missing in the Erlanger.

464 **Erl. 49, SS9-SS1. Sermon On Joh. 14, 25. 26. W. VIII, 27K-27S.**
465

Word and sermon hear of Christ who shed his blood for us and died.

Therefore let us look at this text, keep it pure, and hold it up to
their noses, that it says: \"The Comforter, whom the Father will send in
my name, will teach you 1) all things. They leave this outside, and
smear the slime on it, so that it comes in our name; if we popes,
cardinals and bishops thus conclude, then the Holy Spirit has done it.
But this is called in Christ\'s name, where Christ is understood, known,
and believed, where his baptism and preaching are done. Item: \"He shall
teach you and remind you what I have said to you,\" that it is my word
and teaching, and he shall keep it that way, and remind you of it, so
that you may understand and judge that it is my word, and just what I
have said to you; 2) and thus cross it out, and make it clearer from day
to day, so that you may know me better and better, how you are saved
from sins and death through me.

I say this in answer to our papists, who come along with this saying,
and praise the glorious name of the Christian church, that the Holy
Spirit teaches it, therefore one must keep what it says; for this is
true and right. But there it is a question of looking at who is the
church or who is not. This is to be seen and judged (says Christ),
whether my word is there. For the Holy Spirit shall come in my name, and
teach what I have said. But if it is something else, or not according to
this word, then it is not the Christian church. For how would the church
come to change and repent of their Lord\'s word? If they were the true
church, they would say: I hold to my dear Lord Christ\'s word, so I
stick to it. Accordingly I will conclude, and will not hold with those
who want to do otherwise; as she did before, when she condemned all
heresy and false doctrine, but not from her own head, as the pope does
with his flocks, but according to the Scriptures and Christ\'s word, and
thus concluded: This is what my Christ says, this is what the Holy
Spirit has taught me; therefore

1\) Wittenberger: he will.

2\) Erlanger: sage.

I conclude and say that Arius and others who teach against it are
heretics and accursed teachers. This then is called rightly concluded,
as the Christian church ought to conclude; and this ought to be kept and
obeyed. But what is different from garments, food and other outward
show, that is not so concluded; for it is not Christ\'s word, but from
the pope\'s own conceit; there they may order what they will, but it is
none of the church\'s business. For what God\'s word teaches, and
Christianity concludes, does not belong to this life, but up to that
life, and therefore must also go, not from our head, but from above,
from Christ, and according to his command.

455 When we have received this text against the Pabstrotts, then other
spirits come from the other side and say that they are the ones who have
the Spirit, and they know nothing to boast about but pure spirit, and
they also make a great show of it and use splendid words, as now the
Anabaptists and their like, and in former times the Montani and many
others. And this alone is the quarrel with all the sects, that they want
to have the Holy Spirit, and therefore have believed them. And we must
always be in battle with the devil and false spirits.

456 But if we look at this saying and the like, we can judge rightly and
reject everything that is against it. For they bring what they will, so
I know well what my Lord Christ says and what I should believe. If
someone comes and presents something to me as taught or revealed by the
Holy Spirit, I hold to this word and hold his teaching against it as the
right touchstone. If I see that it agrees with what Christ says, I let
it be right and good. But if it wants to go aside and do something else,
then I say: You are not the Holy Spirit, but the wicked devil; for the
right spirit comes in no other name than Christ\'s, and teaches nothing
else than what the Lord Christ has said. So we can protect and defend
ourselves from all kinds of error and false spirits, if we only stick to
this, and keep this saying right and pure, and know that the Holy Spirit
does not bring people into the world.

[466 Erl. 49, M-SS4. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
M-WI. 467]{.underline}

We are not afraid of the truth, but of great, serious things, of Christ
with His gifts; and we can boldly rely on it, and also 1) conclude that
we, who have Christ, are holy before God, and have the Holy Spirit with
us, contrary to all other self-chosen holiness.

**V. 27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give to you; not as the
world gives do I give to you.**

457 These are the last words of him who will pass away and give good
night or blessing. This shall be my valete (he says); I depart, and know
not how to leave you anything in the world; but my testament, and what I
will leave you, that is peace. And he sets forth two words: One says,
\"Peace I leave unto you.\" And the second, \"My peace I give unto
you.\" To this he declares the two with an addition, that he says, \"not
as the world giveth,\" 2c. As if to say, I know no greater treasure to
leave you than that it may go well with you. For no man hath peace,
except it be well with him, as it shall be with him. Therefore in the
Hebrew language the 2) little word \"peace\" means nothing else than
well-being. I leave these things behind me, that it may go well with
you, or that it may be well with you, that you may not say to me that I
have left peace and trouble with you.

Now this is a very comforting and sweet last word, that he leaves them,
not cities and castles, nor silver and gold, but peace, as the highest
treasure in heaven and earth, that they may have neither terror nor
mourning from him, but right, beautiful, desired peace in their hearts.
For as much as in me is (saith he), ye shall have nothing else but peace
and joy. For thus have I preached unto you, and so dealt with you, that
ye have seen and known that I love you with all my heart, and do all
good, and that my Father doth mean you with all graces. This is the best
I can leave and give you. For this is the highest peace, when the heart
is satisfied; as

1\) \"also\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Jenaer: \"to\".

They say: Joy of heart is above all joy, and again: Sorrow of heart is
above all sorrow.

There is nothing with the joy of children and fools, of beautiful
clothes, counting money, pleasure and happiness, because this joy lasts
for a moment, and yet the heart remains uncertain and in discord or
worry. For it cannot say that it has a gracious God, always has an evil
conscience, or has a false hope, which nevertheless doubts that it
always remains in strife and unrest, driven by the devil; even if they
do not feel it now in their great worldly joy, it is nevertheless found,
when the hour comes, that the strife begins. Therefore you have nothing
more to complain about, I leave you the excellent, high treasure that
you can have a good, fine, peaceful heart toward God and me, because I
leave you the love and friendship of my Father, and mine; as you have
seen and heard nothing else in me, but sweet, kind words and works, and
these are not mine, but the Father\'s; therefore you have everything
that you may desire from me, even if I go from you, and you see me no
more.

Whoever could believe and grasp this from the right heart, would also
experience and feel such peace, and could finely judge and conclude that
all thoughts are false and 3) from the wicked devil, which present
Christ to man 4) as if he were angry with him and wanted to condemn him.
For he speaks these very words against such thoughts, as if to say,
\"Have you never once seen or heard from me an unkind word or work, but
only grace and love; why then will you not be joyful and of good cheer?
Whence then are ye troubled, and afraid, and foolish? Ye have no cause
of strife: for I have so lived with you, that ye have love and peace
from me.

461 Thus it is read of the apostle St. Peter, 5) that after the
ascension of the Lord he wept day and night until it had eaten into his
flesh that he had lost his eyes.

3\) Wittenberger: and also.

4\) Wittenberger: \"a sinner\" instead of: man.

5\) The same history is found in the Tischreden, Cap. 7, § 164. Walch,
St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 348.

468 Eu. 49, \[\[4-s \"s. Sermon on John 14, 27. W. vin, 28l-284. 469

He always had to dry himself with a little cloth and said that he could
not leave it alone if he remembered the friendly nature and the sweet,
sweet words of Christ. And I can well believe that it is true. For if
you had such a master, who had shown you nothing but love and
friendship, and he were taken from you, would it not hurt you to
remember it? Now we also have in him such a Lord that we can say nothing
else but: What he speaks and does is sweet love. To this he himself
says: As I speak and deal with you, so my Father in heaven speaks and
deals with you. This should make the heart glad, if only it believed
that it could joyfully and defiantly despise the devil and all the
world\'s wrath and rage, and laugh at them.

462 But though these things are easily preached and said, yet they are
not easily believed. For they, the apostles, also heard it well and
preached it, and yet could not grasp it so firmly in faith. We have
nothing that should give us cause for discord against God. He has given
us his holy baptism, word, sacrament, keys and gifts of the Holy Spirit.
Who can say that we have received anything else from Him but His grace,
love and comfort? If he promises us the blood and death of Christ in the
baptism of the Lord, and through this forgiveness and washing away of
sin, closes hell and opens heaven, what can there be in him for peace or
sourness? There is nothing in it but wholesome, living, sweet, and
joyful words; why then should I be afraid of him, or say that he would
cast me away and cast me away?

Likewise in the holy sacrament, he gives me neither poison nor death,
but only wholesome, sweet, living food and drink; item, both in the
pulpit and in absolution, he lets me preach nothing else but his own
word: \"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life\" 2c.
\[John 3:16\] What can there be for anger or terror? For he himself has
given me his only begotten Son, and that I may be assured that he will
not

will leave me lost. This means nothing else than peace left and given.

464 Therefore we can joyfully boast: Just as the apostles heard it
personally and presently from the mouth of the Lord Christ, so we have
kept it through the apostles, and through their descendants and our
fathers, who preach to us in this way, just as they preached and
received from Christ himself, so that we have the same grace, love, and
joy that he boasts of leaving and giving to them. For he is departed
from them bodily, that he is seen no more: but he hath left behind him
the peace of all Christendom. Where there? Nowhere, but in his baptism,
sacrament, and preaching ministry; I will silence the other gifts and
goods, so he gives us (also bodily), father and mother, authority,
regiment, temporal peace 2c. How angry can he be, if he lets the sun
rise daily and gives us good weather, all kinds of plants, fruits and
food from the earth, healthy body and limbs? That we must say, if we
could look at it right: He has left us a wonderful treasure; first of
all, peace and joy toward him, and in addition, on earth and in the
flesh, all kinds of good things, so that we can see and grasp that he is
merciful and willing to help.

465 Therefore, we should not be frightened or despondent before him. He
does not want to do us any harm, otherwise he would not have given his
word, baptism and sacrament. Let those who do not have these things 1)
be terrified and lament. For there is no wrath and plague more terrible
than when these things are not or are taken away. But again, if one has
these things, he has the most certain sign of his supreme grace, love,
and peace, if he 2) can only look at it that way, and certainly believe
it. This is the comfort he gives them for the last. This shall be my
last will and your humble portion: I will also leave you this treasure,
that you may know that you have a gracious Father and a kind Lord in me.
This is the true treasure, which brings us all good and eternal bliss,
makes us children of God, and which is dear to us.

1\) Wittenberger: \"such treasure\". In the following, the pronouns
refer to \"treasure\".

2\) Wittenberger: unless.

[470 **Erl. t9, 2SS-2SS.** Interpretations about the evangelist John.
**W. VIII, 284-287.** 471]{.underline}

angels companions who wait from us and serve us.

But he clearly adds: \"Not as the world gives, so I give to you. There
he paints the peace further, per antithesin, against the world\'s peace.
For the world also hath peace; but I will not give it you (saith he).
For it has peace, if it does what the devil wants, he leaves it peace
and quiet. As he has done so far under the papacy, since he had nothing
to do, the wretched spirit, he went into a chamber and made a racket as
if he were a poor soul. This was only a joke and a game for him, because
he was so idle that he did not know what to do. He played the same joke
with pilgrimages, with false miraculous signs, so that he would whisper
people here and there. But now, when he is attacked with the word of
God, he leaves the game and causes trouble. He can help people to great
good, honor, and give peace and tranquility to the world, where one
alone does not believe in God; but there the discord with God arises,
that is a miserable change. Therefore I will not give you such peace
(says Christ), but against God and me, that you may be well with him,
and that there may be peace among us toward one another.

467 But in the world it shall be so unto you, that it shall become an
enemy unto you, because ye will not, neither shall ye have peace with
it; but have peace with me: I give you my divine, spiritual, blessed,
eternal peace. This will annoy the devil, and he cannot stand it,
because he is an enemy to me and the Father, and will also become an
enemy to you, for my sake. Therefore I cannot give you the peace of the
world, nor am I to wish it for you, for you would lose my peace.
Therefore you must surrender to be persecuted and so deal with you that
you cannot stay on earth. The devil will play this game with you,
because you do not want to obey him and live according to his will, but
believe in me and live according to my word, so that you do not have to
suffer this for your sake, but for the sake of my name and word; because
he is mortally hostile to me, and it is all too painful for me, that he
persecutes you and

1\) Wittenberger: \"for the sake of the father and\" 2c.

hates. Therefore set my peace against his discord, hatred and malice,
that you may despise it, and be comforted by my grace and the Father\'s
grace, love and friendship. For both must be daring and chosen: either
the devil\'s or God\'s disfavor and discord.

Before, when we did not have Christ, we had peace with the devil, but
discord with God. We went out in all corners, through monasteries,
churches, pilgrimages, etc., that we might attain God\'s peace, or a
gracious God, and yet we could not find it anywhere; but the more we
attempted it, the less peace there was. And though outwardly we had good
peace from the devil, yet the heart and conscience were despondent, so
that it feared a rustling tree leaf, and was weeded without ceasing by
all manner of doctrine and work, from one to another 2c.

But now, praise be to God, we know that we have peace with God, we must
no longer doubt or fear. For we have His Word, Sacrament, and Summa, the
whole of Christ, with all the angels and saints. Since we have them for
friends, and he is well pleased with us, let us be angry and hostile to
those who cannot leave us alone as long as they will; let us remain with
the Lord, who has left and given us his peace, and can and will keep it,
even though the devil and all the world oppose them with their discord
and all their misfortunes.

See, this is what he wants with these last words: I will depart from
you, and leave you in the devil\'s jaws, who shall be an enemy to you,
and shall put every plague upon you; which ye must wait for, if ye
cleave unto me, and rejoice of me, or be at peace. Therefore also accept
this, that the devil and the world will strike you on the mouth, and
give one defeat upon another. But abide in me alone; let my grace and
mercy and peace, body and blood, baptism, word and spirit (if I leave
you) be dearer to you than all things, and my peace shall be so strong
that it shall overcome and subdue all that strife. For though you are
outwardly afflicted, afflicted and afflicted, yet inwardly I will make
you glad and of good cheer in your heart, that such things shall not
hurt you nor overcome you.

472 **Erl. 4S, 2SS-S40. Sermon On Joh. 14, 28. W. VIII, 287-2S0.** 473

**V. 28. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. You
have heard that I said to you: I am going away, and I will come to you
again.**

471\. Then he concludes just as he began this sermon and wants to say:
Since I must now depart from you, and cannot do otherwise than that you
should have strife in the world for my sake, that the devil with his
followers should hate you, persecute you, and afflict you, prepare
yourselves for this, that ye be neither afraid nor dismayed, but be of
good cheer and courage, As I have admonished you at first and hitherto
by many a comforting and glorious promise, and have told you so many 1)
things, which shall make you glad and undaunted, that ye may be well and
abundantly refreshed of the little lack (that I depart from you bodily,
item, that ye must suffer outwardly in the world). Only do not let this
frighten you so much, whether you will see me crucified so shamefully
and miserably, and you will be scattered and in great misery and sorrow
before the world, and according to your feelings; it shall not be so
evil as it can be seen. For such outward mourning and affliction,
persecution and plagues, shall not endure for ever, nor remain forever,
for I will come to you again and rejoice both in body and in spirit.

472 And so he did. Physically he departed from them the three days of
his suffering from this life, but on the third day he came to them again
and showed himself alive; then they rejoiced again and began to
understand the things he had said to them before. But his going away is
not only to be interpreted as the three days when he visibly departed
from the apostles and came back; but it always does both spiritually to
his Christians, so that they may also take this comfort (that he both
departs from them and comes back). And if they feel in temptation as if
they have lost Christ, yet if they believe in him as his disciples, have
his baptism and word, and eat with him daily at his table (by the
sacrament of his body and blood), let them not despair, if they do not
feel him present with his

1\) \"much\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

Comfort, power, strength, salvation and help, and it seems that he has
left them alone among the enemies, in weakness and mourning, but they
should take comfort in the fact that he promises them here that he will
come to them 2c.

473\. For it cannot be so evil with us as it was with the apostles, who
had the miserable sight of Christ being so shamefully executed before
their eyes, and in such weakness that he did not defend himself with a
word, and was even forsaken by God, that they themselves were offended
at him, and stood with scorn and shame, as the great fools that they had
clung to him, that they also said: He is now gone, there we are, what
have we done now? But if we are to suffer anything for his sake, it must
be such that he looks as if he were far away from us and would never
come back, that we no longer feel any comfort in heaven or on earth. But
we are told here to learn hard against hard; that is, not to judge by
such seeing and feeling of his going away or parting, nor to sink the
heart in terror, but to hold fast to this comforting promise (as the
apostles also had to do in their suffering after his departure), that he
said here \[v. 2\], \"Believe only in me; in my Father\'s house are many
mansions.\" And, \"I will prepare a place for you, that ye may be where
I am.\" Item \[v. 4.\], \"Ye know already the way whither I go\"; and so
will I rule with you, that ye shall do the same works, and much greater
than I. And what ye ask, that will I do 2c. And summa (saith he), let
this be comfort enough unto you, that I have told you that I go from
you, but come again unto you.

Now, these are excellent words for anyone who could grasp and believe
them. If a child said such words to us on account of God, they should
blow out our hearts and make us brave against God; yes, if an emperor,
king or pope said it, or an angel from heaven spoke it, we would not
know how to consider it great and dear enough, and 2) how to defy it; I
think we would eat the Turk with it. Now no emperor speaks, nor

2\) \"and\" is missing in the Erlanger.

474 Erl. 49, S40-S4S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIU,
L9V-S9L. 475

The Lord himself of all angels, 1) out of his divine mouth thus: Dear
one, do not be frightened and do not be afraid. These are such words, by
which we hear that his fault is not that we are terrified and grieved;
yes, we hear that he is hostile and against such terror, and against all
who do such things. And he sincerely denies it, as if to say, \"Why do
you want to be frightened or to be grieved? Do you hear that I say you
should not do it? I have said unto you, and I say unto you again, Let
not your heart be troubled. 2c. And what I say unto you my Father also
saith, and all the angels of heaven say yea unto it, and there is no
other word in heaven but this.

It is said comfortingly enough that we should walk in vain leaps; our
poor, miserable blood and flesh cannot yet grasp such things, can be
moved so easily that it is saddened, and yet does not know itself why it
mourns. But it is the wretched devil who tears such a lovely image from
our eyes, and pushes Christ away from our hearts (or ever hides him with
his sour, dark, thick clouds), so that we do not hear what he says, and
so easily tremble and quake when only a thought of God\'s wrath and
judgment falls into our hearts. Therefore, we should learn to defend
ourselves against this, and to raise ourselves up against the devil,
yes, against our own heart, and to strengthen ourselves with this. If
you can be frightened by a roaring wind in the name of the devil and
make the world narrow, why do you not learn to be fearless against it,
since it does not roar or thunder, nor does any creature look at you
sourly, but God\'s Son, who created heaven and earth, says and commands
you in all earnestness: Be undaunted and do not fear, for I promise you,
and give you my peace and my Father\'s peace, grace, comfort and help;
for what can you blame me or have cause to fear? Without the guilt of
our flesh and of the devil, which rule in us so strongly that we are
always worried that he wants to devour us; so that we cannot unlearn
this sermon of comfort, no matter how long we learn and preach it. But
we must therefore

1\) \"but \... Angel\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

Do not desist, but always do such things against the devil\'s terror.
Why are you afraid? Do you not know that Christ himself calls you to be
confident and of good cheer?

476\. Yes, you say, I am a poor sinner and have angered God. Then strike
fortune. But do you not hear that he says to you: I give you my peace,
God\'s mercy and forgiveness of sin? You must not look here at what you
are, but at what I give you. You have my baptism, sacrament, gospel,
which are nothing else but vain signs of grace and peace. Let those be
afraid of wrath and disgrace who are secure and unafraid in an
impenitent, reprobate life and do not know Christ. For you are such a
man who would gladly have God\'s grace and forgiveness of sin, and be
comforted by Him, as one who is terrified and knows his misery. That is
why these things are said to you. For for such alone does he preach this
sermon. To whom and for what else should he say it, but to those who
need his comfort? Why then are you so foolish that you will not accept
the beautiful, comforting words and signs, nor let them go to your
heart, in which he says to you and to all stupid hearts: I do not want
my Christians to be frightened, because I know that the devil and the
world, death and all misfortune will frighten them. But I am here to
comfort them against such terror and to help them out. For I do not want
to be their devil or their master of the sticks; neither does my father.
They were frightened enough before; should I first drive up and overturn
the chariot completely, and load more misfortune on him who suffers
misfortune, and push him into hell? Then I would not be the Savior nor
Christ, but worse than the devil himself. Therefore, if you feel terror
or distress, know that this is certainly not from Christ, nor should you
give it room, but with these words you should be uplifted, in which he
admonishes you, and is called to be undaunted.

**V. 28, 29. If you loved me, you would rejoice that I said I was going
to the Father, for the Father is greater than I. I have told you this
before it happens, so that when it does happen you will believe. And now
I have told you before it comes to pass, that, when it shall come to
pass, ye may believe.**

**\
**476 **Eri. 4g, S4S-S45. Sermon on Joh. 14, 28. 29. W. VIII, LS2-2SS.**
477

This is also a comforting addition. Why do you want to grieve over my
departure? You should rather rejoice. For where am I going? Not to hell,
but to the Father, to the glorious, eternal kingdom, and give you credit
that I also bring you to glory. Therefore, if I would not go away, you
should hold me to it and urge me on, and rejoice in it, and be of good
cheer that I may soon do it.

478\. but it was spoken in this way, as among those who are loath to
part from one another, as father, mother, and child, husband and wife
2c. When one said to another whom he had to leave for the sake of the
gospel: Dear son or father, husband or wife, I would gladly have you
here with me; but you are baptized and called to the gospel. Well then,
if it cannot be otherwise, go in God\'s name; if we can no longer see
each other here, we will see each other in that life. But who can do
this? Those who hate their children or friends can do it, but not those
who love one another.

479 And indeed he himself confesses here that he does not like to part
from them, and they also do not like to part from him, and yet they must
leave each other. Therefore he speaks like a father to his children: I
will not willingly leave you; but because it must be, be content, and be
comforted, knowing whither I go. For I come not to death, nor to hell,
but into my Father\'s bosom and kingdom, that I may bring you also
thither, where ye shall be well. Therefore ye ought to rejoice 1) in my
going. For it is not such a parting that I should remain from you
forever, but both your best and mine, as he also says afterwards in
chapter 16, v. 7: \"It is good for you that I depart from you. For there
is appointed unto you a certain eternal joy, glory, 2) and a mighty
kingdom, whereunto ye could not otherwise come.

480 This is that he says, \"I go to the Father.\" For \"to go to the
Father\" means nothing else, than from this mortal life (in which I have
served the Father and you, humbled among all men), that is, from

1\) \"yes\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: magnificent.

I have gone from the pit of tears and prison to the glorious heavenly
castle and eternal divine dwelling place, where I will reign at the
right hand of the Father and be Lord over all that is in heaven and on
earth, which I cannot do in this house of service and servile being; I
must first perform my service and devote my life to it. Therefore, the
sooner the better, the more likely it is that I will be crucified and
then transfigured, so that the Holy Spirit will be sent and it will be
known that I have sat down at the right hand of the Father and have
taken my kingdom. This should be your comfort and joy, and both I and
you should gladly grant it, if you understand it and love me completely,
as you will learn hereafter. For I tell you this beforehand, so that you
may learn it later and realize for yourselves that it is the truth and
that I have meant it faithfully and sincerely for you.

481\. He then causes this and says, \"For the Father is greater than
I.\" As if to say, \"This is a great comfort to you, that I am coming
into the great kingdom of my Father, where I will reign like the Father
in eternal dominion over all creatures.

482 But this saying, though it is plainly spoken, has been used by the
heretics who denied the deity of Christ, and they have been displeased
with it. For they ran hard against the Christians with it, saying: Then
hearest thou the word of the Lord, that he saith the Father is greater
than he. Now if the Father is greater than he, Christ is not equal to
him; therefore he cannot be equal to him, the eternal God. And did
great, murderous harm with this saying. For the rabble and simple-minded
people, who have no spirit and no understanding, are easily caught up in
such talk, and cannot defend themselves.

That is why the holy fathers fought against it. Saint Hilarius
interprets it thus: Because the Father is the first person, therefore he
is called greater than Christ. But since it is proven from other places
in Scripture that Christ is the true God, this saying must be compared
with the other Scripture, namely, that the Father is greater, non natura
seu essentia, sed autoritate, not because of the divine essence, but
only because of the divine essence.

478 Erl. 4g, S4S-S47. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
29S-298. 479

because the Son is from the Father, not again, the Father from the Son.
According to this, St. Augustine also acted on this saying, and thus
said: The Son is smaller than mankind. I let that go and be good,
because the dear fathers did what they could.

But it goes, as one speaks: Who does not understand the language, he
must lack the understanding, and takes probably a cow for a horse. So
again, even if one knows the language, and yet does not understand the
thing of which one speaks, he must again be lacking. Hence all sorts of
errors and fallacies arise, that now one does not understand what the
words mean, now what the thing is. Just as it happens in other arts.
Therefore, the best and most certain thing is to always look at materiam
subjectam, how and from what, and from what causes something is spoken.
For example: What is it that the papists rumble about with the saying:
\"If you want to enter into life, keep the commandments\" \[Matth. 19,
17\]. They hear and understand the words, quid nominis? But if one asks
further, Quid rei? What then is keeping the commandments? or, how does
one keep them? Then one goes out here, the other there; and if they come
far, they remain only in the other table of the ten commandments. A
Mahometan says: it is said that one should be circumcised, not drink
wine 2c. A Papist: one should therefore fast, pray, vow chastity and
obedience; and few (if the best and most intelligent among them) come to
the works of the ten commandments. But of the doctrine of the gospel, of
Christ (which belongs first of all to keeping the law), they know
nothing at all. So it also goes over the word \"church\" and \"church
order\" (of which we have spoken above).

\[§ 454\] have said), since they make the pope with his cluster 1) alone
bear the name and title 2) of the church, yet the Scriptures speak much
differently of the church.

485 Therefore, one must diligently pay attention to it, and stay with
it, so that one sees what Christ is talking about; in this way, one can
also understand the language of Christ.

1\) Here we have erased \"so\". The meaning is: They make the pope with
his bunch alone the church, while the scripture 2c.

2\) \"Title\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

understand what it means to be greater than the Father. Now you see that
all this is not about how Christ is God or man, or what his nature and
essence are, whether he is greater or less than the Father, but about
this he says that they should not be afraid that he is going away from
them. And he puts these words to the cause: because he goes to the
Father. How does this rhyme with the fact that they should be unafraid?
Therefore it is because of that which is called \"going to the Father.
Now it does not mean to be born of the Father, but it means to enter the
Father\'s kingdom, in which he becomes like the Father, and is
recognized and honored in the same majesty. Therefore I go, saith he,
where I shall be greater than I am now, even to the Father. For the
kingdom which I am to enter at the right hand of the Father is above all
things; and it is better that I should pass from littleness and weakness
(wherein he went on earth, suffering and dying) into power and dominion,
wherein the Father is and reigns in almighty majesty.

486\. Summa, of his transfiguration he speaks, that is, of the kingdom,
where he goes out of this house of service, that he may manifestly take
his divine, almighty power and dominion, which he has with the Father
from eternity. Which he cannot do now, after and in his servant\'s
office, because he was sent into service and humility, in which he
manifested all his divine glory (as St. Paul says Phil. 2:7) and took on
the form of a servant; so that he is not only lesser than the Father,
but also humbled below all men. Therefore it did not make sense that he
would take on his glory before and before he had performed such a
servant\'s office. So it is rightly said of his present office, which he
now held on earth: The Father is greater than I, because I am now a
servant; but when I come again to my Father, then shall I be greater,
even as great as the Father is, that is, I shall reign with him in equal
power and majesty.

So he gives more to understand with these words than he speaks. For he
wants to comfort them: \"Now I am weak, and you must suffer with me,
with me despised and small.

480 Eri. 4g, S47-S4S. Sermon on John 14:28-31. W. vm, ess-Zvo. 481.

but I have a kingdom above (with the Father) that is great enough, there
I will go, and only then will I be with you, give you the spirit that
shall make you so 1) undaunted that you will not ask anything about
death, the devil and the world. So I will strengthen you by my power and
strength, so that you shall be victorious against all power and
authority on earth and in hell and be lords, even if you are weak, small
and oppressed on earth for a time (as I am now myself). But follow me,
and hold fast to me, and be not afraid that I go from you now, for I am
going where I am going to be great; and not that I alone may be there,
but that I may serve you with it, and bring you up. So he goes out of
the narrow stable of distress into the wide heaven, out of this dungeon
into his great, glorious kingdom, where he is much greater than before.
Before he was a poor, miserable, suffering and dying Christ; but now,
with the Father, he is a great, glorious, living, almighty Lord over all
creatures 2c.

488 I will leave it at that with this saying, that he speaks badly of
his passage from this life into the kingdom of the Father, then one
should not have anything to say about the divine nature of the Father
and the Son. For he nevertheless remains in his essence like the Father,
eternal God, and has thus thrown himself down on earth, into the very
weakest and least ministry, for us, and has gone to death, but by the
same passage has overcome death, and has drawn us up with him, since his
kingdom is the Father\'s kingdom, and again, is the Father\'s kingdom.

489\. Let this be the comfort that strengthens and sustains us in this
weakness and suffering that we have here for Christ\'s sake, because he
is bodily from us, so that we may also comfort ourselves among
ourselves, if we must also part, or if our dear brothers die on us, and
one says to the other: Well, you are going out of this narrow, dark hole
into a wide heaven, and out of the foul, stinking dungeon into a
beautiful, joyful paradise, out of death into life, out of the devil\'s
prison into the heavenly Father\'s.

1\) Wittenberger: so confident and 2c.

You were small and nothing here, but there you will be great and more
glorious than anything on earth. This should be the sermon and
admonition of Christians. Therefore we should rejoice and not be
dismayed at his departure, because he will become a great and mighty
Christ, and will also make his poor, little Christians great.

490\. \"These things have I told you before it comes to pass, that, when
it shall come to pass, ye may believe. He does not mean this last part
alone, but what he has said throughout this chapter, namely, that he
will prepare a place for them; item, that the Comforter will come to
them, and that he will come to them again together with the Father. I
tell you this now, but you do not understand it now. But I tell you
this, so that when it comes to pass, you may think back, \"Behold, these
things he told us before, when he was about to depart from us; then we
sat like sticks, grieved and terrified, and understood nothing of them.
But now we see and grasp what he meant 2c. So then you will believe (he
said), though you see me no more, with all Christendom, until the last
day.

491 This is the sermon he preached over the table, soon after the supper
of the Paschal Lamb, when they were still sitting together, and were
greatly distressed, because he had told them of his departure; and he
gave them herewith the last, and briefly in one piece or ten (as we have
heard), that they might be comforted. Therefore he now concludes this
chapter.

**I will not speak much to you any longer, for the ruler of this world
is coming and has nothing to do with me. But that the world may know
that I love the Father, and do even as the Father hath commanded me:
arise, and let us depart.**

The time has come for me to leave, and this is the last sermon I will
preach. For the devil is coming, and he is coming with Judah and his
multitude, and he wants to get at me, and to do his bidding. I have to
serve him, and he is angry and wrathful, he means to devour me; but it
shall come to him in such a way that it shall be

[482 **Erl. 49, 249-2SS.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 3M-S07.** 483]{.underline}

shall rend his belly. For he has no right nor fault against me, I do not
deserve it, and yet out of evil, poisonous hatred attacks me and
strangles me; but he shall pay. Therefore, secretly threaten the devil
with evil eyes, to strengthen himself against his bitter anger, and to
comfort the disciples (although they do not yet understand). As if he
should say: Come on, and try what you can, eat and choke as you like.
But you shall have to chew and gorge on the morsel, so that you have to
choke on it. I will tear it out of your belly again, and you will have
to leave me and many more that you have eaten. And that I suffer these
things, I do not do it because I am not strong enough for the devil,
whom I have often cast out and driven away; but that it may be known in
the world that I am obedient to my Father, and that the Father\'s will
may be seen and known in me, that I should redeem you by my blood and
death.

So he comforts and admonishes himself against the wretched devil. For it
now goes under \[his\] eyes, and begins to strike the heart, that he
should so miserably perish.

Let it be blasphemed and acted most shamefully, but it does no harm. Let
it only be because the Father wills that the devil be overcome and
weakened, not by might and power and glorious miracles, as was done
before by me, but by obedience and humility, in the greatest weakness,
cross and death: That I throw myself under him, and let go of my right
and power, but just by this all his right and power are taken away from
him again and won, that he also has no right and power over you, because
he attacks me without any guilt and murders me, and then must give way
before me and flee as far as the world is, condemned and damned by his
own guilt. Let this then be preached and made manifest in all the world,
that I have done this, not out of impotence or powerlessness, but out of
obedience to the Father, so as to overcome the devil, that thereby his
glory, both of his divine grace and goodness toward us, and of his
almighty power against the devil, may be praised and spread, and the
Christians comforted and strengthened thereby, and thus the devil\'s
kingdom completely destroyed. Amen.

**The fifteenth chapter.**

**V. 1. I am a true vine, and my father a vinedresser.**

001 All these things that follow in this and the sixteenth chapter the
Lord spake unto the apostles, when he arose after supper to go by the
way into the garden. And now he speaks further, not only of the
consolation which they should have after his resurrection, that they
should see him again, but which should endure for ever, when he should
be gone up to heaven, and they should be scattered abroad, having also
sufferings and persecutions. And herewith he sees before him how it will
be for his dear disciples and Christians, and at the same time couples
himself and them together, grasps both in the eyes, his suffering, as it
was now present, and also the suffering, which would subsequently pass
over the disciples; and

makes a beautiful likeness and painting of it, as if he should speak:
What shall I tell you much? I am going there and must suffer and die;
you will have to do the same hereafter. Therefore I am reminded as of a
vine and a vinedresser, for it will be the same with us as it is with
the vine and its branches.

2 This is a very comforting image, and a fine, lovely prosopopoeia, so
that it sets before the eyes, not a useless, barren tree, but the dear
vine, which, though not delicious to look at, yet bears much fruit, and
gives the sweetest, sweetest juice; and interprets all the suffering
that is to befall both him and them, that it is nothing else, but the
diligent work and maintenance that a vinedresser

[484 Erl. \"9, SSS-S54. Sermon On John 15, 1. W. VIII, 3V7-SIV.
485]{.underline}

or vine dresser does to his vine and vines, so that they may increase
and bear much. This is to teach us that we should look at the
afflictions and sufferings of Christians in a much different way than
how they feel and appear to the world, namely, that they do not happen
without divine counsel and will, and are not a sign of wrath and
punishment, but of grace and fatherly love, and must serve us for the
best.

\(3\) Now it is an art to believe and hold these things to be true, that
what grieves and distresses us should not be said to be grievous or
hurt, but done for good and good. That we should regard it as if we saw
a vine dresser hoeing and working on his vine, who, if he could hear and
speak, and saw the vinedresser coming along, and with the hoe or hoe
hewing in to him about the root, and with the hoe or wine-knife cutting
the wood from the vines, would have to say after such seeing and
feeling, Alas! what doest thou? Now I must wither and perish, because
you drive up and take the earth from me, and set your iron teeth 1) on
my vines, tearing and twisting me all over, so that I must stand bare
and barren in the earth, and you treat me so cruelly, as one does
neither to a tree nor to a plant. But against this, the vinedresser
would also say: You 2) are a fool, and do not understand it 3). For even
if I cut down one of your vines. If I cut off one vine, it is a useless
vine that takes away your strength and juice, so that the other vines
that are supposed to bear must decrease; therefore just take it away, it
is for your own good. Yes, I do not understand (you say), and feel much
differently. But I understand it well, and do it for this very reason,
that it should be your benefit and piety that the foreign wild vines do
not suck out their strength and juice from the others, so that you can
bear the 4) better and more, and give good wine. So also, if the
vinedresser pours dung on the trunk or vine, he also benefits the vine,
even though he may complain and speak here:

1\) In the old editions: \"zeen\".

2\) Erlanger: Da.

3\) Erlanger: understands.

4\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: deß. Jenaer: the more.

What is this? Is it not enough that you chop and cut me? but must I also
suffer that you defile my tender vines, which give such good sweet
juice, so shamefully with the unclean cow dung, which one can suffer in
the stable, nor anywhere else?

4 Christ interprets the suffering that he and his Christians are to have
in the world in this way, so that it does not mean hurt or suffering,
but is good for them and helps them, so that they may bear fruit better
and more abundantly; so that we may learn to imagine it in the same way
as he himself imagines it. As if he should say: It is true after all,
and I cannot interpret it differently. It is the same for me as it is
for the vine. My Jews will heap dung on me and heap it on me, they will
mock me so shamefully, they will torture me most shamefully, they will
scourge me, they will crucify me and execute me, so that all the world
will think that I must finally perish and be destroyed. But such
fertilizing and beating, which is done to me, is for the very purpose
that I may bear the more fruit, that is, that through the cross and
death I may come to my glory, and begin my kingdom, that I may be known
and believed in by all the world. In the same way, he says, it will be
the same for you. For you also must be weighed down and naked. For the
Father, who has made me a vine and you branches, will not suffer the
vine to lie untended and unpruned, or it will become a wild, unfruitful
vine, and in the end it will perish. Now, however, if it is well worked,
fertilized, pruned and leafed, it grows with full vigor and bears not
only much, but also delicious, good wine.

5 So this is a fine, comforting image, if only one could understand and
interpret it in hardships and temptations, and when death strikes a
Christian right in the head, the devil attacks and plagues him, the
world blasphemes and disgraces him, as an apostle of the devil. 2c, that
he might then say, \"Behold, I am being fertilized and worked as a
branch on the vine: \"Well done, dear hoe and hoe, hoe, cut and leaf
with confidence, I will gladly keep you; for they are God\'s hoes and
hoes, for my use and good. Go on, Christ

486 Erl. 49, SSI-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SIV-SI2. 487

interprets it as a master, and can thus model it for himself: I will be
fertilized, chopped up, cut in pieces, and left to die, but I know well
what it is; not as the world sees it, that I should perish and be
destroyed, but that it is my Father\'s work, as he works on his vine, if
it is to grow and bear well.

6 Therefore, let everyone who is able to learn, think that the world,
the devil, death and all misfortune are nothing other than God\'s hoes
and hoes. So, all blasphemy and shame that befalls Christians is God\'s
manure, and say: Thanks be to the pious God, who can use the devil and
his wickedness in such a way that everything must serve us for the best;
otherwise (if it were due to his evil will) he would soon strangle us
with his knife and suffocate us with his dung. But now God takes him in
his hand and says: \"Devil, you may be a murderer and an evil-doer, but
I will use you for whatever I want; you shall only be my hip, the world
and what hangs on you shall be my manure for my dear vineyard, that it
may become the better.

\(7\) This may be called a fine master who can do this art, that he may
use the devil\'s malice and all the world\'s for it, that it may serve
the vine for good, and not for harm nor for destruction, as they have in
mind. But he says to this: Ye have it wickedly enough in mind, are
almost bitter and angry, and think to cut off the vine: but I will and
must have you to be my instruments in the vine, that it may be wrought
and made ready: therefore only cut, hew, and hoe with confidence, but no
further than I will. For so far shall it go, that it shall not destroy
my vine, but shall profit and improve it; and so far shall I fertilize
and know, that it shall not be choked, but shall become fine, juicy, and
fat.

8\) So the dear holy martyrs of old saw their suffering and torture: as
one reads of the martyr St. Jgnatio (who was the disciple of the apostle
St. John), when he was to be thrown to Rome among the wild beasts, which
were let run into the barriers to tear the Christians, and they had
their spectacle and amusement by it.

Then he began and said, \"Let them come, for I am God\'s grain, and must
first be ground and crushed 1) if he is to make something of me. That
would mean fine and Christian interpreted according to this text, and
differently regarded, because flesh and blood do, which such suffering
cannot hold for God\'s work, but for the devil\'s fury and wrath, so
that he murders and kills humans. But he does not look at the horrible
wild lion\'s and bear\'s teeth differently, but as God\'s millstone, by
which he must be ground, so that he may be prepared for God as a good
cake.

9\) So also of St. Agatha, who was a maiden of fourteen or fifteen
years; when they led her into prison and to torture, she went there with
joy, and said: She would be no different than if they led her to the
dance. These are the right comforting, defiant words of a young maiden,
who does not regard the torture and death to which she is led any
differently than if she were going to a wedding and to the highest joys.
This is what faith does when it has turned its eyes from the fleshly
appearance and feeling to the flesh, up into that life, and has thought:
What can they do, if they make it evil at once, and put all misfortune
on me, but that they may promote me, that I may only soon come out of
this misery to Christ in heaven? (10) All the sufferings of Christians
are of such benefit that they only promote our Christian life and bring
forth fruit, to a fuller knowledge and stronger confession of the Word,
and certain hope, and further expansion of the kingdom of Christ. The
world may mean to make it very evil, but they do no more with it, than
as the church sings of the martyrs: Introducunt nescientes in aeterna
gaudia, etc. They themselves do not know that without their knowledge
they bring the Christians (through torture and death) to eternal joys.
That such torture is nothing else than (as St. Agatha said) being taken
neatly from the poor and led to heaven (as a bride to the dance). For
this purpose, what happens to the Christians from the world to sorrow,
that God turns their anger, and creates for them the best. As also

1\) In the old editions: gemalet.

2\) Erlanger: and there.

488 **Eri. tg,-ss-sss. Sermon On John 15, I. W. VIII, 312-SIS.** 489

the pious patriarch Joseph 1 Mos. 50, 20. said to his brothers: Ye
thought evil of me; but God hath turned it to good 2c.; as if to say, Ye
would slay me, that I should not be your lord, and sold me among the
heathen; but that ye would prevent this, ye have made me lord.

\(11\) For God is such a Master, who knows the art that what wants to
hinder and harm us must promote and benefit us; what wants to kill us
must serve us for life; what wants to cause us to sin and condemn us
must only help us so that faith and hope may be strengthened, prayer may
be all the stronger, and answered all the more abundantly. So he has
done in our time against the papacy and all who persecute the gospel,
that if they were wise and would listen, or if they were to be advised,
we would say to them, \"Not so, dear sirs, stop, you will not dampen it,
but only blow into the fire, so that the ashes will be thrown under your
eyes, then they would do wisely and could well remain. But because they
will not cease to rage against the word, but to muffle evil thoughts,
they do nothing more, without only encouraging and urging us to hold
fast to the word, and to pray more earnestly, that it may go on and on,
and at last bring them down without all mercy. What profit is there for
them, or what harm is there for us?

12\) So also, that with us some of the lords of the nobility, burghers
and peasants cannot stand the gospel and its preachers either, nor do
they want to hear the truth being told to them, are worried that the
preachers would want to become lords again, and were looking for a way
to get rid of them, to them we say: Yes, go ahead, 1) dear lords, you
are on the right path to this. For just so that you want to resist, you
will promote it the most, and only hinder yourselves. For here is the
Master, who always creates the contradiction, against the world\'s mind
and thoughts, and needs just that, which it means in the worst way. For
it is God who calls that which is nothing to be, Rom. 4:17,

1\) \"fort\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

turns everything around and makes everything new. It does not seem, when
one tramples his Christians underfoot, or cuts off their heads, that it
should be called honor and glory, joy and blessedness, but feels only
vain contradiction. But I can make (says he), that there stand what
there is nothing, and become vain joy out of sorrow and all heartache. I
can say: Death and grave, be you life; hell, be you heaven and bliss;
poison, be you delicious medicine and refreshment; devil and world, be
you more useful to my Christians than the dear angels and pious saints.
For I can and will build and maintain my vineyard in such a way that it
will only become better through all kinds of suffering and misfortune.

\(13\) Therefore, though all the devils, the world, our neighbors, and
our own people are enemies to us, reviling and blaspheming, beating and
tormenting us, we should not regard them otherwise than as a shovelful
of dung poured on the vine and fertilizing it well, or cutting off the
useless foreign vines, or taking off a little foliage that was too much
and hinders. So they do nothing more (if they think they have done us
great harm, and have smelled good), but that they serve us, that we may
learn the more patience and humility, and believe the more strongly in
Christ. But what do they gain by this? Nothing, for, as they say, when
the father has chastised the child, he throws the rod into the fire. So
also, when God has used enough tyrants and blasphemers for the good of
his Christianity, he keeps his vine and grapes; but the 2) dung, hoes
and hoes he finally throws away into the eternal fire.

\(14\) Yea, saith the world, is it true, why complain ye? If it is good
for you, we will help you to do it, and we will do enough chopping,
cutting and slicing. Just as the disowned, renegade emperor Julianus did
the Christians the mischievous thing, saying, \"Your master taught you
to be poor and to suffer everything for the sake of the kingdom of
heaven; so we will soon help the cause, so that you may go to heaven,
and he took from them everything they had. But against this we have the
consolation that nevertheless herewith a goal has been given to them.

2\) \"den\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

490 Erl. 4g, S5S-SSI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
34S-3I8. 491

is. For we have a vintner or winegrower, who has the hoes, hoes and
forks in his hand, lets them fertilize well, know, blatten and clean.
But if they want to do it too much, he can stop them hot. When Julianus
also wanted to exercise his courage with cutting and chopping, he said
to him, \"Lie down and die,\" and he had to stop. For He leads the
cutters and hoes; they do not lead themselves. Therefore do not be
afraid if they continue their raging and persecuting, and it seems as if
there will be no end to it. For it is already decided that they shall
not be vinedressers and fertilizers, but forks and hoes only; and they
must cease when he wills, and go no further than is expedient and good
for us.

\(15\) And it is a beautiful image that he presents himself to us in
this way, the dear God, not as a tyrant or a master of the vineyard, but
as a pious gardener who waits for and cares for his vineyard with all
faithfulness and diligence, and certainly does not think of destroying
it when he fertilizes and hoes it, prunes it and leaves it. For he does
not leave his vineyard to be torn up by dogs and wild sows, but waits
and tends it, and strives to make it bear well and give good wine.
Therefore he must hoe and leaf in such a way that he does not cut away
the trunk or the root, nor cut and prune the vines too much, or even
take the foliage. Thus (saith Christ) doth my Father also toward me and
toward you. Therefore let us be undaunted, and not be afraid of the evil
muck, prongs, and teeth of the devil, and of the world: for he will not
suffer them to go any further, neither will he grant them any more: for
it is for our good.

16 We see this also before our eyes (praise God!). For where pabst,
bishops and their tyrants could do what they would like, they would have
long since gladly executed all of us. The Hippen and Karst are sharp
enough, so the dung is lazy and evil enough. Summa, both, the will and
the power are there that they could do it and would like to do it. What
is lacking, then, that it does not happen? Well, it is not in their
hands, for they are not the vinedressers, but another man (saith
Christ), who is called my

Heavenly Father, who has in his hand, like the vinedresser, his sharp
hoe and hoe, and can defy them to walk differently than he leads them,
or to hoe, dig and cut more than is good for the vine and branches.

\(17\) Behold, the Lord Christ himself, when he is about to go to his
passion and cross, comforts himself by making me an example and exemplar
of the same comfort to us. I am the true vine, and without doubt a dear
vine to the Father, and you are my and the Father\'s dear vines; that
where ever a vine is fertilized, pruned and purified with care and
faithfulness, I am it. Therefore, let what goes, and let the devil and
the world do what they can, they will not make it any longer, more evil
and worse, than my dear Father wants it. What more do we want? Is it not
comforting or kind enough that the Father takes care of us so highly and
cordially as of his dear vine and branches? that what evil and harm
should befall them, that should befall him himself. But now he does and
governs it so that everything that happens to me happens for the best,
both to me and to you. For this purpose he has measured it out and
provided it so that it will not go any further than this, because he
sees that it is of use to us. For he is, saith he, the husbandman, which
is, as they say, even the man, 1) Who looketh on it by himself, and
tendeth his vineyard, and suffereth it not to be done by others.

18 This is the beautiful image of consolation, which, if anyone can see
and grasp it in faith, he must become bold and confident against the
devil and everything. But these are words and such an image that
spiritual ears and eyes should hear. For outwardly it seems much
different, and here (as it is said) it depends on a good interpreter;
that everything that is said here be rightly seen, both the husbandman,
the vine and the branches, and also the hoes, hoes and forks of the
vinedresser. For in the sight of the world, it is not called God\'s vine
or branches, but the devil\'s herbs, nettles, thistles and thorns, which
only \"burn,\" bite, prick and scratch, and in short are not to be
suffered. For she will not and can not suffer it, that one should

1\) Cf. § 430 of the previous chapter: \"Selbst ist der Mann.

[492 Eri. 4S, SSI-2S3. Sermon On Joh. 15, 1. 2. w. vm, SI8-W0.
493]{.underline}

not with her, and touches and punishes her thing; yet it is not we, but
God\'s word that does this, which we preach to everyone for repentance
and 1) salvation. Therefore they consider us only fireworks, which are
good for nothing, except to be destroyed and thrown into the furnace. As
they cry out about Christ himself \[Luc. 23, 18\]: Only away with this
one, he is worthy of death; and about St. 2) Paul \[Apost. 22, 22\]: It
is wrong that this man should live; no better than only dead with such
people. But because God Himself calls Christ His right vine, and
recognizes us as members and branches of this vine, let the world, the
devil, hell, as they will not let us, throw us 3) into the furnace of
fire or into 4) hell, and it shall not hurt us. For here is God, who has
a stronger, greater language and voice than the world and the devil, and
will overrule them, so that they must call us, together with Christ, His
right, fruitful vines and let us remain.

\(19\) Again, in the sight of God and us, they are to be nothing but
God\'s helpers and instruments, who neither should nor must destroy the
vine and its branches, but only benefit and serve, so that we may bear
much fruit for our vinedresser, and that he may make us eternally
blessed and glorious.

\(20\) This is the right Christian knowledge, that one may see so
sharply, and interpret so spiritually and heavenly, and understand: what
the world regards as vile misfortune and abominable thing, that we
regard the same as vile happiness and salvation, and learn to accept
sin, death, suffering, and what concerns us, with joy as life and
blessedness, and make vain good out of that which is evil.

**V. 2. Every branch of mine that does not bear fruit he will cut off
2c.**

\(21\) Then he makes an arid distinction between them that are called
branches of the vine, showing that even so there are also false
Christians. For he forms almost all the kind that are in the vine. Now
some grow on it

> 1\) \"zur\" is missing in the Wittenberger and in the Erlanger. 2)
> \"St.\" is missing in the Erlanger.
>
> 3\) \"throw us\" is missing in the Erlanger.

4\) \"the\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

Vines that are called water vines or wild vines, which are naughty
plants 5) and branches that bear no fruit, do no more than consume the
sap that the right fruitful vines should have. Therefore my father, he
says, is such a vinedresser: where he sees such a vine that is not good
and hinders the others, he cuts it off and throws it away. This cutting
off is evil and terrible to the wrong ones; but that he prunes, leaves
and cleanses the others, yet leaves them standing, is no harm to them,
but useful and good. But this is a cutting off to the fire.

22\) Now this we also see and lament, that in Christendom there are
always also some false and unprofitable branches, which bear only
shoots, that they must be cast away. 6) They come out of the vine, but
do not remain in it. They come out of the vine, but do not remain in it,
are baptized, hear the gospel, and have forgiveness of sins. Summa, they
are first in Christ, as he says here, as in the vine; but if they are to
continue, they become wild branches, which have only the mere name of
Christians; they may well lead God\'s word, boast of God\'s glory, need
and enjoy the foreign juice, so that they grow great on the vine, want
to have the honor and glory as the best Christians, can pretend to be
more delicious and glorious than the others, and have the appearance and
prestige above all; But there is nothing behind, and is found to be vain
rotten wood, without proper sap and strength, who neither teach nor
confess the word righteously, and all is vain false pretense. These are
the first, so we call the spirits of the rotten and false brethren.

23\) Secondly, there are also the lazy Christians, who have the word and
the right teaching, but do not follow it with their lives, 7) wanting
only to do and live as they please. Such are not far from them, for they
lack only a master. For such loose, lazy Christians are very easily
overthrown by the mobs and false teachers, who, when they come, soon
find in them right disciples, who already have

5\) Bankert - bastard. In the old editions: banckart.

6\) \"and\" is missing in the Erlanger.

7\) Wittenberger: descendant.

494 Erl. tg, S6S-2i\>5. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S20-S2S. 495

They are more capable of doing this than those who are already tired of
the right doctrine and have had enough of it; since they also have to do
to remain righteous, those who are fresh and brave in the right faith.
Therefore these two are not far from each other, so that when false
teachers come to such lazy Christians, in the end it becomes a
chastisement, that is, a rebellion, so that they cannot remain with us,
but separate themselves and make it evident that they are unfit.

\(24\) Now Christ says that his Father is the vinedresser, who looks
well to his vine and waits for it, and distinguishes such false branches
from the others, and does not want them to suffer, lest they overgrow
and destroy the true vine. Therefore he paints them and pronounces the
sentence that they must be cut off and thrown into the fire.

\(25\) But it seems to be much different in appearance. For such are
seen to grow and increase, to become much stronger, fatter, and thicker
than others, and are thought to be the only ones who will bear fruit;
but we, on the contrary, are small, thin, and barren. Yes, they want to
cut us off and cut us off as useless and unfit, but those go as if they
should remain forever, and all the world thinks much of them. Therefore,
it takes a spiritual mind and face to believe it. For God always does it
in such a way that, no matter how many mobs rise up against the
Christians, His rightful group always remains, and the mobs are cut off.
Since the time of the apostles, so many heresies have arisen against the
articles of Christ, baptism, sacrament, righteousness of faith, etc.,
and they have been torn down as if the true doctrine and the Christian
Church would perish as a result. But God cut them all off, and preserved
His branches, so that we nevertheless remained with the right doctrine,
baptism and sacrament, which were planted by the apostles, and the faith
has penetrated the world from Abel, the first, and will remain until the
last and youngest Christian. So that not one of them is cut off, but all
remain in one accord on the vine; as one has taught, believed, and
lived, so they all teach, believe, and live.

26 For this reason we are not to consider or judge here how large and
strong such false branches are to be regarded, but only according to
which are the true branches in Christ. Which Christ himself soon after
shows and signifies, when he says, \"Ye are clean because of my
sayings\"; that is, behold, whosoever hath and keepeth the doctrine
which is pure and cleanly grounded in the Scriptures, as the apostles
and prophets had it, thou mayest know and perceive that they are the
true Christians; though they seem not, and be thin branches, yet this
doth no harm; for one weak, thin branch often beareth fair grapes, while
another corrupt, thick vine can bear nothing at all. Accordingly, you
can know and conclude from these two that these vines, which hold to
Christ and have his word, should remain, and no one should cut them down
or dampen them, however strong and large the others 1) may be, as if
they wanted to overgrow them, but that they should and must be cut off
when it is time, so that these may also remain before them.

\(27\) But this also requires patience and waiting in faith. For he does
not cut off the wild branches as soon as they grow out of the vine, but
lets them come out until it is revealed what they are. But surely he
does not remain outside; but the stronger, the greater, and the thicker
they grow, the sooner he cuts them off, and the greater fireworks he
makes of them. Therefore a Christian, as a true vine in Christ, must
hold fast in the faith among such false saints, persevere, and wait to
be found righteous. For without such perseverance there can be no true
faith. It is the same in all things. So that I show a rough example:
When a loaded wagon goes through a deep mud, it seems as if the mud
wants to be master and hinder the wagon; but it always goes over the
land, through mud and puddles, and leaves the mud behind, even if it
clings firmly and thickly to the wagon. That\'s why they say in German,
\"He sticks to it like mud to a wheel; of those who mix in all things,
they want to be the best and the most distinguished, and yet they can do
nothing, because

1\) Wittenberger: the other false Rottm.

496 **Erl. 4S, SSS-SS8. Sermon on Joh. 15, 2. W. VIII, S2S-326.** 497

that they only want to hinder others. In the same way, the false
Christians attach themselves to the good and pious ones, but they have
to come down and stay behind, and these let them continue and stay.

028 Therefore, if it seemeth as if these little vines were cut off and
rejected, and should now perish, and the rest should hover above, having
the cry, power, and glory, let it not deceive thee; only see which are
the righteous, fruitful vines. If thou seest them not, be not
displeased, how great, how high, how strong, and how thick they are; but
take comfort in this text, saying, My vinedresser is God, who is greater
than such vines, and hath a wine-knife also sharper than all their might
and splendor, and will cut off the unprofitable vines, and cast them
away. For what is all the greatness and multitude of all men against
God, but a little spark against an everlasting fire? But where thou
seest the true branches, know that they shall remain, though all the
world oppose them, and cut them down, and destroy them. For he calls
them his beloved branches, and keeps them great, though they seem small
and feeble, and are despised of all men upon the earth.

\(29\) Behold, he hath included this for the comfort of his dear
Christians, to whom such false spirits do much heartache and great harm
(above that they are otherwise persecuted of the devil and the world),
that they be not too much afraid, whether false vines also grow up among
them. For it must be so, and cannot be otherwise. The useless water
vines must also grow under the right vines, and where God\'s word goes,
the dirt must also hang on the wheel. Thus Judas had to be among the
apostles, among the disciples Nicolaus and Simon the Sorcerer, among the
fathers Arius, Sabellius, Marcion, and after that always other types.
Where do they come from, without being from the small group that is
God\'s people and church? And from where did they draw their poison, but
from the right holy scriptures, which the right Christians have? They
have always attached themselves to it with their excrement, and have
disrupted Christianity with their mobs and heresy.

\(30\) Here then the wise world begins to cry out against us: What has
the new gospel raised but vain deceit? What comes

from the Scriptures, because it is all heresy and error? So they paint
and color the church of Christ no differently than a real boys\' school,
and the Biblia a real heretic book; as the pope calls it with his
priests. For of course no heresy has ever arisen from the faith of the
heathen, and Aristotle or other heathen books, unless it had previously
existed in the church and had been brought forth from the Scriptures. So
also, the Roman council, emperor and kingdom have never made a heretic,
but they must come from Christianity; not that the church is heretical,
or false doctrine is found in the Scriptures, but it is like the
beautiful rose, from which the spider sucks vain poison; Not that there
is poison in the rose, as the dear little bee sucks nothing but honey
from it, but it is the spider\'s fault, which also corrupts that which
is sweet and good, over which it comes, and makes everything poison,
even though it has sugar and honey in its mouth; and just as if one
poured poison under malt liquor, or put it into a poisoned vessel,
whoever drinks of it drinks and receives vain poison, not of the wine,
but of the vessel.

31 So also here. The Biblia is indeed a pure, pure malvasia, yes, a
right healing medicine and refreshment, but when the impure, evil worms
come over it, and with their poisonous thoughts, poured in by the devil,
draw out of it and take to themselves, then they spew out vain poison
for 1) malvasia. Therefore heresy and false doctrine are not brought and
led anywhere but from the Scriptures, but not by the same pure doctrine,
but by their poisoned thoughts, which the devil has poured into them.
For they want to confirm all their things as being founded in the
Scriptures and taken from them, and yet they do it only from an unclean
heart, by which they falsify the Scriptures. For they are evil, and
false branches, which have no wholesome juice in them, nor can they give
of themselves, enjoy the juice of the vine, but not to bear fruit, but
only to do harm. For as soon as they received such juice, they corrupted
it, making both them and others deadly poison, since the right vines
have and give only good, sweet juice.

1\) In the original and in the Wittenberg: \"feur für\".

[498 Erl. 4g, SW-S70. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
326-328. 499]{.underline}

32\. therefore it is true, that boys come from the church, and heresy
from the Scriptures; whence else should they come? and what else could
they know of God, or of the faith? But we say at once, as St. John says
\[1 Ep. 2:19\], \"They came from us, but they were not of us; for if
they had been of us,\" or of our kind, \"they would have remained with
us.\" Is it not so in our own bodies? It is a beautiful, noble creature
of God; but what does it let out of itself but butter, sweat, dung,
urine, snot, pus and sores? I also have to say that festering and pus
are in the body, but the body is not evil if these things come out of
it. For if it were good, it would remain in it, like other members. But
because the body together with its members is good and healthy, the
impurities must be separated and thrown away. But if you want to reject
the body because it stinks, festers and makes you unclean, cut off your
own neck. So also Christianity is a living, healthy body of the pious
multitude who are God\'s children; but there is also filth and stink
mixed in, which must be thrown out.

\(33\) What then is it but that thou shalt cry out in hostility? What
good can there be in the doctrine of the gospel, and in those who adhere
to it? yet so much wickedness and rascality come from it, because if you
would cry out about your own body, \"What good can there be in the body,
since nothing but filth comes from it every day? But if thou canst be
content, and discern wisely between the body and that which proceedeth
from it, and art not so mad and foolish as to promise the body, but
praisest it that it can cleanse itself as well as a fine, healthy body,
that the nose bloweth well, and the belly sweepeth well, and hast it the
better, and doth cleanse it, and doth adorn it, and doth lay it gently;
why canst thou not discern and say so here also: The dear apostles,
disciples and Christians are indeed a clean, healthy body, and yet they
also have their Judam among them? This is the filth that comes out of
them, but cannot and should not remain with them (as a right member),
but must sweep itself out and separate itself.

34 Yes, you say, there are nevertheless many evil ones.

Among the heap, and do harm! So is your body, and yet it remains a good
body with its members, which do innumerable good things. The eyes see
and guide, the ears hear, the hands do all kinds of work, the feet carry
him wherever and however far he wants. In sum, they all bring forth
delicious, good fruits, which cannot be told, and they all serve the
whole body well, even in that they sweep out the foreign, unhealthy
things in the body and give them up. For it is good for the body to be
swept clean, and the evil to go away quickly, even though it causes a
stench, so that the body suffers displeasure and annoyance, and must
wash and cleanse itself again and again. So also here: If filth goes out
of the spiritual body of the true church, should the whole bunch be
condemned?

35 For this cause I say, that we may know how to meet the blasphemers,
who are able to cry out and blow so poisonously, that there are also
wicked men among us, and that after the gospel is preached there arise
many mobs; and that we may learn to make a distinction, as the scripture
teacheth, that we receive and keep them that are righteous, and sweep
out the rest, and let them go. This those poisonous worms cannot do; but
as soon as they see a traitor, Judas, appear from among the apostles, or
a heretic and a ringleader from among the fathers, they cry out and
blaspheme, as if they were all knaves, and condemn all Christendom. Just
as if you were to shout and cry out in hostility, \"Man can do nothing
but sweep out his lust and stink, and all the evil goes out of him; you
must be an evil worm or a rough donkey to reproach the body and throw it
away, so that it sweeps out the evil and throws it away.

For this reason, such people are the very unfaithful and poisoned with
blindness and malice, so that they neither want nor are able to see the
good in us, but only look and ponder where there is something evil in us
that must be swept out. Just as if an evil mother did not want to see
anything else in her child but its dung and urine, and therefore threw
it away, and did not want to know or see the beautiful limbs that God
had given it. So do these,

500 Eri. 49, S70-S7S. Sermon on John 15, 2. W. vm, 3S8-331. 501

who only look us in the butt and see where we are unclean; and where
they smell or feel something, there they stir and burrow, as the flat
sows with their unclean trunks, so that it only stinks. Well, we let
them wallow in their filth, roll around and graze as long as they want,
as they are worth nothing better, because for such sows such game
belongs. But we want to select the pure, and thus distinguish: What can
St. Peter and the dear apostles do that there is a Judas among them? If
the blasphemers want to reprove and stir up such filth, they may also
have the stink, and smear both mouth and nose, as they do. But we take
comfort in the fact that the body is healthy and fresh, that it can
sweep out the stink, and in addition does much good, and brings forth
innumerable fruits. For who can tell what use even a single member of
the body is? And whoever does not know or wants to know, let a blind man
or a deaf man tell him what eyes and ears are good for, or a lame man or
a crippled man tell him how good it is to have hands and feet. For if
you do not have them, you will only see how necessary and useful they
are.

\(37\) Therefore let no one dispute if they cry out against us in
hostility, and see nothing in us except where we are defiled. For they
are not worthy to see the good in us. Let us ourselves say with Christ
that out of the good, noble vine grows false branches, and out of the
cluster of Christ come bad boys, and out of his Scriptures false
teachers. Should the vine, which God Himself planted, therefore be unfit
and cut off? or should God\'s people be condemned, and His word be
called a lie? They themselves have all said that Christianity is divided
into two kinds of people, which they call Christianos nomine vel numero,
et Christianos re, that is, some who are Christians; some who are only
called Christians. These are indeed among the multitude and in number,
like 1) pennies or false florins among the righteous, but are not of a
right kind, and must also finally be cast out.

38 Therefore it is no pity for us that we are accused of having heretics
and mobs coming from

1\) Jenaer: the.

As little as the malmsey harms me when I drink, and another pours into
an unclean vessel, and makes it poison itself; item, that my body is
well cleansed, and the filth goes away quickly. For this is rather his
honor and health. So also that some of us run, and make a stink, we say:
It is the dung that should and had to come out. Summa, it is said: False
branches are also on the vine; but at last they do not remain, but must
be cut off, and wither, or be burned, without harm to the vine. For it
nevertheless remains a good vine.

39 Now this is the comfort against the trouble that seems to be in
Christendom. First, that it must be known that it cannot and will not be
otherwise, that false, rotten and unfruitful vines must grow up beside
and among the righteous. Secondly, that they should not remain, but must
be cut off and taken away.

40\. But what the fruits are that the righteous branches in Christ shall
bear is obvious enough. Namely, first of all, that a Christian goes out
according to his faith, praises and thanks God, and confesses and
praises before all the world the benefits he has received from Him.
Item, then also practices works of patience, bears and suffers all kinds
of evil, and on the other hand does good to everyone with serving,
helping and counseling 2c. Christ also means these fruits, and
especially the first ones, which actually concern the apostleship,
namely, preaching the gospel, by which God is known and praised; as he
soon after interprets this, saying, \"In this my Father is honored, that
you go and bear much fruit. When this fruit comes forth, the branches
are right.

But the others do not do this, both false and lazy Christians, but
either let the sermon stand, or snore and sleep, and if they preach,
they do not preach it rightly, but corrupt and pervert the pure doctrine
with their masters and clowns, for they seek their own glory, not God\'s
praise, nor the salvation of souls. Such may well grow up and become
great for a time, but they shall be cut off at last.

502 Erl. 4\", 272-27S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
M-ss-\". 503

**And every speech that bringeth forth fruit shall he purify to bring
forth more fruit.**

\(42\) He is not content, a good husbandman, to have a good vine and
righteous branches, but would gladly have such a vine and branches that
bear much fruit. Therefore, he continues to work and clean it, pruning
and leafing, helping and tending it, so that it will grow and increase
and bear more and more, as it does when it is cultivated and maintained.

God also does this to every Christian who is on this vine, whether a
preacher or a disciple and listener; he does not let him celebrate, but
sends him to temptations that force him to practice his faith, hangs the
devil on his neck, and the world with persecution, within and without;
thus he sweeps the vines clean and draws them out so that they grow
larger and stronger. All this is done so that they may bear more and
more fruit, so that their faith may become more and more practiced, more
and more certain and strong through temptation and experience; item,
that they may praise God more and more, praying, preaching, confessing,
so that the word and power of the word may increase everywhere, both in
the persons who believe, so that they may become stronger in faith and
spirit for themselves, and also in the multitude, so that through them
many others may also come to faith, and thus not only bear great and
complete fruit, but also (as he says here) much and abundant fruit.

44 For this reason I have said that we should not be afraid if we have
to suffer from being challenged and afflicted, either internally by the
devil through terror and fear, so that he would like to bring Christians
either to disbelief or despair, and make their lives so sour that they
would pine away because of sadness; or externally by the world, through
violence, tyranny, imprisonment, deprivation of goods, or even of bodily
life. For everything must promote and benefit that Christians only
become stronger in faith, and the more joyful to resist and overcome the
devil. For through such challenges they are driven to seek comfort and
help in God.

Word, and to practice and increase their faith by calling, praying and
giving thanks, and thus to become ever stronger in spirit, more humble,
more patient and more perfect.

45 Thus God, as stated above 5 ff.\] of all temptation and suffering,
not to harm Christianity (as the devil and the world mean by this), but
for the best, that it may be cleansed and improved by this, to bear much
fruit for the vinedresser. For this is what he means here by cleansed,
that those who are in Christ may continue and increase forever. But how
this cleansing comes about, or what the true main cleansing is, by which
they are implanted in Christ as branches, he clearly adds, and says:

**V. 3. You are now clean because of the word I have spoken to you.**

This is a strange cleansing, and seems as if it did not rhyme with what
he said before about suffering and the cross, but rather as if it were
thrown in across. But he precedes it well, and gives a preservative or
remedy against the poison, which is called false confidence or
presumption of one\'s own holiness, lest someone think that by suffering
he will obtain forgiveness of sins and become a vine in the sight of God
apart from Christ. For this tends to follow naturally: when a man has
done many good works or suffered much, and feels his fruit, that he has
done something special and accomplished something with preaching or
other things, the sweet poison always wants to strike, so that he
thinks: \"Well, I have nevertheless also done something, which God will
look upon and be gracious to me. 2c, and nature always drives such
offshoots and wild little vines that want to grow up with it, and take
away the juice and strength of the real vines, so that they cannot
progress. Therefore, the vinedresser must be careful and always ward off
such false arrogance and presumptuousness, by constantly practicing the
word.

47 Therefore he says, \"You are not clean because you do these things
and suffer and bear fruit, for you would not do these things even if you
had not first been cleansed and were good, righteous vines. That ye

1\) \"zu\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

504 **Eri. 49, 275-277. Sermon on Joh. 15, 3. W. VIII, 334-3S6.** 505

But if you are to be cleansed, it must be through the word, which must
always be there, purifying you both before and after. But that the same
may have power in you, and be firmly grasped and kept, therefore the
Father sends you many afflictions, dangers, fears, distresses, and
temptations, that ye may be humbled, and learn that purity is not of
yourselves, nor is it of your doing. Therefore, your suffering is not
purity itself, so that you should be declared clean before God for its
sake; but it does serve to drive the person to grasp and hold the word
all the more firmly and strongly, and thus faith is exercised through
it. But the word itself is actually the purification of the heart, if it
is and remains attached to the same.

He clearly says: \"Through the word that I have spoken to you, you are
clean\"; this is nothing else than the whole preaching of Christ, how He
was sent by the Father into the world, that He paid for our sins through
His suffering and death, and reconciled the Father, so that all who
believe in Him are not condemned nor lost, but have forgiveness of sin
and eternal life for His sake \[John 3:16\]. This word makes a person
pure (if it is grasped in the heart through faith), that is, it 1)
brings forgiveness of sin, and makes us pleasing in the sight of God, so
that because of the same faith, through which alone such a word is
received and grasped, we who cling to it are counted and held pure and
holy in the sight of God, even though we are not yet pure enough for the
sake of our nature and life, but sin, weakness and infirmities, which
still need to be cleansed, always remain in us while we live on earth.

\(49\) So with this saying he teaches the right main part of the
Christian doctrine, how and by what means a person becomes and remains
pure and righteous before God, so that this purity, which is to be valid
before God, is not to be given and measured to our actions or sufferings
against sin, although it is done by those who are Christians, and is now
called right, good, pure fruit. For he speaks all-

1\) Wittenberger: he.

here with his dear apostles, whether believers or Christians, and says:
\"You are clean,\" not because you bear good fruit, but \"because of my
word.

50 How does this work? How are they at the same time not pure, and yet
pure? If they are pure, why does he say that they must always be
purified? Or, why do they pray the Lord\'s Prayer: Forgive us our
trespasses; item: Thy will be done 2c., so that they ever confess that
they still have sin and are unclean? For he is not called pure who asks
for forgiveness of sin, and complains that God\'s will has not been
done. But again, they are unclean and still need to be cleansed, so how
does he call them clean? How do the two rhyme together? Answer: Thus, as
I have said, that a man is first made clean by the word of God for the
sake of Christ in whom he believes. For through such faith in the Word
he is made a part of the vine, Christ, and clothed in the same purity,
so that it is imputed to him as if it were his own, and as perfect and
whole as it is perfect and whole in Christ. All this happens through the
word, if it is received and grasped in faith, in which I hear God\'s
will and promise that He will forgive my sin for Christ\'s sake, and
esteem and keep me pure. And so when I take hold of the word by faith,
such a word (through the Holy Spirit who works through it) makes new
heart and thoughts in me, which hold fast to the same and do not doubt,
live and die on it. Because I cling to it, what is still unclean and
sinful in me is not reckoned to me for its sake, but the same weak,
fragmentary, begun purity is reckoned to be completely perfect purity,
and God makes the cross over it, and does not look at the remaining
uncleanness in me. Where such purity is and goes by faith through the
word, then God goes to it, drives it and exercises it through the cross
and suffering, so that it becomes stronger and more complete, so that
faith increases, and the remaining impurity and sin decreases from day
to day and is swept out into the pit. This means that the branches,
which are in the vine and are now clean through the word, are always
pruned and cleansed, as he said above \[v. 2\].

506 Erl. 4s, S77-S7S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. viii,
\[ss-sss. 507

\(51\) Thus he finely shows that the purity of Christians does not come
from the fruits they produce, but again, their fruits and works come
from the purity they have beforehand from the word, by which the heart
is cleansed, as St. Peter says in Acts 15:9. 15, 9. The fruits then
follow from this, but are not themselves purity, unless they are also
counted pure and good for the sake of faith, and are pleasing to God.

\(52\) This is the Christian doctrine of righteous purity, which no
unchristian, popery, or paganism can understand. For it is not possible
for them to rhyme the two together, that a Christian should be both pure
and impure. For they do not know and do not know the power of Christ and
his word, how we are made pure through the word for his sake (as he is
pure), even though we are still unclean in ourselves because of our
sinful nature. For the devil will not reprove the word, nor punish a
lie, nor make Christ unclean; but since the word is right and true, and
Christ remains pure, we also want to remain pure and holy in him, and no
one should make us unclean or sinners, and yet so that such cleansing
also produces good fruit in us, as he said \[v. 2\].

**V. 4: Abide in me, and I in you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit
on its own, but abides in the vine, so neither can you, but abide in
me.**

\(53\) Ye have therefore my word, by which ye are clean, and by which
also your fruits are good, and all things are pleasing unto God. But see
to it that you abide in me only by faith, where you will keep purity and
bring forth good fruit, and not fall into your own doing through
presumption or false confidence, nor otherwise by other temptation let
yourselves be turned away from the faith and torn, lest you lose both
your purity (which you have in me), and spoil and destroy the fruit.

54 Thus this is set for admonition and warning, and should be terrible
if we did not have such hard heads. For he herewith pronounces the
sentence, \"He who does not abide in me cannot bear fruit.

And shall be cast away, as a withered unprofitable vine. Therefore, if
you bear fruit, that your word and doctrine may be right, and your life
good, think that you abide in me, and be not found apart from me. 1)

55 Now all the great multitude on earth are of the opinion that they
think it is not necessary for them to be or remain in Christ, because
one also sees much finer fruit in other people, as Turks and false
Christians. For they also do much greater works than the true Christians
themselves, lead a beautiful, honorable, hard and strict life, establish
and hold beautiful, glorious worship, give and suffer much for the sake
of God 2c. And as some here scoff and gloss over this text and say that
one can still do much without Christ; for we see that people build,
govern land and people, maintain justice, peace and discipline, and do
much more good: this is what reason and nature are able to do, therefore
this saying (apart from me you can bear no fruit; item: \"without me you
can do nothing\") is to be understood as meaning that Christ is Lord
over nature 2c. For he and nature create nothing in vain. But such
scoffers let go, until they have exhausted.

\(56\) Christ speaks here of such fruits, according to His own
interpretation, which remain forever (as He Himself subsequently
decides) and never come to an end, but are praised and glorified by and
before God forever. These are not natural fruits. For of the same we
know very well that to beget and raise children, to govern land and
people, and the like, may be as good and better among the heathen and
unbelievers than among Christians, and that the heathen also have the
same bodily life and being, and all kinds of gifts, as we have; that we
may not be taught, nor the Scriptures interpreted, such works as God\'s
Word does not teach, but lets them go as they are created, and reason is
commanded to rule in them. But the Scripture teaches about such fruits,
which serve for eternal life. For those works are valid and pleasing to
God no further than in and for this bodily life;

1\) Erlanger: will.

[508 Erl. 4g, S7S-282. Sermon on John 15, 4. W. vin, 839-342.
509]{.underline}

But there none will be any more, but must perish all here, and be buried
the world with all its essence, so it has led.

\(57\) Therefore, this text must be understood only from the essence
that is led so as to please God both here and there, and never be
forgotten. These are then the lasting fruits (as Christ calls them),
which we will take with us, and God will testify to them on the last
day: These are fruits that please me, and I will reward them forever 2c.
No Gentile or Turk will ever come to this, whether he be found a pious,
honorable man, or woman, prince, citizen, or peasant. For these are
natural, good, but not Christian, nor everlasting fruits. Therefore he
now says: \"If you want to bring forth the right fruits (that are valid
before God), then you must remain in me. For I am speaking of higher
status, nature and fruits than those of which Moses, Book 1, Cap. 1, 28,
writes, how God created heaven and earth, and everything that is on
them, was given to man and commanded to rule, but of those that one
should have when Moses\' and reason\'s rule ceases, and this life and
all its doings are over, so that one may know where to remain when death
comes and takes everything away. No heathen nor all the world knows
anything about it; but you (as Christians) alone should know it and can
know it, and bring forth such fruits, if you remain in me otherwise.

\(58\) With these words he looks again at all of Christendom, how it
should and will always be when this preaching is done, namely: Whoever
believes in me and is baptized shall be saved \[Marc. 16, 16\], and
whoever wants to be saved from sins, death and the devil, let him call
on me. So shall and shall they preach of me. But where these things are
concerned, there will also be found, first of all, the devil with the
world, and by force will want to subdue; or where he is not able to do
this, by mobs and sects; there will be many who at first gladly accept
it, and are called Christians, but when it comes to the meeting, and
they are to suffer for it, or stand in danger of life, property or
honor, then they pull in the pipes, and think: I want the

I will still remain a Christian, even if I keep what is mine; and so
make a nose at Christ, as if they do not want to deny, and yet they are
so fated that they must not suffer hatred and persecution from the world
2c.

\(59\) Again, on the other hand, many who also boast of me will say,
\"Behold here, behold Christ,\" as the priest\'s and the monks\' sects;
whoever follows me, keeps such a rule, and thus lives, is a true
Christian, and will make so many sects that many people will be offended
by them, and (as he himself says \[Matth. 24, 23.\]) even the elect may
be led astray, so that there will be very few of them who keep my word
pure and remain in me. For they all teach such doctrine as is according
to our understanding, and rhymes well with it; so reason always wants to
hold and teach that which it thinks right, but what it finds offensive
it will not accept. For example, the Anabaptist mob slandered that
baptism could not wash a person of sins, for it was only bad water, but
external things did not help to forgive sins; the Spirit alone must do
it. 2c. Therefore it is no more than a seal or sign of the Christians
that they belong to Christianity 2c.; item, that the Arians blaspheme:
Do you think that Christ, the Virgin Son, should be true God and equal
to the Father? and what similar heresies are, all of which are such
doctrines, which reason can understand and gladly believes, and yet all
want to be in Christ and boast of him, so that they also say: Behold,
here is Christ, this is the right doctrine 2c.

The faithful Savior, Christ, saw all this well, that it would be
difficult and not so easy to remain in him, because the devil throws so
many obstacles in his way, here with violence and murder, there with
lies, as he is a liar and murderer from the beginning. Therefore, where
the truth arises, he strikes the vines with so much hail and lightning
that he brings them out of the vine of Christ with fire, sword, and
whatever he can; he would like to cut down and destroy the vine. Then
the beautiful cover of the lamb helps to comfort the people, so that
they say, if they are destroyed for the sake of the gospel 1)

1\) \"willen\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

510 Erl. 49, S8S-S84. Interpretations About the Evangelist John. W.
VIII, 312-34\". 511

wants to attack: What shall I do? nevertheless one must be obedient to
the authorities, not leave wife and child 2c. Item, if that does not
help, that he dampens it by force, he nevertheless sends his shameful
ravens, sparrows, and other vermin and creatures, that is, false
doctrine and sects, which nevertheless devour and corrupt the vine.

61 Therefore look on it, says Christ, and be warned, it will be a great
trouble and danger to remain in me. For he that shall do this must
suffer the murderer and the liar, and be strong, that he may withstand
and resist him, that he may not be taken away by force or guile. This I
say beforehand, that you may know that it is not so easy, though it does
not come to pass without great fruit (as he also says afterwards). For
verily I say unto you, As the branch cannot bring forth fruit, but
abideth in the vine; so neither can ye, but abideth in me.\" Therefore
do not let the false, beautiful, glittering fruits deceive you, which
appear to those who pursue the gospel, and who alone want to be called
Christianity, do many excellent, great works, and attack themselves much
harder than the true Christians, as the monks have done up to now and
always (and I, as one of the same, have also done), but beware of them!
For they are called fruits, but they are not and do not remain in them;
therefore they are false, damned works of lies, and rotten fruits in the
sight of God, even though they seem delicious in the sight of the world.
For they believe that they have the right fruits and are closest to God,
and consider you to be heretics, apostates and cut-offs; and if you want
to see and judge according to such appearances, you will soon go astray,
because you do not know which ones are true Christians. See then that ye
abide in me aright, and be not deceived by the hypocrites, lest ye also,
like them, and with them, be cut off and cast away.

62\) Then sayest thou, How can I know which are the right fruits, or how
shall I know which abide in Christ? Answer: That 1) he has now said,
\"Ye are now

1\) Wittenberger: Da.

purely because of the word which I have spoken unto you\" 2c., that it
should not be seen how great and much they do. For all these things are
no more than works, which even unbelievers and boys are able and do: but
first of all, looking at the mouth, what they teach and believe, whether
it be the pure word of Christ, or not? and first of all, whether your
doings, sufferings, or worship be of the word which Christ speaketh, we
will soon say, whether it be right, pure, and good. For if it is not, we
freely conclude that it is not pure nor good fruit from this vine, but
already condemned by Christ, whether you torture yourself to death or
raise the dead every day, for it does not abide in Christ because it
does not have His word.

Now we see that the main doctrine of the pope and of all the pagans is:
If you want to get rid of sins and be saved, you must not only believe,
but also live in such a way, do so much and suffer so much; indeed, our
papists have neither understood nor taught anything at all about faith,
without now learning the word \"faith\" from us, and must be ashamed of
their former doctrine, start to patch it up, and call it faith, but make
the addition of the merit of works, that faith must be nothing after
all. And that is the most fearful thing, when they have long taught it,
they have finally sealed it with such stink, and publicly said: a man
may be pious, and do much good, but still he does not know whether he
will obtain favor or disfavor with God. This is what they say about the
pious, who are righteous and do good deeds, and yet do not know what
their fate is with God. This is what the wretched, cursed devil from
hell has called them to talk and preach.

\(64\) From this it may be seen what their fruits are, and how their
doctrine is according to the pure word of Christ. For first of all, they
say nothing about believing that we have forgiveness of sins through
Christ, but call me to do good works (by which I am to be cleansed of
sins), and yet, when I have done them all, I am not to know nor believe
that I have a gracious God, when Scripture teaches me that I must first
believe and know that God is gracious to me by

2\) Jenaer: schendlich.

512 **Erl. 4g, S84-SS6. Sermon on Joh. 15, 4. W. VIII, 34S-347.** 513

Christ, before I do works that please God. Therefore I can freely
conclude that whoever thus returns or believes and lives is not in the
vine, but is a lost branch, condemned with all his deeds and fruits,
because they teach nothing, except that one should always doubt and
never be sure whether one is in Christ (that is, in the grace of God)
and has true fruits or not. For this reason alone the papacy is to be
condemned as the devil\'s seduction, even though nothing else about it
would be reprehensible.

\(65\) For how would I come to the misery of being a Christian, and
doing such good works (as they teach), and tormenting myself with them
unto death, as some have done, and still doubting above all things, and
saying, God knoweth whether I please him, and am in grace. Let the
wretched devil do this in my place. Should a prince, a mayor, a
householder lead his position and office with hard work, care and
unwillingness, and never know whether God would be pleased with it, if
he had done it in the best way? Who, in the end, would want to serve God
more, or to do and suffer something for His sake? Such cursed,
unchristian doctrine has still gone astray in the world under the
papacy, and has been practiced in all schools and preachers\' chairs.

66\. But the Scriptures and the Gospel teach us that we should put this
first and foremost, as the foundation, and be sure beforehand that God
is our gracious Father (which happens when we believe in Christ), and
from this foundation build up everything we say, do, and live, so that I
may say, \"I know that I have a gracious God, and that my works, done
according to the Word and in such faith, are pleasing to Him and good
fruits.

67\) Where such preaching goes, by which the hearts become certain of
the matter, how they are with God, then 1) I can conclude that it is the
right preaching and the 2) pure word of Christ, and judge against it
that all other preaching is a lie and devil\'s doctrine, so that the two
pieces are reversed and say: one should not know whether we are in
grace, and yet on such adventures and doubts demand and do the works.

1\) Wittenberger: that.

2\) \"that\" is missing in the Erlanger. Wittenberger: da.

That it may be said to them, If I shall hear no other comfort from thee,
but that I shall never know how I am with God, the devil confess thee,
and be thou a preacher in the abyss of hell.

68\. But do you say, \"How can I conclude that God is gracious to me and
that my works are pleasing to Him? Am I full of sin and unworthy?
Answer: Why then do you do such works, and atone for sin with them, if
you do not think that they are pleasing to God? Just as much as you
remained as you were before, so you do the works with unbelief and false
delusion, and only thereby anger God more 2c. For because you believe
and hold thus, God cannot be gracious to you, nor let your deeds please
Him, but happens to you as you think of Him and doubt that He is
ungracious to you, and you can never come out of such thoughts.
Therefore, we say: If you want to act with God and not to run away, you
must be certain of this before all things, so that you can say: I know
that this work I am doing is a good work and pleases God.

\(69\) But whence cometh this, or how cometh one to conclude that he is
gracious, and hath pleasure in us? Certainly not from yourself, but only
from the fact that he says, \"If you abide in me,\" for, \"Just as the
branch cannot bear fruit unless it abides in the vine, neither can you,
unless you abide in me.\" Therefore it is not necessary here to look at
ourselves, what we are and do, whether we are worthy enough or our works
are sufficient; otherwise it would be right, as the papacy teaches, and
monks and priests say: Who knows whether he is worthy of grace or
disgrace 2c. For they look no further than themselves and their status
or work, and want to reconcile God with it and gain grace, like pagans
and Turks, and do not know what it means to be in Christ. Therefore,
they can never be sure of things, nor conclude that their state and life
are pleasing to God, and must forever hang in such doubt; and the more
they work and toil to please God, the further they get away from it,
until at last they even despair. As must certainly happen to all, so
upon themselves and

[514 Erl. t\", SS6-S88. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
347-sso. 515]{.underline}

their actions remain. For there is 1) finally nothing else, but that all
our actions are sinful before God and condemned to hell, where it is
best. For wrath has already been pronounced by the word of God on
everything that is man\'s own ability, strength and works, and
everything that is not in this vine, Christ, must be condemned and cut
off.

Therefore, whoever wants to be helped out of such doubt, 2) only think
that he may come out of himself and all his deeds into Christ, and learn
to recognize how we come to grace through him, and please God, and thus,
through faith, are incorporated into him as branches, 3) so that he can
say: I now know (praise God!) well that I am, unfortunately, a poor,
unworthy person, and before God have earned nothing but wrath and hell.
But I also know that God is gracious to me because of the Lord Christ,
who suffered and died for my sin. And because I am therefore in Christ
and cleansed by Him, God is pleased with my life and work, which come
from such faith, and considers it good fruit. 4)

So I can speak much differently of my status and work than a pagan, a
Turk, or a believing saint. For I am not only a prince or a householder,
man or woman, who does the work of his office or station, as others do,
but I am also baptized and washed by the blood of Christ. This is not my
work nor my position. For baptism does not make a prince, nor a subject,
nor a husband, nor anyone else, but it makes a Christian. Item, I also
have the word that Christ died for me and rose again; the same word does
not make a priest or monk, lord or servant, but such a heart that
receives God\'s grace and is cleansed by faith. This then is called
\"being and abiding in Christ. For let them preach to me what they will,
and I will abide by the fact that I was baptized, not on

1\) Wittenberg and Jena: sichs.

2\) Wittenberger: have. The Erlanger, which also read \"become\" in its
original, has exchanged this with \"see\" according to Walch.

3\) Wittenberger: will.

4\) Erlanger: \"u. s. w.\"

my life and status, but on the man who is called Jesus Christ. Through
Him I am in grace, and have forgiveness of sins with God. So also, when
I hear the gospel, I do not hear anything about myself or my works that
I might be justified before God, but about Christ, given to me for this
purpose by the Father, that I might be redeemed from sins and eternal
wrath. Therefore, through the Word and baptism you have a sure testimony
and confirmation that you may no longer doubt and stammer, but can and
should certainly conclude that you have a gracious God and Father in
Christ. 5) I am not a sinner.

\(72\) Wherefore, if there be such faith and sure knowledge of grace in
Christ, thou mayest certainly conclude of thy estate and works, and say
that the same are well pleasing to God, and are good, Christian fruits;
and so also the works which are temporal and corporal, such as governing
the land and the people, keeping house, bringing up and teaching
children, serving, working, etc., shall also become abiding fruits unto
eternal life. So also the holy patriarch Abraham, and the holy
archmother Sarah, will be praised and glorified from their conjugal life
at the last judgment. Although the same status with all worldly life and
being, which even the unbelievers have now, will cease and be no more,
this holy Sarah, and others too, will receive their crown from the fact
that she was a pious wife and housemother. Not because of her works,
which must cease, but because she did them in faith. Thus the works of
every Christian are done, that they may please God forever, and not be
cast away, as the unbelievers are, but have their eternal reward in that
life also, because they are done in Christ, and grow out of the vine.

From this you see that it is not to be suffered to preach in
Christianity that we should not or could not know whether God is
gracious to us or not, but the contradiction must be taught, and say
(who wants to be a Christian preacher or believing Christian): I know
that I have a gracious God,

5\) Wittenberger: some.

516 Eri. 4\", 288-ssi. Sermon on John 15, 4. W. vin, 350-352. 517

and my life is pleasing to him. For I know whether I believe in Christ,
that is, whether I cling to his word that is preached to me or not,
whether I remain in baptism or fall away from it 2c. But if I believe,
then this must be certain and true, that God is my gracious Father, and
for this I have the pledge and seal given by Christ, baptism and the
holy sacrament. Therefore, if I remain in Christ, it is certain that for
this reason my status, life and work will be pleasing to God and will be
delicious fruit in His sight. And even if I am still weak in faith for
my own part, and many infirmities and sinful lusts remain in me and run
along with me forever, it shall not be counted against me, but shall be
forgiven me, so far as I do not put them away or leave them in the
bridle, and let myself be torn from the faith and from the vine.

For because the vine is rooted in the trunk or stock, 1) and its sap and
strength remain in it, its fruit must also be and remain good, whether
it is otherwise bitten by the worm or attacked by caterpillars and other
vermin. So also, because a man abides in Christ, and receives and
retains juice and power from him through faith, that he works in him
with his power and gifts of the Holy Spirit, the remaining weakness,
which is aroused by the devil and this sinful nature, must not harm him;
but so that he resists it with a constant struggle of faith, and fights
out such vermin. But if thou wilt forsake or pervert the doctrine of
faith, (as the Papists and other wicked men do,) and fall from Christ
unto thy holiness, or live openly in sins and shame, and yet boast of
the gospel and the Christian name, know that thou art a false vine, and
hast no part in the vine, but art condemned with wood and fruit, and
cast away into everlasting fire.

75 Therefore he warns everyone that we should be careful and watchful.
For there will (he will say) be much trouble and sectarianism mixed in,
and you will have the devil around you in the back and in the front,
that he may

1\) \"tst\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

tear you away from me. But only hold fast to me, that your faith may
remain pure and firm, and in such faith go your life and work: then have
no doubt nor worry how you are with God, and must not fear any wrath,
and let the cursed doctrine 2) have an evil year; 3) for if a monk
tortures himself to death with works, fasting, vigils, and
mortifications, 4) he still cannot know whether he has earned heaven or
hell. Cause, because he does not keep Christ\'s word, and even if he
speaks the child\'s faith that Christ suffered, was crucified and died
2c., he still does not believe that \[it\] happened for his good. 5)
This is then no different, 6) for as much as said, I know not whether it
be true that Christ saith, He that believeth on him, and is baptized
into him, the same shall be saved? Item, that faith is uncertain and
nothing, so also the children pray: I believe in Jesus Christ our Lord,
who suffered and died for us 2c.; item, I believe forgiveness of sins
2c., and I do not know whether it is true that Christ feeds me in the
sacrament with his body and blood for the forgiveness of sins.

What more abominable blasphemy could be devised against Christ and his
holy word? Therefore, whoever remains in such thoughts in the hour of
death and dies there, must certainly go to the sorrowful devil and
remain in eternal disgrace and condemnation, as if he were to deny
Christ, deny his suffering and death, baptism and sacrament. But he who
wants to die blessedly and go well must think and say: \"Have mercy on
me, you merciful God, for I am a poor sinful man, and deserve nothing
but wrath; but still, I have lived as I wish, so I hold myself here, so
that I know and should not doubt that I was baptized and called a
Christian for the forgiveness of sins, and that my Lord Christ was born,
suffered, died and rose again for me, and gave me his body and blood for
the forgiveness of sins.

2\) Wittenberger: Doctrine of human commandments.

3\) Erlanger: \"have, so da saget: If\" 2c.

4\) Erlanger: \"has martyred to death\" 2c.

5\) This sentence: \"Ursach-sei.\" is missing in the Jenaer by Walch and
in the Erlanger.

6\) Jenaer und Erlanger: \"Denn was ist das anders\".

518 Eri. \"s, \[si-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
352-sss. 519

The food and strength of faith; item, that I am absolved and delivered
from my sins in the name and power of Christ. Such a heart and faith
cannot go wrong or be lost, no more than God\'s word can be missing or
wrong. Of this I can be your guarantor, for God Himself is your
guarantor through His word.

But this doctrine, as it has always been, and Christ here shows that not
all will abide in it (both with doctrine and faith), for there has never
arisen a mob or sect that has not taught against it (as well as the
pope), and led the people from Christ to other uncertain things, so that
one does not abide in it. For when they say many things, this is the sum
of it: faith alone does not do it, one must attack oneself differently,
leave everything, and thus still lead to works, so that it always
remains uncertain. But they do not get there by laying the first stone
right on the foundation, and thus teaching: \"Before I begin to do a
work, I must first be sure of the grace of God in Christ. When the stone
is laid, then go on 1) and do good works as much as you can, and thank
God who has accepted you in grace, before and without all your work.
They do not want to hear or see the little piece, and they reproach and
condemn us for it. But when we ask them to do better, they come up with
their old tricks: \"You must be truly pious, do much and suffer much.
But if thou askest further, What is it more, or what profit is it to
thee? they say, If God wills and pleases him, he is gracious to thee.
This is just put on the monkey\'s tail. For if you follow such teaching
for a long time, you are just as uncertain as before.

78\. But Christ teaches thus: If you want to play the game of
conscience, you must first of all be in me before you do a single work
or bring forth fruit, so that all of it comes out of me and from me; but
after that you can also bring forth really good fruit. 3. But if thou
turnest it back, and bringest forth fruit before thou art in me, neither
shall thou be in me.

1\) Wittenberger: \"als\" instead of: alsdann.

2\) \"so\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

3\) Wittenberger: \"a little\". In the Jenaer is missing: a.

Vines still remain fruit. For who has ever heard that a vine has grown
from the grape? Must not everyone say that the vine and branches must be
there before the fruit? For the grape does not make the vine, but the
vine brings and bears the grapes. So we must first be in Christ, after
which we can bear fruit and do good works.

This is so clear and certain that everyone must confess it, even our
papists themselves, if they could do honor to the truth, and see or hear
against us and our doctrine before their ugly faces and poisonous ears.
For they are like the Pharisees and scribes, who were bitter and
murderous enemies of Christ; therefore what he said and did was poison
in their ears and eyes. Therefore Christ also saith unto them, How can
ye do good, or speak good, because ye are of a kind of evil worms? So
also we say to them: How can such grasp this doctrine and bear good
fruit, because they are not in the vine, yea, will not hear his word nor
suffer? They themselves cannot deny that the tree and the vine must be
there sooner than the fruit. Nor will they let it be right when we teach
such things from the word of Christ, and must be called heresy, and good
works forbidden.

80\) As if the vine would say to the husbandman: You spoil the vine,
because you produce the vines before you have the wine: make grapes
first, then they will become good vines. Then, of course, the vine
dresser would say again: \"You dear fool, I can hear that you have not
yet seen many vines or grapes. So foolish and foolish are they that they
cannot understand that no one can do a good work that is pleasing to
God, and is called good fruit, he must first be a Christian and
believer, as a branch on the vine. Now this doctrine of ours, for which
they persecute us, is so clear and evident that they are thereby
convicted before God and the world. And we can take all farmers,
vintners and gardeners as witnesses, whether they do not have to say,
before one grows a pear, apple, grape or a

4\) Erlanger: Dem.

520 Erl. ts, 29g-rgs. Sermon on Joh. 15, 4. 5. W. vin, Ws-M. 521

Before any other fruit is born, the stalk, tree or trunk must have
grown. This is written in nature, yes, in all creatures, that they must
all bear witness to this doctrine, against the shameful perversion and
lies of the devil.

**V. 5. I am the vine, you are the branches; he who abides in me and I
in him bears much fruit.**

81 Then he almost repeats the previous words, so that he may impress
upon them to look to him alone and cling to him. I am the vine, and you
are my branches. As if he wanted to say: It will not be done
differently, it was once decided with God that it should be me and no
one else; as you have heard. Further, you must not look around as if
there should be any other vine than me, or that you or others should be
true vines in the sight of God, except in the one vine, which is me.

For he has seen (as I have said) how it would be in Christendom, how
both angry tyrants and false teachers would be found against this
doctrine, and would bear much the name, both of the vine and of the
branches, which yet do not belong to them; as we have hitherto done
almost all. As, the bare-footed red men openly and unashamedly put up
their Franciscum with his rule for the vine, and lifted him up in all
things and works like Christ, and so taught: Whoever would be a right
vine and bring forth perfect fruit, must follow the same, and keep such
a rule. There have been, and will always be, countless such people who
have such names and appearances, so that (as Christ himself says
\[Matth. 24, 24\]) even the elect may be deceived. For they shine much
more beautifully and prettily than Christ with his true vines, so that
I, on the other hand, am not considered a vine, but a wild thorn, and
you the thorn hedges. But let not these things vex you, nor deceive you
with glorious appearances and splendid words. For I, I 1)

1\) \"I\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

it must be and remain alone (as planted and set as a vine by God
Himself), and you who cling to me and remain shall be the true vines
alone, even though the devil and all the world says otherwise. This
admonition and repetition is so necessary that no one understands or
believes, unless the time comes and the need arises, when one learns how
many and various things rot against this vine, and how few there are who
persevere and remain in it. That is one thing.

83 For this reason also he says, \"He who abides in me and I in him,\"
against the false Christians, so that it may be known that it is not by
natural power or works that one is a true vine in Christ. For it must
not be made, but grown thing, and of the nature or kind of the vine of
\"Christ.\" The vine and branches are not put together or grafted as a
twig or rice on a dry trunk, but they must be of the same right kind and
nature, grown from Christ. For this does not make one a Christian, that
thou art so called, and dwellest among Christians, as the apostle Jude
or others, though thou mayest live with Christians, pray, fast, go to
the sacrament, and outwardly so live, that they cannot be cast out; and
yet are not true branches, but strange, dry thorns, among the grapes,
though in appearance they seem to be far above the rest. But now it must
be so: Whoever is to be a Christian must be naturally born and grown
from the vine, Christ.

Therefore, it cannot be made or carved here, as the bishops\' larvae and
patsies, or monks and nuns think they make people holy with their
jiggery-pokery, when they smear the Chresem, shear plates and put on
caps; but it remains unmade and uncarved, a mere larvae and
jiggery-pokery. But a Christian and a true saint must be a divine work
and creature, who is such a master, who with one word makes everything
out of nothing, so that it is whole and perfect. No human work, rule or
order can do that.

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: one.

522 Erl. 4S, S9S-SW Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
3S7-36V. 523

For even if an abbot is long in breeding and accustoming a monk, he
makes nothing else, but a man, as he is created in his free will and
reason, or flesh and blood, who is differently clothed and adorned with
works, but nevertheless the way it is, remains a rogue as before, and
nothing differently natured nor minded. For he still wears the old Adam
on his neck, as before, without having put on a larva, and has made
other ways and works. That is called all human business. Just as a
schoolmaster trains a child and lions it with works, he cannot make
another creature or form, but the Creator alone must do this by his own
hand and power, without the help of man.

When I am baptized or converted through the gospel, the Holy Spirit
comes and takes me like clay and makes me into a new creature, so that I
now have a different mind, heart and thoughts, namely, a right knowledge
of God and a right trust in His grace. In sum, the foundation of my
heart is renewed and changed, so that I become a new plant, planted in
the vine of Christ and grown from it. For my holiness, righteousness,
and purity do not come from me, nor do they stand on me, but are only
from and in Christ, into whom I am rooted through faith, 2c., just as
the sap from the vine springs up into the branches, 2c., and am now like
him and his kind, so that both he and I are of one nature and essence,
and I bear fruit in and through him, which is not mine but the vine\'s
fruit. So Christ and the Christians become One Cake and One Body, that
it may bear 1) right fruits; not Adam\'s or his own, but Christ\'s. For
that he baptizes, preaches, comforts, exhorts, works and suffers, this
he does not as a man of Adam, but Christ in him, so that his mouth and
tongue, so that he acts or confesses God\'s word, is not his, but
Christ\'s mouth and tongue; his hand, so that he works and serves the
neighbor, this is his Lord Christ\'s hand or member, who is in him (as
he says here), and he in Christ.

1\) \"may\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

See, this is what he says: \"He who abides in me, and I in him,\" 2c.,
to indicate that Christianity is so, that it is not brought in from the
outside, or put on as a garment, nor is it given a new manner and
nature, so that it walks and lives in works, like monasticism and
self-chosen holiness, but so that it is born anew through God\'s Word
and Spirit, and must even be a new man from the bottom of the heart. But
after that, when the heart is thus born anew 2) in Christ, there also
follow fruits, confession of the gospel, works of love, being obedient,
patient, chaste 2c.

\(87\) Christ thus warned his disciples to abide by his word, which
makes newborn and regenerate true Christians, who bring forth much fruit
of the vine, and to beware of all other doctrine, which perverteth these
things, and would make of the fruit a tree, or of thistles and briers
grapes. For nothing ever comes of it. Kind does not leave kind, and if
one teaches long, drives, and blushes with works, nature will not be
different, there must be nature and kind, or no driving nor blossoming
will bring it about. For the two are and always will be widely
differentiated: one is called made; the other is called naturalized or
grown. Now it is always the case that we have to work much harder and
more cruelly on what we have made, and yet we do not want to leave it as
it has grown; for it goes, stands, lives and does well by itself, as it
should. So also, he says, all other teachings have to deal only with
doing, so that they make something out of works, and yet they can get
nowhere. But if ye be in me as planted in the vine, and natural
branches, ye shall surely bring forth good fruit, and much of it.

**For without me you can do nothing.**

This is a short conclusion, and it transfigures what he has 3) now said.
\"Without me\", that is, if you do not remain in me and become born
Christians through me, you will not do it, you do and do alike 4) what
you want.

2\) \"is\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

3\) \"he\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

4\) Erlanger: nevertheless.

524 **Erl. 4g, SW-MO. Sermon on John 15:5. W. VIII, S88-S82.** 525

But how does he behave so rudely here, and speak so peevishly? Should so
many more pious and excellent people than were among the Jews at that
time, and may still be among the Christians, have done nothing at all,
and lost everything, when they have done and are still doing much more
and greater things than the poor, wretched multitude, who know nothing
to boast of but this Christ? O, it is an angry, blasphemous word in the
ears of the great saints, as there were the holy Jews, Pharisees and
others, as St. Paul in his beautiful, blameless righteousness according
to the law, and now the spiritual, devout hermits, Carthusians and other
monks (as I also have been), who take it up with great earnestness that
they want to be pious and go to heaven. Look at the pagans, how they
have governed the land and the people, made excellent laws and order,
kept beautiful peace and discipline, produced all kinds of arts, so that
all the world praises and marvels at their wisdom. Item, one reads that
some heretics have lived much more strictly, and have done greater 1)
works than the right Christians, as, the Cathari and Encratitä; as also
the forty-day-fasting of the heretics has arisen. And it is said of the
Turks that many among them lead a very strict life, and do miraculous
works with fasting, almsgiving and other 2c. And now all the mobs cry
out against us and our doctrine, so that we do not attack ourselves so
harshly, saying that we do not have the Spirit, because we do not live
as they do; how then does Christ say here, \"Without me you can do
nothing\"?

90\) To this is to be answered, as it is also said above \[§ 55 ff\],
that he does not speak here of natural or worldly being and life (as the
scoffers counterfeit it), but of fruits of the gospel. For he created
the world in such a way that he commanded it and gave it power to rule
bodily over cattle, birds and fish; item, to keep house, to raise
children, to build fields, to govern land and people 2c. Christ did not
teach any of these things. For it is implanted in nature beforehand, and
written in her heart, to do all things.

1\) Wittenberger: large.

Books that are written apart from the holy Scriptures are derived from
the same source. Therefore, Christ\'s teaching and word must not be
taken as if he wanted to teach and regulate something else, more or
better. But he speaks only of his spiritual kingdom and regiment, in
which God himself dwells, rules and works through his Word and Spirit
for spiritual, eternal life. For this is called God\'s own rule, that
one baptizes, preaches the gospel, gives sacraments, comforts and
strengthens the stupid, afflicted consciences, scares the wicked and
punishes them with the ban, and practices works of love and mercy, and
suffers the cross. This is done so that we may please God, be His
children, be redeemed from sin and death, and have eternal life. The
worldly regime does and can do nothing for this everywhere. Because
everything must end with this life.

In this kingdom (says Christ) you are nothing, do nothing and are not
able to do anything, if you are not and remain in me, yes, it is all
nothing (before God), what all the world does, thinks, does and is able
to do, all Jews, Turks, Pabst\'s saints own devotion, spirituality and
chosen worship. Therefore, any Anabaptist who has fallen from Christ can
never teach or do anything right, but only leads both himself and other
people further away from Christ. As now the Anabaptists with their
spirituality only baptize out of the church and strive against the
spirit, as can be seen by their fruits. Likewise, all monks and orders
who teach and practice their work sanctity can never come to Christ, nor
bring a man to right knowledge, nor counsel or comfort a conscience, nor
help from the least sin, nor bring forth some Christian fruit;
Therefore, whatever they do, even if it is much, great and difficult
work, it is all lost, and the more they torture themselves and fear, the
less they accomplish, as I myself must testify by my own experience,
after having been a devout monk for more than fifteen 3) years, keeping
daily Mass, and thus occupying myself with prayer and fasting.

2\) Wittenberger: \"nu\". The \"r\" seems to have dropped out (at the
end of the line), because the space is there for it.

3\) Erlanger: twenty.

[526 **Erl. 4S, soo-sos.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, S62-SVS.** 527]{.underline}

that if I had remained in it, mine would not have been long. And yet, if
I were to gather all these things together, I could not help myself in a
small challenge, so that I could say before God: \"I have done so much,
but look at it, and be merciful to me.

\(92\) What have I done with it, then, but that I have toiled and
perished in vain, and have lost time, and must now let the judgment of
Christ pass over it: You did it without me, therefore it is nothing, and
does not belong to my kingdom, can neither help you nor others or
benefit eternal life. Yes, I myself must now make it sinful and condemn
it as done in idolatry and unbelief, and be terrified of it when I think
of it. Everyone still clung to it and considered it the way to
salvation. All the world has given and given enough, wanting to buy such
holiness and merit from them, as they have brazenly offered for sale,
and sold with seals and letters.

So here is decided an abominable judgment of all life and deeds, however
great, glorious and beautiful they may be, if they are apart from
Christ, that they can do nothing, and are to be called nothing. It is
indeed great and much in the sight of the world, for it is called
excellent, delicious works; but here, in the sight of God, in the
kingdom of Christ, it is truly nothing, because it did not grow out of
him, nor does it remain in him. For it is not his word, baptism and
sacrament, but a thing of our own making, which we have chosen and
forced apart from the word. Therefore it cannot bear fruit, nor remain
before God, but must, as a rotten, withered tree, without sap and
strength, be uprooted, and (as he says afterwards) thrown into the fire.
Therefore, let others carve and make what they can without him, until
they make a new birth out of their works, and out of the fruit the tree;
but they shall (if God wills) make this saying true, and out of all
become nothing at all.

94\. but who believes that this saying should spread so far and condemn
so many people? or that the world should be so full of false

1\) Erlanger: \"much\". This is not a printing error, because the
variant \"rope\" is given.

Christians and saints? But it is preached to us that we do not run and
work in vain (as St. Paul exhorts us in 1 Cor. 9:26), but see to it that
we are ever found abiding in Christ, that is, that we hold fast to His
word, and do not let anything 2) snatch us away from it; then the right
abiding fruits will also surely follow. For it is a mighty comfort and
defiance when a man knows that he does not live and work in vain, but
that his works are pleasing to God and bear true fruit, and that he can
say from the bottom of his heart, \"I have been baptized into Christ; I
did not devise this myself, nor did I do it through my order, rule or
choice of men, but my Lord Christ Himself, I know this for certain.
Secondly, I know and confess before all the world that I believe in the
man by the grace of God, and think to abide with him, and to leave both
body, life and all, before I would deny him; in such faith I stand and
live. Then I go out, eat and drink, sleep and watch, rule, serve, work,
do and suffer all in the faith of that in which I was baptized, knowing
that it is good fruit and pleasing to God.

95 For such a man, whatsoever he liveth and doeth, whether it be great
or small, and whatsoever it be called, it is all fruit, and cannot be
without fruit: for he is born unto this in a newness of life in Christ,
that he may be full of good fruits without ceasing: and whatsoever he
doeth is easy unto such a man, and without sour labor or vexation; there
is nothing too heavy or too great for him, that he cannot suffer and
bear. On the other hand, others who do not have faith and want to bear
fruit themselves, even though they toil in hostility and do many great
works and more than others, never have such comfort, but do everything
with a heavy heart, so that they never become happy, nor do they think
that it pleases God, and so everything they do is in vain and lost. That
it is true, whatsoever is without Christ, or apart from Christ, is not
done, and is vain, vain, vain works; and again, in Christ all things are
done, and are rich, full, delicious fruits.

2\) Wittenberger: not.

528 **Erl. IS, M2-S04. Sermon on John 15:5. W. VIII, 3W-sss.** 529

But the world, with its false saints and cults, cannot understand such
things. What kind of Christian should he be? He can do no more than eat
and drink, work in the house, care for children, and drive the plow 2c.
I can do that just as well, and better. One must make a distinction
between what a Christian does and what the heathen do, and not soon call
all the fruits of the Christian life, otherwise the heathen would have
it better than we, after such common works as father and mother, child,
servant, 1) man or woman do. Therefore we must have something different
and special about the common man\'s works, such as going to a monastery,
lying on the ground, wearing hard shirts, praying to one another day and
night. So they interpret the works they call a holy life and Christian
fruits, and quickly conclude that this is not a holy life, raising
children, doing housework 2c. For they cannot judge by the 2) stem or
birth in the vine, but see only the outward larva of the work. But who
does not know that monasticism with its works seems greater when one
looks at them and reckons how they are made and carved, and not
according to the kind or birth from whence they come?

97 But now Christ saith, That these only are good fruits, which come of
them that are and abide in him. And what such a one does and lives is
called all good fruit, even though it be less than a farmer\'s servant
loads up a wagon full of dung and carries it out. They cannot understand
this, but consider such things (as they see them before their eyes) to
be common, pagan works. But among Christians there is a great difference
between the works they do and those done by pagans or others (apart from
Christ), even though they are the same. For the works of the heathen do
not spring and grow from the vine of Christ; therefore they cannot
please God, nor be called Christian fruits. But the works of Christians,
because they come from faith in Christ, are all true and useful fruits.
Just as from the shepherd

1\) Wittenberger: \"servant, maid\". - Child\" is missing in the
Wittenberger and in the Erlanger.

2\) \"dem\" is missing in the Erlanger.

The little one says that there is nothing in him that is not useful and
good, not only the flesh, fur and legs, but also the urine and dung.

For this reason it is true that a Christian does not appear with his
works and fruits to be a spirit of the sect or a peculiar person,
because he does not choose a particularly glittering work, but remains
with the common daily works as they appear to him. But this is lacking,
so that the world cannot see that they are the works of a new person in
Christ. Therefore the same work is not equal, even in a man who did a
work before he believed in Christ, and does it now. But before he was a
thistle and a briar apart from the vine, that he could bear no fruit,
and what he did was lost and condemned; but now that he is a Christian,
such a work is a goodly, delicious cluster of grapes; not because it is
thus made or done, but because it comes from the good stock, which is
Christ.

\(99\) Therefore it is not to be judged by what work is done, but by
what cause it is done. It is not a matter of what is done, whether it is
great or small, much or little, but of the source and spring from which
it flows; there the life and nature of Christians, and of all others on
earth, are separated and set apart. For here Christ comes and makes the
distinction; he speaks to him who deals with the works that he himself
has set forth for him: Your deeds are nothing and lost. I have said mass
every day for so many years, I have not eaten meat for so long, I have
chastened myself, and I have become heartily sour to live so strictly;
shall such great, many, heavy works be nothing? Yes, he says, they may
be called great, hard works, but I call them nothing at all, for they
are all done without me. On the other hand, a poor little girl, like
Mary the Virgin, who has done no special work than other common people,
he pronounces the judgment: \"Behold, this one has none of your great,
difficult works everywhere, and yet she is full of good works, for they
are such works as are called done in me; therefore I consider her to be
precious gems, and I will praise and reward her before God and all the
angels;

3\) Wittenbergers: good works.

[5Z0 Erl. \"9, sv4-so7. Interpretations about the evangelist John. W.
vm, zsg-zm. 531]{.underline}

But your works, because they are not in me, will be of no use anywhere,
except to be thrown into the fire as thorns and thistles. It will not do
for you to cry out in hostility that you have been wronged, or to excuse
yourself and say that you did not know. For he shall also say unto thee,
Why hast thou not heard my word, which I spake aforetime, and warned
that men should beware 1) of all things that might be done apart from
me, and that without me no man might do anything?

\(100\) Therefore learn not to look at works as a cow looks at a gate,
but from what heart and person they come. If it is in Christ, let the
work be called as great or as small as it pleases, and he will call it
good fruit, for what remains in him must bring forth much fruit, and all
such works will be called the most delicious grapes, even though at
times sin also runs along with them and they stumble. For this is the
dung, that he may fertilize his field, that even his infirmities may
come to good, and not to harm.

Again, in the other monastic, Turkish and pagan saints, not only are the
public sins condemned, but also their best works, so that they think
they deserve heaven, are rejected and condemned to the fire together
with them, and such a judgment goes over them justly and rightly. For
what devil leads us, who are called Christians and are baptized, to fall
away from baptism and Christ, and to seek and choose our own work apart
from Christ? We do not want to live, work and do like the other common
Christians, and open people\'s eyes with special, new, self-chosen
things: Doing.

I see no special work nor fruit of the spirit in those who know nothing
but to teach about Christ. One must attack oneself differently, with
sour looks, gray skirts, having nothing of one\'s own, or, like the
monks, with fasting, casteism, not eating and drinking, like the others.
For such things make a great appearance, that the rabble comes and says:
What are our preachers, and those who follow them, compared to these?
These are holy, Christian people, so forsaken everything, gray

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: solle.

Wear skirts 2c. So they let themselves be beguiled and seduced by
Christ. And it serves them right. Do you hear that Christ says here that
one should not see or judge according to the outward appearance of the
works, but according to the stem and root from which they come?
Therefore you should first ask: Why do you look so sour, and walk in a
gray robe, and do a special thing in front of others? Yes, one must
truly attack oneself and separate oneself from the world, if one wants
to be blessed. There you see the donkey with his ears sticking out. Thou
shameful hypocrite and deceiver, how wilt thou make fruit without and
apart from the vine? It does not come to heaven with a sour look, but
you must first be in the vine, from which it must grow and spring.
Therefore such a work of thine is lost, and nothing, because it is apart
from and without Christ, yea, against Christ also.

**V. 6. He that abideth not in me is cast away as a branch, and
withereth; and they gather them, and cast them into the fire, and burn
them.**

\(103\) He has left his Christians the high consolation and excellent
glory that a Christian life that remains in faith is vain and delicious
fruit, and such fruit does not remain on earth or come to an end here,
but remains with us forever in heaven, no matter what and how small it
may be. This should be cause and stimulus enough for us to gladly remain
with this Lord Christ. Here he sets up the contradiction, and concludes
a short and terrible judgment on all life and being that does not grow
out of him and remain in him; and names five kinds of harm that will
befall those who do not remain in the faith, nor hold to the vine. For
it has been decided, he wants to say, that in me everything is fruit,
except me it is harm; if anything good is to be valid in the sight of
God, it must be said to have grown out of me and to have welled up;
otherwise nothing will come of it. Therefore you have here the two
judgments against each other: If you remain in me and do not fall away
from me, then know that what you live, do and suffer is good fruit,
which pleases God. Again, he that abideth not in me, let him do what he
will and can, but it shall not be unto him.

[532 **Erl. tg, S07-S0S. Sermon On John, 15, 6. W. VIII, 370-373.**
533]{.underline}

Like vines that do not bear fruit, they are cut off and thrown away to
wither, and then they are gathered and thrown into the fire and burned.

104 This is also a strange simile, and is also taken from the prophet
Ezekiel, Cap. 15, v. 2, and seems to be drawn from the same. For thus
God speaks there: Son of man, what good are the dry grapes? can anything
be made of them? 2c. The vine is a noble wood above all others, because
it stands on the vine, for it has the noblest sap and fruit; nor is it
so, as soon as it comes off the vine, that it is of no use, says the
prophet, that one cannot make a nail or hook out of it to hang anything
on, but serves no purpose except to be thrown into the fire, to be
burned up and consumed to ashes. So also here, says Christ, whichever
branch does not remain in me (as in the right vine) can no longer bear
fruit, nor do anything good that pleases God, but must be cut off from
the vine, so that it does not hinder the other branches. After that, if
it is removed from the vineyard and thrown, it must wither, and is now
good for nothing, except to be tied together in a bundle 1) and thrown
into the fire, and let it burn there until it turns to ashes.

\(105\) All this is said against those who are not righteous, believing
Christians, and 2) yet are presumptuous spirits, that they think they
are the only ones, and also think they can do so much apart from Christ
that they take root and remain green; they want to trust the best, most
noble vines, and not be cast out, but cultivated and honored before
others; they think that Christianity cannot exist or remain without
them. Just as the pope and the bishops (along with other groups) now
boast. But against this he warns us to beware, and to take care that we
ever remain in him, and do not fall into such false conceit. For the
judgment is already decided (he says), so it will happen to all who do
not remain in me. First of all, they must be cleared away, as the first
Psalm, v. 5, also says, \"The

1\) In the old editions: \"Bündle\".

2\) Wittenberger: \"the\" instead of: and.

The wicked do not remain in the judgment, nor in the congregation of the
righteous. This is the first thing that is raised up, that they may be
separated from the multitude of those who preach and believe aright,
which is the proper judicial office of Christianity, and the assembly or
congregation of God. Just as it can be seen that righteous preachers and
false preachers, righteous Christians and false Christians, do not
suffer one another; indeed, they separate themselves from one another,
because the word or doctrine separates the hearts. So we cannot keep it
up with your papal group, likewise with the Anabaptists and other
groups, and they in turn cannot keep it up with us either, but are
separated like winter and summer. Summa, they cannot remain with the
right group, nor with the word, but must be thrown out, so that it will
be obvious to everyone that they have been false and unfit vines. 3.

Now they ask nothing of this, for they do not consider this (that they
separate from us) to mean that they are cut off or thrown away, but want
to be next to God and the right chosen branches, but they consider us to
be cut off, rejected, unfit branches. As they publicly reproach and
condemn us. This we must suffer. But it is as Christ says, that it must
be separate and distinct. In the same way as on the threshing floor,
when the farmer plows the grain, the grain goes to one place; but the
chaff separates itself, and cannot remain with the grain. So, when
God\'s word goes, and He leads the word shovel in His hand, the chaff
(that is, the false Christians) goes where it is winnowed; but the grain
remains in the threshing floor. He then who abides in the pure doctrine
and faith of Christ has this comfort, that he is a true noble vine, and
what he does is good fruit. Again, all the others, however great,
mighty, learned, wise and holy they may be called, are but rotten, unfit
branches, which are cut off and cast away.

\(107\) This some judgment would be terrible enough if it were believed
that a man should know that he must be cut off.

3\) The words: \"bei dem rechten Häuflein, noch bei\" are missing in the
original and in the Wittenberg.

534 Erl. 4g, zag-gn. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
373-376. 535

from Christ and Christianity, and deprived of the Word, Baptism and
Sacrament, the intercession of Christ, His blood and Spirit, and all
that is in Christ and Christianity. This is already an all too gracious
pity, which afterward brings with it much greater. Although they do not
respect it, because they have fallen into the wrong doctrine, and with
it bewitched and blinded, that they cannot do otherwise.

\(108\) There is not yet so much trouble with those who are otherwise
infirm, as our many are, even sinners, if they only abide in the pure
doctrine of Christ, and do not become spirits of the rot. For the vine
can get a crack or a break or any other damage, but if it remains in the
vine and does not separate itself from the vine, it can be healed by the
vine. So also, if a Christian has already fallen and been harmed for the
sake of his life, but if he does not start something new against the
doctrine, he can be helped again, if he sticks to Christ again through
repentance and faith, he is not yet condemned and cast away, as he who
establishes another doctrine and sect, according to his foolish head,
still wants to do right, 1) and has not punished the error, or 2)
remains in unrepentant life, and does not want to stick to Christ again.
For these are the unfit and cast out branches. Even though they remain
among the Christians, according to the outward society, they are
deprived of all comfort, grace, help and blessedness that is with the
Christians.

\(109\) Secondly, Christ says that if a vine does not remain in him, it
will not only be cut off or thrown away, but it will also wither; that
is, the longer it remains, the worse it will become, until it is
hardened and hardened, like a vine that has lost its sap and is now
withered, so that it can no longer be bent, but only broken. So also,
when a man falls from me and is torn from the vine, it is already done
for him. For there is no other vine to be found without and apart from
this one. Therefore, the longer they fall, the deeper they fall into
hardening, and there they have it.

1\) \"dazu\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Wittenberger: or so.

\(110\) For these are the two grievous cases, that a man should perish
unto the pit of hell: the first, that he should fall from Christ; the
second, that he should be hardened in unbelief and sins. The first fall
may still be atoned for, if in time one comes again to the vine (that
is, to the doctrine and faith of Christ); but if one remains so,
withered and hardened in error, that is Pharaoh, Judas and others, who
will not nor can return to repentance. As now also the papal crowd, who
know well that they are wrong and of no use, and yet set up their heads
so that they are hardened and hardened about it, and will not come to
Christ in courage. They are already as deep in hell as they should be.
For one cannot sin more grievously than when he falls away from the
faith and will not return to it. This is the sin of death, which cannot
be helped. But they think that there is no harm for them anywhere, and
that the wine tastes as good to them as otherwise; for they are still
rich and fat, sitting in honor and power 2c. But see what follows.

The third is to gather them together and throw them into the fire and
burn them. They have now done it in the previous two ways, and could not
do it worse; therefore there is nothing left to wait for but punishment.
Because they have not remained in Christ, and will not return, he will
do it to them again; and they shall suffer it, that they be gathered
together, and bound, and cast into the fire, that they may be burned.

This is the final judgment they shall not escape. Therefore beware lest
you fall into the dreadful fall. For it shall not be given to them that
will not abide in Christ, yea, that will stubbornly oppose it, and yet
safely go as if they were well off; but it is determined, and the
irrevocable sentence pronounced, that they shall be taken away, and
gathered into a bundle unto everlasting fire.

\(113\) For this gathering is no other thing than this: Let no man think
that any shall escape from them; let him become a Carthusian or a
hermit, and run and walk to Rome or Jerusalem, and make an endowment,
and do whatsoever he can; and he shall be loosed out of the snares and
the cords.

536 **Erl. 4S, S11-S14. Sermon on Joh. 15, 6. 7. W. VIII, 37K-378.** 537

They will not come in bonds, nor escape punishment, but will be gathered
together in one heap with the hardened Pharaoh, Judah, Caiphah, Herod,
Mahomet, Pabst, and all the rest of the mob, and bound to be punished at
the same time. This is already happening before the last day, when he
will always carry off one after the other, so that they will lie buried
there and already prepared, so that they will only be thrown into the
fire, and so one stubborn person after the other will always be put
there, until they all come together, so that no one remains, nor
escapes, being as powerful, learned, wise and proud as he wants to be.
Then the fire will be lit and they will be thrown into it. This is the
end and the reward that they will have to wait for, because they have
fallen from Christ, and besides him, he himself will advise and help
them.

Yes, says the world, what\'s the harm? It is to do with an evil hour.
Yes, but he adds a wicked addition, and says, \"They will be burned. It
will not be a fire that only roasts or scorches them a little and then
stops, like the fire and suffering that Christians have to go through on
earth, which hurts them but will soon be removed. And even though they
are reduced to ashes, they are not burned up, but only swept up and
purified. But with those it will not go so that they would like to hope
to come out again. It will not be said that they have been roasted or
fried a little, but that they have remained in it forever and have been
burned to powder, for it will be a fire that will never go out, as
Christ says in Marci 9:43 ff.

**V. 7. If you abide in me, and my words abide in you, you shall ask
what you will, and it shall be done unto you.**

Behold, how highly a man praises a Christian life. Where someone would
not have understood 1) or would like to ask: Dear, how does one remain
in Christ? How am I or do I remain a branch in this vine? So here he
adds the gloss, and says: \"Only pay attention to my word, for it all
depends on whether my word remains in you. The

1\) In the old editions: not someone.

If you believe and confess the articles taught by the infant faith, I
believe in Jesus Christ our Lord, crucified for me, dead, risen from the
dead, seated at the right hand of the Father, and what is attached to
it, and abide in it, being willing to venture and leave all things
before you will accept other doctrines or works. If then thou abide in
the word, I abide in thee; and again, thou in me. And so both are rooted
and united in each other, that my word and your heart have become one
thing, and you must ask no further how I am in you, or you in me, for
you will see that in that life. But now you can neither understand nor
comprehend otherwise than that you have my word, and are washed by faith
in my blood, and are anointed and sealed by my Spirit; so then all that
you live and do is well done, and all good fruit.

\(116\) And not only shall you have this, but whatsoever you shall then
ask, that shall you be granted and receive assuredly. Now what more do
you want? All that thou doest shall be good and pleasant, and thou shalt
be the dear child, and canst not spoil it. Though thou be infirm, and
though, as a child or a sick man, thou defile thyself from time to time,
yet will he not cast thee off at once, but will always cleanse thee and
make thee better. Moreover thou shalt have power, honor, and glory, that
whatsoever thou shalt ask shall be done unto thee. If thou hast any want
or need that oppresseth thee, call unto him, and open thy mouth
confidently, as a child to his father, who will please him whatsoever
the child shall do, if he cleave unto his father; especially if he shall
babble childishly with him, and ask anything of him, that he will gladly
do and give all that the child shall have. Yes, not only that, but he
cares for the child, and thinks no other way than to provide and give
him everything he needs. These things, saith Christ, ye shall surely
provide unto my Father and me, if ye abide in the trunk, and the
branches in the vine. 2)

117 These are now these two pieces (of which the prophet Zechariah says
in chapter 12, v. 10): \"The spirit of grace, and of prayer\",

2\) Erlanger: stay.

538 Erl. 49, sit-sis. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
378-381. 538

which is poured out on Christians, which first of all makes them agree
that everything they do is pleasing to God and is all grace; and even if
it is still sinful, it is still forgiven and covered up by it, which
also drives them to cry out to God in all kinds of distress, and assures
them in their hearts that they will be heard.

For this reason Christians have great advantage and glory if they remain
pure and firm in the faith and guard against false doctrine and life.
And this is a glorious, comforting sermon about the Christian state.
What devils have we made with our preaching of monasticism, and all the
filthiness which we have praised and exalted above the Christian state
and our baptism? Where is there any state or life on earth, of which one
finds such glorious promises, as of this? which are promised to all who
are called Christians and are baptized, whether monk or layman, master
or servant, wife or maid, young or old 2c. This must be a blessed state,
and highly praiseworthy before all, to whom such divine promises are
given, that what one asks and desires from God in it shall certainly be
heard and yes, and without that, everything that happens in it shall be
well done and praised before God. Shouldn\'t we 1) run to find out where
such a promise could be found, at the end of the world? Now it is
brought to us at the door, without all our trouble and cost, to one as
well as to the other, who only wants to accept it. How I have labored
and toiled so long (since I wanted to be a pious monk, as I was) with
fasting, vigils, prayers and other things, that I might attain such
things; and yet all my life long I could not find it in my heart that
God would be pleased with my works, which I had done most diligently, or
that my prayer would certainly be heard.

119\] That is why it has been a hostile, cursed life with all the
monasticism and everything else, so that one has wanted to serve God,
and yet can never come to the glory and comfort that Christians have,
and say: I know that everything I do in the name of Christ must please
God, even if the devil should be sorry for it; therefore I will

1\) \"we\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

go and do all my works that I should and can do in my state, however
small it is, because I know that it is called pleasing to God and
pleases Him just as much as the most beautiful, most difficult and most
delicious work of the highest state. I could not have done this before
with all the works that could be done on earth, for we did not know what
a Christian life was. But now that I have come to know Christ and
believe in him, I am happy to boast that everything I do in this faith
pleases him, and whatever need or need I have should fall before him and
pray, and be sure and certain that I will be helped.

120 Now the contradiction follows from this text, as he said above \[v.
7\]: If any man abide not in me, and my words abide not in him, he may
do many things, and be tormented to death with them; but they are
nothing but vain, forsaken, rejected, damned works, as of a corrupt,
unfruitful speech, which is good for nothing, but to be cast into the
fire, and to be burned up. And in addition, if he wanted to pray as long
and as much, he should still obtain nothing; as we have prayed so much
until now in all churches and monasteries all hours, and yet never
prayed anything. For we could not provide ourselves with the grace that
we would certainly be heard; we only thought: I must therefore pray my
horas, rosaries and other things, but whether God is pleased with them
and wants to hear me, I do not know.

\(121\) This is the wretched state of the world apart from Christ, when
it is said, \"Much has been done and labored, and yet nothing has been
accomplished everywhere; much has been prayed for, sought for, and
knocked for, and yet nothing has been obtained, found, or accomplished.
For they lack the right door. For what they do and pray, they do without
faith, as they would any other work; they have no comfort or confidence,
indeed, no right thought that it will please God or hear them.
Therefore, they can never not pray. For, as I have often said, praying
is the work of faith alone, and no one but a Christian can do it. For
these do not pray in themselves, but in the name of the Son of God, in
whom they have been baptized; and are sure that thus God prays.

540 **Erl. 4g, SIS-SIS. Sermon on John 15:7, 8. W. VIII, 381-384.** 541

because he commanded to pray in the name of Christ and promised to
answer. Others do not know this, who began to pray in their name; they
want to prepare and gather themselves together until they become worthy
and skilled enough, and so they make it a real work. And when they are
asked if they are sure that they have been heard, they say: I have
prayed, but whether I am heard, God alone knows. But what does it mean
to have prayed, if you do not know what you are doing, or what 1) God
says about it?

A Christian, however, does not depart from prayer in this way; but, as
he begins it at God\'s command and promise, so he offers it up to God in
the name of Christ, and knows that what he has asked will not be denied
him, and experiences it in fact, that he will be helped in all his
troubles. And even though he will not soon be delivered from it, he
knows that the prayer is pleasant and answered, and God gives him that
he can bear it and overcome it. Which is just as much as if it were
taken away from him, and is no longer called a calamity or plague after
it is overcome. So far, praise God, we have also experienced many great
dangers and hardships from our enemies and others, as God has helped and
saved us for so many years through prayer, or has given us, that we have
endured and overcome them, and are still overcoming them until we are
finally redeemed.

**V. 8. In this my Father is honored, that you bear much fruit and
become my disciples.**

I will praise you even more highly for your Christian life, he will say,
so that you can not only do all good and overcome and avert all
misfortune through prayer, but also be the people through whom my Father
is honored and the priests and God\'s servants who do holy, pleasing
sacrifices to my Father without ceasing.

How many people are there on earth who would like to have the honor and
glory of being called God\'s servants, whom He would honor and praise?
And what effort and labor did we put into it before we invented how to
serve God? Since everyone has

1\) \"what\" is missing in the Erlanger.

He was not striving to become a holy priest, priest, or monk, or to
establish much worship, and he gave help so that he would also be able
to do so. If a boy came to say his first mass, how blessed did the
mother think she was who had borne the son and made God a servant? just
as if we had to become God\'s servants through our actions and works,
apart from and without Christ; and thus we ourselves would have to
perform such works, which would be called worship. Hence the distinction
between the laity and the priests, who are nothing but ministers of the
Mass, that they alone were called spiritual, and served God only by what
was done in the church, and all other common professions and works on
earth were despised as neither spiritual nor holy, and in them one could
not serve God, since their so-called spiritual life is vain,
incompetent, unfruitful works before God; because there is no Christ and
faith, and truly God has not been honored nor served, but rather
dishonored, and His right service has been prevented, even obscured and
put down.

It is true that the noblest and highest service is to preach and hear
God\'s word; item, sacraments, 2c., as the works of the first table
among the ten commandments; but everything is called serving God, even
what is found in the works of the other table, as honoring father and
mother, living patiently, chastely and modestly. For he who lives in
this way serves and honors the same God. Thus, says he, I will
consecrate you, who remain in me, to be holy priests, that you may be my
Father\'s priests, and that what you do may not only be right and well
done, but may also be the most delicious service of God, much nobler and
better than that of the unbelieving Jews, or of Pabst and all his mass
priests. For I do not want such stinking services, which only have a
false appearance, but which my heavenly Father truly considers to be
worship, and accepts as a glorious, holy sacrifice, and pleases him from
the heart.

So you see how the Christians are so highly honored by God that they
alone are the people on earth whom God considers His servants. What
about all the Jews, Turks, Papists, who want to be holy without faith?

542 Erl. 4g, SIS-S20. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
384-38V. 543

by their works (not of the Ten Commandments, but which they themselves
choose), for vain stink before God? But you, he says, are the holy
people, and right priests consecrated by God, and your works are holy
and acceptable sacrifices. This means that our works are not only
praised on earth as good fruits, but also lifted up to heaven and
offered to God, so that he accepts them for his special honor and as his
highest service. How could a Christian life be praised more highly? And
what could be used to 1) incite and exhort someone more strongly to it,
than that it has such fruits, benefits and honor with God?

But what is this that he adds, \"that ye should become my disciples\"?
Are they not his disciples beforehand? Or, how, are they to become so
only by their works? What then is Christ, and what he hath hitherto said
\[v. 5.\], that without him they can do nothing, and bring forth no
fruit? Answer: But behold what manner of man Christ is; he is he that
can do the art best. For all that he does is right and well done, and
all that he asks is undoubtedly yes and answered, and all his works are
the highest worship and sacrifice before the heavenly Father. They
should also be such people, so that they are called disciples and
followers of this Master, and thus do as he does and what he does. This
the apostle St. Paul further points out from Rom. 12, 1. 2. that our
perfect, spiritual worship, actually speaking, is nothing else than to
be disciples of this man and to become like him, who is the one person,
whose whole office and all works are vain worship and holy sacrifices.
As the 110th Psalm v. 4. says: \"You are a priest forever\" 2c., and
makes us, if we are and remain in him, also such priests 2c. This we
have, if we remain in him.

But if we fall away from it, or go beside it, we are like those who 2)
have gone before, who want to make the world full of priesthood and
worship, and yet never learn or know what true worship is, nor can we
become disciples and followers of Christ.

1\) \"man\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

toil to death over it with his own works. For all fruit is lost, and
they can do nothing in trouble and fear, but run hither and thither
seeking help, and yet obtain nothing. For they cannot call upon God with
faith and trust in Christ, but vow themselves to the devil in the name
of the dead saints, or come in their name, and always remain in doubt
and unbelief. Therefore, they cannot serve God, nor do pleasing
sacrifices; indeed, they do not know that their whole life in Christ
should be a constant priesthood and service of God; they pervert and
corrupt the right sacrifices, with their self-conceived piety and
abominable sacrifice of the Mass. In sum, they never become Christ\'s
disciples, but remain the devil\'s disciples, 3) and what they are and
live is lost and condemned.

**V. 9. As my Father loves me, so I also love you. Remain in my love.**

Until now, he has comforted and exhorted them to remain in him and to be
good branches through the benefit and fruit they will receive from him.
Now, for the last time, he gives them a doctrine or commandment of love,
which they are to have among themselves.

The cause and necessity of this commandment is that he saw how things
would go in Christendom, that the devil would also bring about his
disunity, anger, impatience, hatred and envy among Christians, as has
been seen and experienced all too often, unfortunately, and is still
before his eyes. So it is with us 4) that we are branches that need
sweeping and cleansing without ceasing. For though we are clean in
Christ, if we abide in him in any other way, we are not yet clean
because of our life, because we have this sackcloth on our necks, and
there still remain many daily weaknesses and infirmities. And it cannot
be otherwise; at times one limb must bump the other, as in our body one
foot or toe bumps the other, or man injures himself. Such jolts and
challenges do not remain outside, especially because we are all here in
the

3\) \"but - disciple\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

4\) Wittenberger: us too.

544 **Erl. 4S,sso-323. Sermon On Joh. 15, 9. W. VIII, \"so-SSL.** 545

The devil\'s kingdom, which attacks us without ceasing, and in addition
the flesh is still weak and full of infirmities.

For this reason, even the most pious 1) and dearest of friends can
become divided and suspicious among themselves, so that the devil
sometimes puts suspicion and poison into their hearts for the sake of a
word or a look, which causes them to dislike one another. He is a master
of this, and takes great pains to do it, and has done it before anyone
knows or realizes it. How it happened between St. Paul and Barnaba,
Apost. 15:2, that they clashed sharply with one another and drew away
from one another. The two men, Jerome and Rufinus, were the best of
friends, and like brothers to each other, and yet they disagreed so much
about a preface that they could not become friends again. This would
also have happened between St. Augustine and Jerome, where Augustine
would not have been wiser. So from small things such quarrels and enmity
can arise that \[it\] brings great harm to a whole group afterwards. For
the blood soon begins to flow; so the devil shoots his poisonous arrows
into the heart through evil tongues, so that no one speaks or thinks
anything good of the other; he blows, and would gladly set people on
each other, and cause misery and murder.

132\) One reads an example of this, 2) which may be fictitious, but it
rhymes well with this, to show the devil\'s art: how a couple of people,
husband and wife, loved each other so dearly that the devil could not
make them disagree (and yet would have liked to do so), until he finally
hired an old weather whore, to whom he talked a red pair of shoes, where
she could make the two spouses disagree. She accepted this, and first
went to the man, and persuaded him that his wife was a whore, and was
attached to another, and sought his life; and that as a sign (she said)
he would find a sharp shear knife in the bed under her pillow, so that
she would cut his throat in the night. Now, the man draws the poison
that he be-

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: \"furnemesten\".

2\) The same narrative is found in the Table Talks, Cap. 43, tz 40.
Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. XXII, 1146.

begins to get suspicious. However, the old whore also comes to the same
man\'s wife and says the same thing, how he follows others and secretly
wants to strangle her. Therefore, she advises her to come before him and
take a shear knife to her bed. Then it happened that they did not give
each other a friendly word or sign that day, and she took the shear
knife into bed with her; and the man was also waiting for it; and when
he found it, he took the knife and cut off her neck. It is also said
here (and is believable), that the devil had caught the old woman\'s red
pair of shoes on a pole, and said: I will not come to you, because you
are much worse than I am.

For this reason we Christians should know the devil\'s art and trickery,
and so direct ourselves to be wise, and know how to guard against it, so
that we do not let such poison grow up in our hearts, but, if we are
already moved to suspicion and dislike, fight back, and remember that we
do not let love be broken up and extinguished for this reason, but hold
fast to it against it; and if there is any dislike or disagreement, that
love and friendship may be restored and improved. For to begin to love
is not such a great art, but to remain in love, as Christ says here,
that is the right art and virtue. For as often as many of them come
together in wedlock, who at first want to devour one another with great
love and ardor, and then become deadly enemies to one another, so it
also happens among Christian brethren that for some small cause love is
broken up, and those who should be most hard together and hold one
another, tear one another apart, so that they become the worst, most
bitter enemies. As it happened in Christendom after the time of the
apostles, when the devil awakened his seditionists and heretics, that
the bishops and preachers burned against each other, and after that also
divided the people into various sects and divisions; thus Christendom
suffered murderous damage.

This is then the devil\'s delight, and

3\) In the old editions: \"lausset\".

[546 Erl. 19, \[ss-sss. Interpretations about John the Evangelist. W.
VIII, 38S-S9S. 547]{.underline}

Lust, which seeks nothing else 1) but to destroy love among Christians
and to cause vain hatred and envy. For he knows well that it is through
love that Christianity is built up and preserved. Therefore St. Paul,
Col. 3, 14, calls it a \"bond of perfection\" by which Christians are
held together; and in 1 Cor. 13, 13 he calls it the greatest virtue, as
the one that creates and accomplishes the most in the Christian regime.
For where this is lacking, doctrine cannot remain pure, nor can hearts
be kept separate from one another.

For this reason Christ exhorts us so highly and nobly, that after we
have believed in him, and have now become his branches, we hold fast to
love above all things, and sets both his Father and himself as an
example, as the noblest and most perfect example: \"As my Father loves
me, so I also love you; therefore abide in my love\" 2c. My Father (he
wants to say) loves me in such a way that he puts all his power and
authority over me, lets me suffer now and then; but everything that I do
and suffer, he takes care of as if it happened to him, and will make me
alive out of death and make me the Lord over all things, and even
transfigure his divine majesty in me. \"Thus,\" he says, \"I love you.\"
For I do not leave you in your sins and death, but lay down my body and
life for you, that I may save you out of them; and I commit to you my
purity, holiness, death, resurrection, and all that I am able; wherefore
abide also in such my love one toward another. Even though you are
severely challenged and urged to fall from me for my sake, hold on and
suffer; let my love be stronger, greater and more powerful than the
suffering or pain you feel. For I know that the devil will be hard on
you for my sake, that he will make you sad, weary and impatient, so that
you will let go and say, \"I wish I had never started this. As is
happening to many now, and I myself have often been so tempted

1\) So in the old editions and also in the original used by the Erlanger
edition. Accordingly, Walch\'s change: \"after nothing else\" is
included in the text by the Erlanger.

I have felt displeasure and weariness, and almost 2) think: If I had not
started it, I would never preach a word, and let everything go as it
goes. For flesh and blood is flesh and blood, and it shocks anyone that
he should see and suffer so much contempt, ingratitude, persecution and
danger for love and good deeds.

136 But it is not said thus. Do not let the devil, the world, or your
own flesh overpower you, but think how I have loved you and still love
you, and what I have done for you, that through me you might become
righteous and blessed, pleasing to the Father, his priest and servant,
and my disciple, and for this reason have suffered and overcome
everything that both the devil and the world have been able to do
against me. Dear one, remain in my love, and do not let the multitude
and unpleasantness of the challenge deter you; only stand firm and
defend yourself chivalrously. I would also have cause to complain, and
to become unhappy or impatient, that the Father lets me be so miserably
blasphemed, and so shamefully crucified, and that the world gives such
evil thanks for my love; but I will not let any torture or suffering
deter me from such love of my Father, and yours. Therefore, if the world
causes you pain and suffering, look to me for what I have done and
suffered for your sake. Let it go to the devil wherever it wants to go,
but do this for my love, so that you only remain with me, and my word
remains in you.

137 Therefore, according to this example of Christ, we should also learn
to practice this commandment among ourselves, each in his own class
against the other. For if we did not have such an example of Christ set
before us, it would be too difficult, indeed quite impossible, for us to
keep and endure. But now, when I see what he has suffered for my sake, I
can again take courage and say, \"Well, if he has done these things for
me, let this and other things also be suffered for his sake; and if the
world should become mad and foolish with rage, then I will still remain
with the man and be content with the fact that he, and the Father also
through him, loves me, and calls me, and the Father, and the Father also
through him, loves me.

2\) Wittenberger: \"unterweilen\" instead of: schier.

3\) \"before\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

548 **Sri. 4S, \[ss-SS7. Sermon on John 15:9-12. W. VIII, 395-39.\"**
549

Hold fast to his love. This is the first piece of love against Christ,
so that we must maintain against the hatred of the world.

138\. Secondly, as I said, he also wants to urge love among us toward
one another, and to prevent us from causing unrest and discord among
ourselves in Christendom, so that each one may think, if something
displeasing happens to him, that he must suffer and bear too much, not
only from the world or from those who are outside our fellowship, but
also from those who are among us and are our brothers; But that we know
that it cannot be otherwise, that there must be many infirmities and
errors among us; that we are not angry because we bite our tongue with
our teeth, or our fist goes into our eye, or our foot bumps, or our head
runs against the wall, but think thus: Well, it is your member, your
brother or neighbor, what will you make of it? He has done it by
mistake, and not gladly, and does not mean it so badly, or has it ever
happened out of weakness and lack of understanding. The blow has
happened that hurts you, but will you throw away your limb because of
it? It is a little spark; spit into it, and it shall be quenched, lest
the devil come with his poisonous breath, or with evil tongues, and make
a fire of it, which afterward cannot be quenched, and such strife and
hatred as cannot be reconciled, and do harm to the whole multitude. For
he is such a spirit that neither ceases nor desists when he is not
resisted.

**V. 10-12 If you keep my commandments, you will abide in my love, just
as I keep my Father\'s commandments and abide in his love. These things
I speak unto you, that my joy may abide in you, and that your joy may be
full. This is my commandment, that ye love one another, even as I love
you.**

139 He preaches a long sermon, and carries this exhortation almost to
the end of this chapter: that after we have become his branches and
abide in him (lest we be deceived by strange doctrine, and so be cut off
from him), we also thereafter keep ourselves together among ourselves,
as his right branches, and in the common company of this vine, through
the

Love; so that one can see how much he cares about this. For where love
and unity are destroyed, and division and discord arise, there also the
united doctrine perishes, so that one again falls away from Christ.
Therefore, says he, if you are and remain in me, think also and keep my
commandments, for I must also lay up for you a work which is a sign,
that it may be known that you are my branches. As he says, John 13:35,
\"By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love
one to another.\" And this very commandment, which I myself also keep
and do, is for you an example and a model, for therefore I abide in my
Father\'s love, because I keep his commandment; therefore, if ye keep my
commandments, ye abide in my love also. These are the two parts of
Christian doctrine that must be daily practiced in Christendom, so that
neither is slackened.

\(140\) For if faith be not preached, and let the first thing be as we
are incorporated into Christ, and become branches in him, all the world
falleth upon their works. Again, where faith alone is taught, they
become false Christians, who boast of faith, and are baptized and
numbered among the Christians, but neither fruit nor power is evidenced
in them.

That is why it is difficult to preach to the people. Because, as one
preaches to them, it does not go right; they always fall aside. If one
does not preach faith, it becomes a vain hypocrisy. But if one practices
faith alone, no works will follow. Summa, either vain faithless workers
or even vain believers want to become. Therefore it is only a sermon for
those who accept and grasp both; the others, who do not want to, remain
behind. There is nothing to be gained by making all the world godly, as
little as the devil, who is their God and Lord. And if one says much to
her, she only defies it the more, and takes it as an irritation, that
they should only make it worse. Therefore we let them go, because they
will not hear nor believe until they find and know, not only there
forever, but also here in time.

142 But we preach to the multitude who are

550 Erl. 4S, S27-sso. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
\[ss-4ÜI. 551

Knowing and thinking where they will finally abide, that they will abide
in this vine above all things, and put all their comfort in it; and
afterward also show this in deed and with life. For where faith is, it
will undoubtedly show itself with such fruits as he said above \[v.
5.\], \"He that abideth in me bringeth forth much fruit.\" For he will
have to think thus: I believe in Christ, who loved me, and gave his body
and life for me; therefore I will also show myself to my neighbor by
love, that I may be kind and helpful to him, and where he is infirm, or
has too much to do, bear it with patience and gentleness. You must not
lay down your life and limb for him, as Christ did for you, but I only
command,\" he says, \"that you show the sign of faith by serving,
helping and supporting your neighbor, by being faithful and loving. If
you do this, you have done all that I require of you, and are now like
me; but if you leave this standing, or do the contrary, you must not
boast of me either, and your own deeds testify against you that you are
not the right fruitful branches in me, but rotten cut wood.

143\. For it is not that he should have left his body and blood for
thee, and should have turned all that he hath unto thee, and should have
borne and suffered all thy sins and infirmities that are yet in thee,
and thou wouldest not have done so much again for his sake, as to let
thy neighbor off a farthing, or to forbear an evil word; I will not let
you steal and rob him, and overcharge him with usury, and overcharge him
with usury, and deceive him in buying and cheating him with false goods,
and in sum, prove all the evil things and deceitfulness, as almost
everyone does now, and no one takes no conscience about it.

Therefore, let each one go home into his heart and examine himself to
see how he stands, and do not rely on such thoughts: I am baptized and
called a Christian, have heard God\'s word, and go to the sacrament. For
here he himself separates false Christians from the righteous
Christians, as if he were to say, \"If you are true believers in me and
have my treasure, it will be all right.

If not, do not think that I will recognize and accept you as my
disciples, and you will have deceived and defrauded no one but
yourselves, to eternal mockery and harm; the gospel and Christ will
remain undeceived and undeceived 1).

145 He has to admonish this and must always be enforced in Christianity,
because we see how there are always many of these among us. For he does
not want to have or know any false Christians, as he testifies in Matth.
7, 23, where he passes a terrible judgment on them, 2) and says that he
will say to them in that day: \"Depart from me, all you 3) evildoers, I
have never known you.\" For if such false men were even more heathen and
unchristian, they would not do harm to Christendom with a grievous
example, disgracing and blaspheming the holy name of Christ and his
word.

**V. 13. 14. No one has greater love than this, that he lay down his
life for his friends. You are my friends if you do what I command you.**

He makes it out of measure kindly and sweetly with words, that he speaks
this commandment into their hearts, which he leaves for them last, and
sets an example, that they should see how he has loved them and what he
has done for them. That is a great, mighty love, if a man in his need
gave another a hundred or a thousand florins, or paid all his debts for
him; but how great would it be if a king or prince gave a poor beggar a
county or principality, even his own kingdom or land and people? Then
all the world would sing and say of unheard-of love. Now all this is
small compared to the fact that Christ gives his body and life for you,
which is of course the highest love that a man can show to another on
earth, because to serve with money and goods, even with the body, is
also to love. But there is no one who would not rather give away his
money and possessions, even his country and people, because

1\) Wittenberger: deceived - \"-betrogen\", that is: unbetrogen.

2\) Erlanger: stellet.

3\) \"their\" is missing in the Jena.

> 552 Erl. 1S, 3S0-SM. Sermon On Joh. 15, 13. 14. W. VIII, 4M-E 553

**553**

that he should die for another; and even if he did, it would still be
nothing compared to the Son of God lowering himself from heaven and
taking your place, and willingly shedding his blood and dying for you,
who were his enemy and a condemned man. This is love, which is far
greater and higher than heaven and earth, and all that can be called.

What can you or will you do to him, even if you give your life and limb
for your neighbor? What is that against his life and limb? Although he
does not demand so much of you, unless it comes to the greatest need,
that you could or should save him from death by your death. But he
demands only that you show yourself to your neighbor in your life, so
that your love can be felt and noticed. I would like that,\" he says,
\"and I would have enough of it if you would show loyalty and respect,
friendship, service and help to one another, as you are all under one
head and members of one body, and not create divisions and split up love
among yourselves. This is my commandment altogether, as I interpret and
require of you, for so great and unspeakable a love; if ye would
otherwise, that ye should be known and taken for my disciples. For
whoever will not do this, let him know that he is not a Christian,
though he may go under the name of Christianity; for faith is certainly
not there, where not love but contradiction is shown and solved. And
though the works of love do not justify and save, yet they are to follow
as the fruits and emblems of faith.

Therefore he says: You are my friends, if you do what I command you. As
if to say, \"Because I have made you friends and have shown you all my
love, I in turn demand of you that you love one another as friends. For
though it be true that we are made friends by his blood alone, yet this
must be and follow, that such things may be manifested among Christians
one toward another, or friendship may become

1\) \"Glieder\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

be false and nothing. For these are not called friends, since one proves
not love to the other, but hatred, envy, or wicked malice. If then, says
he, you are truly my friends, you will do what I tell you to do.

Now this is a sweet, sweet word, that he calls them his friends. For he
would gladly provoke us to look upon his love, as he has made his Father
a friend to us, and has shown himself a friend to us above all friends;
only that we, who are all his friends, may also live kindly among
ourselves. And this is a fine and easy commandment, put in the easiest
and kindest way. For he does not give them, he says, as servants who
must be held and driven to obedience by compulsion and force, but
admonishes them as friends, that they should do this for his love as
their friend. And in Himself is the easiest and sweetest work, which
otherwise we ourselves should willingly do without all commandments, as
He died for them not out of necessity, but willingly and gladly.
Therefore he will say, I lay no heavy burden or weight upon you, much
sacrifice or worship, or any other thing 2) to which great cost or toil
and labor 3) belongs. The gospel, baptism and sacrament I have laid 4)
upon you. This is not a commandment, but your treasure, which I have
given you freely, and compel no one to receive it, as Moses did, with
coercion and punishment, but let everyone choose who will gladly accept
it. You are not commanded to do it for God\'s sake, but for your own
benefit, that you may obtain your blessedness there, if you wish to be
blessed in some other way. But now, because ye have all received the
treasure which ye ought to have, do but this one thing, that ye keep
yourselves together through love. For as Adam in paradise was charged
with one prohibition, that he should not eat of one tree, when all other
trees were lawful for him: so I give you but one commandment, and
absolve you from as many grievous commandments, and as many strange
works as Moses laid, or else might be laid. But that be

2\) \"Thing\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) \"and work\" is missing in the Jena.

4\) Erlanger: not you.

5\) Wittenberger: Holiness.

554 Erl. 4g, SSS-3S4. Interpretations on the Evangelist John- W. VIII,
403-40\". 555

I require of you that you love 1) one another; as indeed you owe without
this, because you are at the same time my disciples, and enjoy the same
common good from me.

\(150\) This may be called 2) a friendly commandment, that the Lord, who
has left body and soul for us and has done everything for us, does not
demand anything in return that we should give or do to him, as if we had
to do it for his sake, but only for our own benefit. From him we have
everything for nothing, that we may do nothing more without helping
ourselves among ourselves.

\(151\) How heavy a reckoning will we have to give for this, when he
himself will reproach us: I have laid no commandment upon you against
me, but have commanded you among yourselves, or against yourselves only,
that ye should love one another, and think kindly of one another, and
serve one another with faithfulness, all to your profit, that ye may
have the best of it. And yet you did not want to suffer such a
commandment, which I gave you myself for your benefit and piety, for the
treasure I gave you and left you. If I had commanded you to fast and lie
on the ground every day, you would have said it was too hard and too
much for you, even though you would owe it to me if I demanded it, and
it would be even less than the love and kindness I have shown you. But
now I mean nothing to you, except that you love one another as I have
loved you, which is natural, and you should do it without being asked.
For it is in nature that everyone must confess himself that he would
like everyone to show him love and faithfulness, and to help him; and
therefore we are mingled together by God, that we should dwell with one
another, and one should serve and help the other. God is not allowed to
be anywhere, nor do we give it for His sake, but we are allowed to do it
heartily.

Now we should run to the end of the world, that we might be relieved of
our burdens and burdens, and come to such an easy service or
commandment. How we have toiled and labored until now under the papacy,
and have given and done everything that we might only serve God.

1\) Wittenberger: from you.

2\) Erlanger: yes.

serve. What a hellish torture the secret confession alone has been? that
I keep silent about the others. How gladly one would have given money
upon money, so that we would be rid of the same affliction, or that it
would ever be alleviated. But now that it has happened, no one gives
thanks. Yes, it would be easy to forget giving thanks, if it were not
for the abuse of such freedom, and if people did not become more angry
because of it than they were before. For we do just as our first father,
Adam, did in paradise. If God had painted and forbidden him many trees,
he would have complained that it was difficult and dangerous, and would
easily have taken offense at so many forbidden trees; but now he does
not give him more than the one tree, and leaves the others all free, nor
does he like any of them, and they are disgusting to him, and he only
wants to eat from the forbidden tree \[Gen. 2:17\].

Such a sorrowful plague has also befallen us. Since all the commandments
have been taken away from us, and we have been freed from the
innumerable burdens under the papacy, and have only this one
commandment, that we should love our neighbor, we do not want to eat
from the forbidden tree alone, and do not want to keep this one
commandment, regardless of the fact that we have received so much from
him, his blood, body and life, and this freedom from all the laws of
Moses and others, and only become more angry and strive against love
more fiercely than ever before.

This will also put an end to the game. For He will not suffer not only
such ingratitude, but also the arrogant will that He should not charge
us so much for such unspeakable good deeds, that we should only keep
this one commandment, which should only be a sign and testimony that we
live as Christians. If God were to give us all His grace, Christ His
Son, and say: You shall do nothing everywhere without what you desire,
and leave all willfulness and selfishness free, who would call Him so?
We must have at least one sign, that we may confess,

3\) Wittenberger: von unserm treuen Heiland.

4\) Erlanger: Shall he us.

556 **Eri. 4S, SS4-SS6. Sermon on John 15:13-15. W. VIII, 4VS-\^V8.**
557

That we may have such benefits from him, and be free from all that we
were before weighed down, and also do something to him in gratitude,
especially because we ourselves have good need of one another, that one
may serve and help another through love.

\(155\) Therefore he says, \"You are my friends, if you do what I
command you. Before you were enemies, but because of this you are
friends, that I consider you friends; not because you do me much good,
as the world is called friends, but to whom I do vain good. For such
friends I die, who never did me no good, only that I loved them and made
them friends. Summa, you have not made yourselves friends to me, but
through me you have become so, from enemies, who by nature were friends
of the devil. So now you shall be and remain my friends, if you alone
keep this my one commandment, for my love, and for your own good. I have
given you my life and limb, and you are my dear friends, redeemed and
bought by my blood, and you shall have everything through me, be rich
and free nobles 1); only do it so that you remain in friendship and do
not become enemies again, nor live so that no one can say that you are
friends.

\(156\) So he clearly testifies (2) that even though we are Christians
and baptized, and are his friends, he wants us to be grateful for such
friendship, and to prove it by love. For by this it must be known
whether you have the treasure with you, and keep the friendship with
you, as by an outward sign and confession. Which, if it be not, is a
testimony against thee, that thou hast not rightly believed, nor
received friendship, but hast suffered all to be lost in thee, which
Christ hath addressed unto thee.

157 For, as has often been said, even if love does not make friends and
make one blessed, it must be followed by such a sign of friendship, or
of the received treasure of righteousness and innocence. Just as Adam,
when he kept the commandment, was not innocent, but before the
commandment he was created pure and without sin by God, both in body and
soul, and

1\) In the old editions: Junckherrn.

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: shows.

was not allowed to earn it by obeying the commandment. To such a holy,
pious man, who already had what he was supposed to have and was what he
was supposed to be, God gave this commandment as a sign to prove that he
was obedient to God. By nature he was pious, because he was created that
way. Just as when we are born, a light must not be lit for us to get
eyes that see, but is already there by nature. So he did not need 3) to
become holier or more perfect (because he already was) and yet receive
the commandment, that 3) he prove and practice his obedience and
godliness. Then the devil came and brought him into disobedience, 4)
corrupted his beautiful pious soul and pure body. Then it was already
wrong, and vain disobedience; yes, fallen so low, that he also fears
God, can not stand him, where he sees and hears him, which he did not do
before.

So we are all through him, that by nature we no longer know God, our
reason is blinded, our will is turned away. But now through Christ we
are born again and purified, without all our works or law, just as Adam
was created pure in the first place. But just as the commandment to obey
was laid upon him, who was thus created pure 5), so also this is laid
upon us, that we may confess our obedience.

But as he kept it, so keep it still, alas! And as he fell from the
commandment of his creation, and thus lost his innocence, and turned
away from God, so it is with those who let themselves be torn from the
obedience of this commandment, fall again from the new birth, until they
are also blinded and hardened, so that they no longer want to hear nor
suffer what is preached, admonished and punished, and become evil
devils; or, where it is otherwise, desperate people who despair of God
and His grace, like Cain and Judas the Apostle.

**V. 15. I do not say henceforth that you are servants, for a servant
does not know what his master is doing.**

3\) Wittenberger: da.

4\) Erlanger: and.

5\) Thus the Wittenbergers. Jenaer and Erlanger: \"born\".

6\) Wittenberger: of his pure creation.

[558 Erl. 4g, SSV-SS8. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
408-411. 559]{.underline}

**do. But to you I have said that you are friends, for all that I have
heard from my Father I have made known to you.**

160 He drives the word \"friend\" and puts \"servant\" and \"friend\"
against each other. I do not call you servants (as you were before, and
all the Jewish people were under the law before Christ was known), for
the servant does not know what his master has in mind, or what he wants
to do with him, and has no part nor fellowship with him in his goods,
but takes only his hired wages, which he may give him every hour, and so
let it run. You are not such, but the Jews and false saints, who serve
me for the sake of pleasure, and not from the heart out of love, but you
are my friends. For I have revealed and given you all that I have
received from my Father.

161 Then you will hear whom he calls his friends, and from what causes,
namely, those who received good things from him. For this is his way of
speaking, just as in the Gospel of Luke 10:36, 37 it is said of the
wounded man who had fallen among the murderers, that he was his neighbor
who had shown him mercy. We turn it around and call them \"friends\" who
do good to another; but he is talking about how we come to be called his
friends in the sight of God, namely, that we receive good things from
him. For we have not given him anything beforehand, nor have we earned
anything for him to become our friend; as he will now say, \"You have
not chosen me,\" 2c. but he has begun it, and taken us from enemies to
friends and made us friends, so that we must thank him and confess that
it is only due to his grace and goodness that we are friends.

These are also beautiful, comforting words, as we also heard in the
previous chapter, that he says: \"You should rejoice that you have a
treasure given to you, which is not given to any servant, that I reveal
to you everything I have heard from my Father. This must truly be a
friend who tells another everything he knows and reveals, trusts and
gives all his secrets. I show this mightily by the fact that I have

you both, all my heart, and also of the Father.

This is to serve against the despondent, stupid consciences, which
struggle with the thoughts of how God is against them, and fear, since
it is not to be feared. Such thoughts he wants to uproot purely with
this. As if he should say: If you want to know what the Father\'s will
and thoughts are in heaven, you have it all here, because I have told
you everything. Therefore, a Christian can also 1) certainly conclude: I
know (praise God) everything that God wills and has in his heart, and
nothing is hidden from me, namely, that which serves me for salvation.
For he does not speak that we should know everything, how many pebbles
there are in the sea, or stars in the sky, but everything that God
thinks about us, and all his heart towards us.

Therefore, if you want to know what God in heaven thinks of you, and
whether He is gracious to you, you must not run into corners, nor seek
it in your thoughts or works, but only do everything from the heart, 2)
and only hear what this Christ says, for everything is revealed in Him.
Now therefore he says: I am therefore sent unto thee of the Father, to
shed my blood for thee, and to die 2c. and for this thou hast baptism
and sacrament as a sign, and I command thee to believe these things.
There you have all that I know and have heard from the Father. Therefore
you may safely conclude that the Father thinks nothing else, nor has
anything else in mind for you, except that if you have Christ and
believe, you shall be blessed. Therefore you see how I love you, and
what friendship and glory, joy, comfort and security you have from me,
which you can neither obtain nor have anywhere else, neither in heaven
nor on earth. For no teacher, no prophet, no Moses could do this, nor
could any monk or other spirits (who aspired to it and wanted to go to
heaven with their thoughts, or especially sought secret revelation from
God) attain it. But here it is certain, through God\'s

1\) \"also\" is missing in the Jena.

2\) The Jena one has as marginal gloss: \"This little word \'gethan\' is
not in the old copy.\"

3\) Wittenberger: and.

560 \<m. ts, \[ss-sn. Sermon on John 15:15, 16. W. vm, iu-\"s. 561

The Son himself brought from heaven, who heard all things from the
Father himself, and declared to us that we should have no doubt, but be
sure, because we have been baptized into him, and have heard his word,
and have believed, that there is no other thought of the Father in
heaven, but that we should all have his grace and eternal life. This is
the judgment decreed in heaven, which no creature, devil, or calamity
shall turn away or abolish.

**V. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and have
appointed you to go and bring forth fruit, and to suffer your fruit;
that if ye shall ask the Father in my name, he may give it you.**

Then he himself explains how he wants to have understood that he said:
\"I do not call you servants from now on, but my friends\" 2c. This
friendship (he says), that I call you my friends, you have not from
yourselves, but from the fact that I have chosen you as friends
beforehand, through my suffering and death, and recognize you as my
friends: therefore you must not boast as if you had earned it for me,
and were well worth it. Summa, by my choosing and accepting you are
called friends, who otherwise would be of no other kind than vain
enemies, who would know nothing either of me or of God; but now you are
friends, 1) solely because I have loved you so much and meant so
faithfully that I have redeemed you and placed you in eternal life. And
by this also you shall remain friends, and enjoy my friendship forever;
only that you thus prove that I have not meant you thus in vain. So he
repeats and indicates what this friendship is; for in the world it is
not so, but there one calls another his friend, for which he provides
good, and waits to receive good from him; not he who earns nothing, can
give nothing, help, or do good. Here, however, these 2) friends are
called those who have never done him any good, indeed, have never
recognized him, but the poor, miserable sinners, indeed, God\'s enemies,
whose sins and death he takes upon his neck 2c.

1\) Wittenbergers: but now you are friends.

2\) Wittenbergers: the.

166\] Thus is purely cut off and condemned all the presumption of the
false saints against God, that they want to do and earn so much as to
propitiate God and make him their friend. 3) For what do such do but
seek election, and want to be first? that their merit may come first,
and His grace come rolling after; and that it is not He who chooses us,
but we seek Him, and want to make ourselves friends, that we may boast
that He has received good things from us. So do all the world, Jewish,
Turkish, and Papal saints, who presume to merit God\'s grace by their
works. But it is said, \"Ye have not chosen me,\" 2c., that is, ye are
my friends, not for your sake, but for mine. For if you were for your
own sake, I would have to consider your merit. But now you are mine and
mine alone; for 4) I draw you to myself, and give you 5) all that I
have, that your glory may be nothing else, but of my grace and love,
against your works and the works of all the world. For I did not let you
find me, but I had to seek you out and bring you to myself, when you
were far from the knowledge of God \[Eph. 2:11, 12, 13\] and were lying
in error and condemnation like the others. But now I am come, and have
called you out of darkness, before ye asked it, or did any thing for it;
ye are my friends, so that ye receive good things of me, and know that
ye have all things freely, and of pure mercy.

Let the monks and all the world go and boast of their merit, and choose
as long as they will, and you will hear him say, \"You have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you,\" and he does not want to be chosen by you;
and all Scripture condemns and condemns such our choosing (before and
without God\'s command). As the Jews also did, who set up their worship,
chosen and set apart by themselves above all others that God had
ordained and set, and wrote on it the title, This is the chosen worship;
here let us

3\) Wittenberger: want to make.

4\) Erlanger: the.

5\) \"you\" is missing in the Erlanger.

562 Erl. \"s, S11-S1S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
4IS-4IS. 563

To find God, to make atonement, and to obtain mercy. Thus they did in
all things against God, that they would always lay the first stone, and
choose what he should please him; so they offered so much incense and
sacrifice in all places and on the mountains, where there was a green
forest, or some other pleasant place, and boasted that they had found
the right God there, and that he should be gracious to them. Oh, how the
dear prophets were divided with the people over this shameful vice!

168\. as Isa. 66, 3: \"This is what they have chosen in their ways, and
their soul delights in their abominations\"; and Isa. 1, 29: \"You must
be ashamed of what you delight in and choose\"; and Cap. 66, 3. He says:
\"I am warned whoever does such a chosen sacrifice or service, as he who
sacrifices a sow\'s blood; whoever sacrifices a sheep, as he who breaks
a dog\'s neck; whoever slaughters an ox, as he who murders a man. 2c,
that such self-chosen holiness is nothing else before him than vain
murder and blasphemy or denial of God; for he does not want badly that
we should pre-mark and choose what shall please him. As we monks have
chosen until now, how we wanted to find God to be gracious to us: \"Oh,
if I go to a monastery, I thought, and serve God in cap and plate, he
will reward me and welcome me. Thus the whole papacy is thoroughly
disobedient and hostile to God; for they are so furious and mad that
they do not want to approach him, if he seeks them and chooses them by
his word, and offers them all his grace and friendship through his
Son\'s suffering and death, but despises everything and rejects it,
wanting to have the glory and preference that he should live by our
grace and do according to our choice.

Now this has been the struggle in the world from the beginning, and will
probably remain until the end. For Cain also wanted to choose God as he
wanted him, so that he would look upon his work and sacrifice and not
his brother. The world has always followed this until this very hour,
and it cannot be resisted; it cannot do otherwise than to turn back this
sentence, and with

He will say: I do not want to be chosen by God, but I want to choose him
first. So he cannot and will not suffer it, and also turns it around:
You cannot and shall not choose me, but I must choose you. It shall not
be as you think, but as I will; I will be your Lord and Master, and not
be mastered by you.

For this reason he has everywhere in Scripture condemned and rejected
such choice without and against his commandment. And St. Paul is also
very hostile to vice, as he says Col. 2, 18: \"Let no man shift his aim,
who walketh after his own choice in humility and spirituality\"; item v.
23: \"Which have a semblance of truth, through self-selected
spirituality and humility\" 2c. Thus he 1) described future monasticism,
that they would bring up vain self-chosen worship, and thus embellish
and adorn it: I mean well, and do it for the love and honor of God,
therefore it will please Him and be gracious to me. Yes, to such he is
twice more gentle than to others. For he himself will begin to tell us
what it is to serve him; just as he himself called the Jewish people out
of Egypt and gave them the Ten Commandments, what they should do and not
do, so that they should not invent or paint for themselves how they
should serve him.

Therefore he speaks here: Take away all glory from me, as if you had
chosen me, but cling to me, so that you first let me choose you, and
hear what I say to you, so that not you but I may have the glory that I
have earned it for you by my blood and death. So he put on them the
humility that Christians must have, because they have the high honor and
glorious glory of being called friends of Christ and God; that they
nevertheless know and do not forget from whence they are friends, and
remain in the confession that they did not earn or acquire such things,
but that they were given to them by the pure grace of the Lord Christ.
Such a friend should be held dear and in high esteem, who neither takes
nor demands anything from us, but only gives and gives to us.

1\) Erlanger: the.

564 **Erl. 49, S4S-34S. Sermon On Joh. 15, 16. W. VIII, 4IK-4IS.** 565

The world usually likes to do well and not like to give; why don\'t they
do it here? On earth we gladly accept it from everyone, no one can do
too much for us; but because he wants to give us everything good from
heaven, we do not want to accept it. Here we want to turn it around and
do good to the poor man, our Lord God, from whom we are to receive it;
there we build, donate and sacrifice with heaps, give and do what we
should give and do, so that we may only boast about our service to God.
But again, when we should give and do good, namely, to the neighbor who
needs our help, we will and can neither give nor do anything. Summa,
from him we will take nothing; to others we will give nothing: this is
ever a shameful, grievous plague of the devil, brought upon the human
race, who perverts and corrupts all that is valid, right and godly.

Therefore, because the world is such a little fruit, a Christian should
learn to turn it around against the world, that is, to receive from
above all that he should have for salvation, and then to give it out
again from below to his neighbor. For we have enough good from him, both
eternally and temporally, that we can easily help our neighbor; but this
is the complaint that, unfortunately, little is done about it; and the
more one preaches, the worse the world becomes, lives and acts as if one
wanted to be evil in defiance of God. Every day it continues to tear
itself apart with all kinds of wild, furious life, so that no regiment,
discipline, fear or timidity remains. Well, God always lets shout and
preach; but even if the apple is ripe, it must fall. And indeed the
punishment and plague has already begun; and where it will not be
otherwise, we Christians may send ourselves to suffer with them. But we,
who have believed the word and preached it to the world, shall suffer no
harm; but let them see where they are, for they have no cause to
complain that it was not told them.

He continues: \"And I have set you to go and bring forth much fruit\"
2c. Then he repeats what he said above \[v. 14\]: \"You are my
friends\", that is, the people chosen by me, and

receive all good things from me 1) 2c. But it does not mean that you
should do nothing at all, or live as you please. It is true that you
should do nothing, that you may receive forgiveness of sins and eternal
life for yourselves; you have all these things through me. But because
you have it, you should nevertheless show it outwardly and bear witness
to it by loving your neighbor, so that your life may be a sign that you
believe in me. If you do this, your friendship is right and well
established, so that I have not shed my blood for you in vain; if not,
know that you have not received my blood and my good deeds rightly.

For I have chosen you for this purpose, and have appointed all these
things for you, that ye should bring forth much fruit, and so live that
it may be seen that ye are my disciples indeed. You must not do it to
redeem sin, for that is too high for you, and belongs only to my
election and friendship; but you must do it, first, so that God may be
honored and praised by it, and show your obedience; then, for the
benefit and correction of your neighbor, so that it may be seen that you
believe rightly and belong to Christ. This will be done from the fruits
they produce, so that you will be seen to be a kind, charitable, patient
person who does no harm or damage to anyone.

176 This is what it means: \"That you go and bear much fruit. You must
not go to Rome or Jerusalem, but to your neighbor, so that you do not
sit quietly without fruit and work, but show yourselves publicly, so
that other people may enjoy you and also come to you through your
preaching, confession, service and help; for in this way it can be seen
that your faith is right. For where there is no faith, one will
certainly not dare, do, or suffer anything for the sake of the gospel;
but where there is such a man, who for the sake of Christ dares to give
life, goods, and honor, and would gladly bring everyone to it, and
faithfully serves his neighbor, and acts like and brotherly with him,
this is a sure sign that he is a true believing Christian.

177 For the fruits are manifest enough that one may well know and
experience what is of the

1\) Wittenberger: empfahen.

566 Erl. M, S4S-348. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
418-422. 567

Spirit or flesh are works, as St. Paul says Gal. 5, 19. 20. 21:
\"Obvious are the works of the flesh\" 2c. It is not secret, and does
not require a high intellect, but enough in the day that it can be seen
and grasped. For the works of love, item, confessing and preaching,
cannot be hidden like faith between God and us alone, but go out among
the people, so that everyone must see and hear, and say: He has done
this and that or suffered for the sake of the gospel 2c. Such fruits, he
says, you shall bring forth more and more, by which it may be known that
I have chosen you, and such fruits that remain, or are eternal fruits,
so that even in that life they will be praised by God and shine with all
honor.

178 Behold now the great glory which Christians have through Christ:
First, that he hath called and chosen them by his word, that they should
be his dear branches, and have all that he hath purchased, victory and
dominion over sin, death, and the power of the devil. Secondly, that we
also should be his servants, and help to spread his kingdom, creating
and doing much good; which he calls bringing forth much fruit, and such
fruit as shall remain forever, and stand before God, though it be
contested of the devil, and blasphemed and persecuted of the world.
Thirdly, he adds one more thing, saying: \"If you ask the Father in my
name, he will give it to you. This also is a piece, yea, the power and
consequence of his election. For we have grace in Christ, not only to
become friends of God through him, and to come over to the Father, but
also to be chosen to ask of him what we need, and to be sure that it
will be given to us.

For since it is because of both the devil, the world, and our own flesh
that we must in all things suffer temptation, opposition, and hindrance,
and that there always remains much weakness and infirmity, both in
ourselves and in others, that things do not work out as they should, we
need to call for strength, help, and salvation in everything that
befalls and presses us, as the Lord\'s Prayer, which Christ taught us to
pray, sufficiently shows us. And

have the consolation that our prayer shall not be in vain, but is
acceptable to God, will surely be heard and given what we are to have,
if we pray in faith alone from the name of Christ. And so we are
consecrated by Him to the priestly office, that we may and should
joyfully come before God, and bear both our and other people\'s distress
before Him, and according to His promise certainly wait that what we ask
shall be heard and yes, as we shall hear further in the following
chapter on prayer.

**I command you to love one another. If the world hates you, know that
it hated me before it hated you.**

180 Then he repeats and concludes the word and commandment which he has
held out to them, by which Christianity must keep to one another, where
it should remain, and which is the sign by which one recognizes which
are true believers or Christians. For he insists that he has seen how
many false Christians there would be who boast of faith with fine words
and great appearances, and yet there would be nothing behind them. For,
just as the holy name of God, which is the most noble name of all, and
yet is most profaned and misused for all falsehood and wickedness; item,
as the name of Christianity or the church, and everything that is holy,
is misused and falsely led: so also the name, faith and love and good
works must be used for false appearances and disgraceful coverings. For
the devil does not want to be as black as he is painted, but therefore
shine in the beautiful dress, God\'s word, Christian church, faith, love
2c.

181 Therefore he teaches us that it is not enough to boast much about
faith and Christ, but that we must look at the fruits. For where these
do not appear, or where the contradiction appears, it is certain that
Christ is not there, but nothing but a mere false name. Therefore one
must say to such: \"I hear the beautiful, glorious name, which is noble
and worthy of all honor; but who are you? Just as the possessed man,
Apost. 19, 15, to the conjurers, who call the name of Jesus, the

568 Erl. 49, S4S-sso. Sermon on Joh. 15, 17. 18. W. VIII, 422-424. 569

St. 1) Paul preached, led, said, \"JEsum I know well, and Paulum I know
well; but who are ye?\"

\(182\) Yes (you say), does faith make you righteous and blessed without
works? Yes, that is true. But where is it, or where does it remain?
Where does it prove itself? For it must not be such a rotten, useless,
deaf or dead thing, but a living, fruitful tree, bursting forth with
fruit. Therefore this is the difference and proba between righteous
faith and 2) false or colored faith, that where faith is true, it also
proves itself with life; but the false one has the same name, word and
fame, but nothing follows after it.

183 Not only does he urge the exhortation or commandment, but he also
comforts them with it, and carries it out into the whole world. This
commandment, that ye love one another, saith he, I repeat therefore: For
ye, my apostles and disciples, shall find it so, even among yourselves,
that men shall be at enmity with you, and ye shall wonder, saying, If I
thought that there should be love and concord among us, as our gospel
teacheth; whence then cometh this separation, dissension, hatred, and
enmity? Therefore I tell you these things, that ye may know them
beforehand, and be ready for them; if ye would be my disciples, consider
them, and give yourselves up well, that nothing else may come of them;
ye must be cast down, and be stuck (because ye are here), that the world
will hate you. Therefore see that you hold on to each other the more
firmly through love, and do not let yourselves be deterred or torn away
from me, even though you lose the favor and grace of the world, and have
to let go of many friends for my sake. 2c.

And here, see how he paints the world, and gives a clear definition of
what the world is. We cry out and complain about popes, bishops,
tyrants, yes, even burghers and peasants, that they are hostile to us;
but what is the cause, or what have we done to them? What does a poor
pious village priest do to his peasants or squires? Why are they all so
murderously hostile to us? Because

1\) \"St.\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Erlanger: \"or\". The following \"or\" is missing.

It is reasonable to wonder, because they are not hostile to us for this
reason, nor do they blame us for being adulterers, robbers, murderers or
bad boys, which otherwise the world is full of. But this is the cause
(he says) that ye love me, and preach of me. What have I done to deserve
(that I might also boast a little) that the pope and his mob should be
hostile to me, and gladly chase me out into the world, except only that
I preach Christ? 3) Why don\'t I keep quiet, or preach, as before, about
indulgences, pilgrimage, saints\' service, purgatory, mass market, so I
could also keep favor and friendship? But because we want to preach the
gospel and Christ, if you want to (says the devil), I will also salt
your soup and prepare it so that it will not taste good to you.

185\. When the pope ruled through the whole of Christendom, there was
truly a fine regiment for the world, his preachers were held in honor,
and all the monks and priests could throw enough at them; the peasants,
burghers and nobility had to suffer from them that they slept with their
wives and daughters, and called them worthy, dear lords, and set them
above them at their tables; And yet there was not one who said anything
about Christ and the right consolation of consciences; indeed, it was
almost a disgrace to mention the name of Jesus on the sermon platform
(except in the Passion or in the text of the Gospel); otherwise nothing
but vain Aristotle and saintly legends were heard. Then the world was at
peace, no psaff was chased away, but they were held in all honor; no
layman was allowed to touch a hair of their head, or all people had to
let banishment and interdict pass over them. But now, when Christ is
preached, I will awaken (thought the devil) all bishops, princes and
lords, even your own church, so that they will be more hostile to you
than any man on earth. And go thus, as the world should do. For who
would not be hostile to him who calls bread a 4) roll and his mother a
dear woman? This is a great sin. But it is much greater for a man to be
such a blasphemous man, and for Jesus to be a blasphemer.

3\) Wittenberger: preached.

4\) Wittenberger: dear Brod.

570 Erl. 4g, L5v-s52. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. viu,
424-427. 571

Christ may be called our Lord; the 1) is no longer to be suffered, but
must be punished and redeemed with sword, rope, fire and powder.

186 Therefore we should not be surprised if all the world is hostile to
us when we preach Christ, for we deserve it. For do you not hear that
the world does not want to see or hear him, and is deadly hostile to all
who speak of him? Why do we not keep silent, or preach the devil\'s
stink and lies, or ravish their wives and children? If only they would
leave us in peace, give us money and goods, and let them toil and be
toiled for as far as they could go. 2) But now they are a just enemy to
us, that we put our sweat, body and life into it, so that we may help
them to heaven. This shall be the thanks and reward which we shall earn
from them, for we also want to have it so. Behold, this is the world of
kind and nature; such a pious, tender fruit that it will not suffer, nor
can it suffer, that one should do it good and help it, especially if one
tells it about this Savior Christ. Christians must know and get used to
this. For it also does well in worldly rule; just as the heathen have
complained greatly about the world\'s unfaithfulness and ingratitude,
they have also raged and raged with impatience and vengeance.

The Greeks wrote of a citizen of Athens named Timon, who had served the
city and helped it with his body and goods, so that he was impoverished.
Now that he had nothing left, they no longer regarded him, but mocked
him and did him all sorts of mischief. Then he became impatient and
began to curse and rage: Now the wretched devil is serving the people;
if I saw one of them fall into the fire and could pull him out, I would
throw ointment, even oil and pitch, so that it would burn. And out of
such impatience I became such an inhuman and senseless head that no one
could perish with him. So does flesh and blood, if it is for the 4)

1\) Wittenberger: this sin.

2\) \"Ridge\" - backbone. In the old editions both spellings occur:
\"ridge\" and \"degree\"; here \"degree\".

3\) Erlanger: \"but\" instead of: have.

4\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

Love and good deeds shall be rewarded with ingratitude and enmity, for
it is too painful and cannot be borne. There is no one so low, if he had
taught his servant a trade, and had fed and clothed him himself, and he
despised and mocked him for wages, who would not say, \"I would have
thrown my money into the Elbe for this, or buried it in the earth, and
never have helped anyone.

This is what the devil does. When someone has served and helped people
to the utmost, he incites them against him, so that they do not make
friends with him again, and he only buys enemies for him, as Jesus
Sirach says in chapter 29, v. 8, and has raised a snake in his bosom.
Again, he does this to make people weary and discontented, so that
because of such ingratitude and wickedness no one will do any good and
no one will help, and such Timones become vain. This is where the saying
comes from: The bread given to strange dogs and strange children is
lost. This is what he seeks: \"When he sees that you want to do good to
your neighbor and invest your property well, I will make it salty and
sour enough for you. So then nature cannot suffer it. So love and good
deeds are stuffed, even in the very finest and highest people. For there
are very few who can bear it, if they should do the best for countries
and people, and receive nothing in return, but only shameful
ingratitude, hatred and envy. This also made monks, who ran away from
the people into the desert, that they could not see such wickedness nor
suffer it.

Now, this happens in worldly matters, in cities and houses, among
neighbors and friends; but much more and more difficult in spiritual
matters, since a priest or pastor means his parishioners with all
faithfulness, must watch over them and care for them, and bear so much
that it hurts him body and life and heart; and shall gain nothing more
by it, unless one is so hostile to no one as to him. Well then, what
shall one do? If one should do and leave it for the sake of the world\'s
evil, then one would never have to do any good. So also here; if one
were to follow reason, one would have to say: \"Well, if you do not want
God\'s word, then God will give you the pope.

572 Erl. 49, 352-354. Sermon on Joh. 15, 17. 18. W. vm, 427-429. 573

with all the plagues. If you do not want to hear the gospel, hear about
indulgences and all other deceptions. If you do not want to be baptized,
run to the monastery. If you do not want to do good to your neighbor, go
and buy masses, and be deceived for money, body and soul, and have the
infernal fire for it. No, not so; for this is what the devil seeks, that
he may tear us from good, and make us like the wickedness of the world,
that we may all become like devils among ourselves.

190 For this reason Christ teaches and admonishes us here, that we by no
means become impatient, nor let ourselves overcome the wickedness of the
world, but always continue, knowing that we must bear such hatred for
his sake. As if to say, \"If you were false preachers, they would carry
you on their hands; but because you preach about me, the devil is so
hostile to me and my name that he will set on you and hang on you all he
can in the world, and you must have no grace or friendship. Well, that
is still nothing for our person. For what shall we lament, we poor
wretches, who deserve the wrath of the world not only through the
preaching of Christ, but also for our own sins, if we had not deserved
to be cast into the fires of hell. Therefore we are not wronged, whether
the devil and all the world afflict us, but are justified on both sides,
both because of our office (which is not ours, but Christ\'s) and
because of our person. And so it is accounted to us, both on account of
our sin, that we have well deserved and still deserve it for ourselves,
and also on account of our office, because we want to preach and help
the world. For they shall give their faithful servants no other reward
than this.

191 But this is only the true abominable enmity (of which he says here:
\"If the world hates you, know that it hated me before you\"), that one
is so bitterly and murderously hostile to the dear Savior and Lord
Christ, the Son of God. And this is not only done by the common people
of the 1) world, or the foreign Gentiles, but also by his dear people.

1\) Erlanger: the.

and little brothers, his own blood and flesh, and even those who want to
be called Christians and boast about him. Now he is innocent for his
person, and has not deserved that something should happen to him; yes,
the world is also not worthy of him, even if it would always carry him
on its hands; in addition, he is not only holy and innocent for himself,
but has also, through his ministry, sent so much to the world to save
the poor people from sins and death with his precious blood, that they
can pay him such love and grace with no thanks. They are so hostile to
him that they cannot stop until they have crucified him and killed his
Christians. Why did the Romans murder the holy martyrs so horribly,
because they wanted to help them from all misfortune, the devil and hell
through their preaching of Christ?

Who then can attain with words, or attain with thoughts, what the world
is? What else can be said of it, but that it must be a heap of people,
possessed with a hundred thousand devils, because it hates not only us
poor sinners, though we serve it with life and limb in vain, but much
more the Lord himself, who died for it and shed his blood to redeem it.
What are we against him? For though we preach to her and do all good, we
are not yet those who died for her, but preach and boast of Christ
alone. For this reason it cannot be measured what a devilish thing this
is, that one hates Christ and is an enemy, and yet we see it daily
before our eyes. Otherwise no human heart would not believe it 2c.

193 Therefore Christ did not command his apostles and preachers in vain
when he sent them out to preach, Matth. 10, 14: \"If anyone will not
receive you or hear your word, come out of that place or city and shake
off the dust from your feet. This 2) he undoubtedly spoke out of great
anger, that they should not only not take a penny from them, but also
not leave a spear on their shoes, which they would not accept.

! 2) Wittenberger: Da.

574 Erl. 4S, SS4-SS7. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
4SS-4LS. 575

not give them back. They are not worthy that he should have taken
anything from them. And he adds an exceedingly terrible sentence in v.
15: \"Verily I say unto you, that it shall be worse for the land of
Sodoma and Gomorrah at the last judgment, than for that city. Is it not
a very fair judgment that the good man should be offered all his grace
and good deeds in vain and be brought to the door, and that he should be
so blasphemously mocked, reviled and disgraced, and show all hatred and
enmity?

194 Now this is said for the comfort of the apostles, and of all who
preach Christ and help the world, that they neither wonder at it nor are
angry because of it, but say in their hearts, as Christ says here, \"If
they had not hated Christ before, they would not hate me; but because
they hate him who died for them, what wonder is it that they are hostile
to me? What am I against this Lord? For it happens to me justly, as by
two rights. First, that I deserve it for my person, as a sinner.
Secondly, that I am a servant of the Lord, to whom the world is hostile.
And because he himself must suffer such enmity, I shall fare no better.
But neither shall the world be worthy that we should take a piece of it.
And even if it despises it and scoffs at it, it will come to that one
day, when it will be found what is to happen to both it and us. No one
may give us an account for it, but on that day they will hear the
verdict, which will be too heavy and unbearable for them.

Well, it is painted and shown horribly and terribly enough that the
heart in the flesh would be horrified that the world should be so
shamefully evil and full of diabolical hatred and bitterness against
those who help it and do everything good, even in worldly matters. Now
the devil should rule the world, if they deserve no thanks, if they
protect and defend peace and justice, good and honor, but only gain
enmity for it. If they had such lords, who only rumbled among them with
strangles and all plagues, like the stork among the frogs, they would
have to cower, 1) and be glad that they had peace;

1\) In the old editions: tücken.

But where they have protection and all good things under pious lords and
princes, they cannot suffer, but seek and think how they may be rid of
them. But they deserve much more hatred and persecution, who help and
serve the world in much greater things, namely, that it may be freed
from sin, death and the devil\'s power and become blessed. Beat them
purely to death, the sooner the better, because they are bad not to
suffer. But if a bunch of Spaniards or Turks came, running through their
houses, plundering and robbing, devastating and burning what they had,
or false teachers and devil\'s fools, who led them straight to the devil
and into all error, that is what they wanted, then they would have to
say Deo gratias to it. 2) They would have to say Deo gratias. Therefore
nothing is better for the world than the Pabst\'s and the Turk\'s
regiment. For the Turk knows how to stir up both the proud peasants and
the young men so that they become humble and obedient; so the pope knows
how to plague the consciences and souls and to lead them into the
devil\'s jaws. Such shall be sent to the world, as will happen to it
again.

Therefore, let us beware lest we be found as members of the world. For
there is nothing else but the devil himself with all hell, who will not
listen to anyone telling her about God\'s grace, Christ\'s suffering and
death, or about eternal life, but can suffer nothing except to be led to
hell, and to have both heaven, body and goods taken from her. That means
in German, people who are full of devils in the flesh. Therefore we must
not be disdainful nor slothful, that they should be hostile to us,
because we have ruled rightly and well, or have spoken the truth, that
they may be saved 2c. This is the world\'s thanks and reward, and we
would be wronged if it were otherwise. Behold, what I have done (saith
Christ), if for this cause I have cast away all men, that the world
should not suffer me, no man should ever be unsaved: and if for the sake
of many (that hate me) I should cease to preach, all the rest also
should perish.

197 So let us also remember that we will not turn away from the
wickedness of the world.

2\) In the editions: had to. In the Wittenberg: \"led, that they had to
suffer and to it\" 2c.

[576 **Erl. 49, 357-359. Sermon on John 15, 17-19. W. VIII, 432-43P.**
577]{.underline}

Rather, we should continue to praise and honor God and our dear Lord
Christ, and to resist the devil and his crowd, knowing that God wants to
reward it abundantly, and that it should not go without fruit on earth,
but should benefit some people. And even if it is lacking for this time,
it should still come to pass one day, or even be undestroyed by God. A
Christian should be such a man, who can freely throw his good deed into
the rapus and lose it (just as God does). Nevertheless, he will find
someone who will put it on, and who will love him for it. If you have a
pious subject, citizen or parishioner, or two, 2) thank God. If a
neighbor, a child or a servant is good for you, be content. If you get
two or more of them, lift up your hands and consider it a great mercy.
For you live here no differently than in the devil\'s murder pit, and as
among vain dragons and serpents. Therefore see to it that you do not
become like them, and also worldly, that is, full of devilish hatred and
malice. For there must be one of two things: either people must become
devils against you, or you must become a devil yourself. Now it is
better that others are evil-doers and devils, but we remain followers of
the Lord Christ and children of the heavenly Father.

**V. 19. If you were of the world, the world would love you; but because
you are not of the world, but I have chosen you from the world,
therefore the world hates you.**

He says all this to his own for comfort, so that they may learn to
despise the world again with their envy and hatred, and what it may do
to them. For since they neither want to nor can do otherwise than hate
God and Christ their Savior, and for his sake also us, we must know this
art against it, so that we may overcome their malice, which is no other
than to despise their defiance and hope. For the more we would embrace
such things and mourn for them, the more the world and the devil would
prefer it.

1\) Erlanger: \"dem\" instead of: unserm lieben.

2\) Thus the Jenaer. In the original and in the Wittenberg, \"or\"
appears; in the Erlangen, \"or zween\" is missing.

3\) \"will\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

also. And if he could make us grieve and sorrow day and night that the
world should rage and rage against the gospel, he would laugh in his
fist and have his joy in it, and the world would only have it the longer
the more, and think that it had only done well to make us weep and wail,
and now everything would be won. But if we defiantly despise it, they
will become angry, sad and displeased that they have such enemies, who
will strike a cliff at them, and mock them in their teeth when they rage
and rage the most, and must see that they are useless with their hatred
and envy, and would burst with malice.

For the devil is a good, hopeful spirit, together with the world, his
bride. Therefore he can suffer nothing so badly as to be despised and
mocked; and where he feels this, and cannot turn, he lifts himself away.
Otherwise he does not stop until he makes us despondent and weary; he
presses and presses so long and hard that one would die of grief. But
when he sees that we have staked it on enduring as much and as long as
he can always do, with hating, angering and tormenting, and being of
good cheer about it, and only continuing to defy him, then he gets tired
first of all, because his pride is so high that he cannot suffer
defiance and contempt.

200 Therefore, though it be a little grievous, yet we must cast
ourselves about against the contempt of the world and of the devil, lest
we die of sorrow before the hour come. Just as Christ did not die of
fear, but was killed by force on the cross. So also we, when we see and
feel the world\'s willfulness, wrath, and hatred, let us learn to resist
it, saying, \"What can you do more than this? Or, what is this new? Did
you also do it to my Lord before, and yet you had to let him stay until
now? This is the first cause, that he may comfort us, and provoke us to
despise all the world\'s hope and ravings with proud faith, and instead
leap and joyfully sing to God a psalm.

4\) Wittenberger: \"that\" instead of: as.

[578 **Erl.** 4S, W-RI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII,** 579]{.underline}

lein 1) and Deo gratias, to the world\'s sorrow and vexation.

The other reason is that he says here, \"I pronounce judgment on you,
that you are not of the world. This is also a comforting word, because
he has painted and described the world so horribly that nothing more
terrible can be heard or thought by a Christian than that he should be
counted among the same heap and be called \"of the world. And again, let
him take comfort and rejoice that he hears such a divine judgment, that
he is not of the world, because he believes in Christ and confesses his
word, and therefore suffers hatred and persecution from the world, that
such hatred, and all that he suffers from the world, should be dear and
valuable to him, as a sure sign that he does not belong among the same
2) condemned heap, but is cut off and saved in Christ. For if ye were of
the world, (saith he,) the world would love its own, and would remain
hated and unsought of it.

But here he speaks of the things concerning the gospel. For the world,
praise God, has the virtue of hating, envying and persecuting one
another; one prince another, one neighbor another, one trade another;
but here they all agree, Pilate, Herod, Caiphas, Judas, and all the
devils, who are otherwise enemies of one another, against Christ and his
Christians. They are friends among themselves, like dogs and cats, but
in the matter of Christ they all hate with one accord. Just as before
this time, no monk, order, bishopric, prince or city was one with the
other among the clergy. Now, however, they are all good friends and
stand together faithfully against the gospel; they love, honor, and
celebrate each other to the highest degree, only to dampen the teaching
of the gospel.

Now, this text, as I said, is worth a hundred thousand florins, indeed,
it cannot be paid for with any money, that it itself gives us the
verdict that we are not of the world, and that this is the sign that it
hates us. So have

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: a psalm.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: den.

we not only have the example of our Lord that he, our Head and Savior,
was hated by her before, but also the testimony in ourselves that we
will also be hated hereafter for his sake. If we are hated for his sake,
this is a great defiance and comfort, that we have already been chosen,
judged, and declared as chosen by him and set apart from the world.

\(204\) Now we can happily and with truth boast that the whole papacy is
not hostile to us for the sake of worldly things. For they cannot say
(they want to lie publicly) that they are hostile to us and persecute us
because of vice and immorality, but this is the hostility, that we do
not believe as they want. Above faith, word and sacrament, everything is
elevated. So we can also boast and defy: The gospel which we preach, the
baptism and sacrament which we receive and give, are not ours, but the
gospel of our Lord Christ. We did not invent it, nor did we make and
establish it, but it was revealed to us by God, ordained and given to us
through Christ, in whom we were baptized, called and believe; and for
this reason we incur the hatred and enmity of the world, because we
confess this, and want to bring consciences from error to Christ.

205 Therefore he accepts us, and brings it to himself, and so wants to
comfort us: Well, my dear Christians, you do not suffer for your own
sake, otherwise you would be tormented and punished like murderers and
evildoers; no one can blame you for that, but only for my sake, that you
are my disciples. But be content, for they also could not suffer me as
long as I lived on earth. Therefore they also do not want to suffer you.
But you have the comfort that you know that you are not of the world,
but chosen by me. Therefore only be bold in faith, that you may say:
Dear world, pope, bishops, princes 2c., why are you hostile to me, what
harm have I done you? Yes, you are a heretic, and have put down the
spiritual orders, the indulgences, and the mass market, and have made
our doctrine and commandments null and void; should one not be hostile
to you? Answer: Yes, I wanted to, and so it is right. But now I have not
done so,

580 **Erl. 4g, SSI-sss. Sermon on John 15:19. W. VIII, 437-440.** 581

but my Lord Christ and his word, which says that we are to be saved by
faith in him, not by monasticism or other things, and has forbidden that
no other 1) word or teaching (concerning our salvation) be heard or
accepted. Whether this displeases the pope, or he is harmed by it, the
indulgences fall, purgatory is extinguished 2c., what can I do about it?
Why did he build this on his lies (except, yes, against God\'s word, and
yet under the same appearance and name)? I did not devise it from
myself, nor preach it from myself, but I myself was just as deep in
their doctrine of lies as the others, before Christ enlightened me by
his Word and Spirit. We have done nothing but preach his gospel (as he
commanded us) purely and clearly. If they have been harmed by this, and
their thing has fallen, let it be their fault. Why do they not preach
(as they should) God\'s word without their own deeds? But if they want
to be hostile, let them fight it out with Christ.

This is the consolation, both of Christ\'s example and of our own
experience and certain signs, that we should know that we are chosen
from the world and belong to Christ, because we suffer for His sake; so
that whoever hates us or causes us pain or suffering (as His members)
must have done it to Himself. As he also comforts his own by the prophet
Zachariam \[Cap. 2, 8.\]: \"He that toucheth you toucheth the apple of
mine eye.\" That is comforting and heartily spoken: He that toucheth but
one, as the smallest limb (if he believe in me), shall not have touched
a poor man, or struck him on the mouth, but my tender limb and noblest
jewel, which is called the apple of God\'s eye, which feels the most,
and can suffer the least. Therefore, be content, and let what you have
to suffer go confidently; it shall not be called hurt to you, but to me,
and I will avenge you and repay them. So also to Paul, when he was
departed from Jeru-

1\) \"other\" is missing in the Jena.

2\) \"euch\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

salem 3) to Damascus to persecute the Christians \[Acts 9:4\], he does
not say, Why do you persecute my Christians on earth? but, you persecute
me yourself. Why is this? Because these things happened to them for
Christ\'s name and word. Therefore he says that it affects himself, and
is silent about his suffering Christians.

These are (I say) vain comforting words to strengthen our faith and to
make us hopeful that we will despise the persecution and hatred of the
world and sing a little song in defiance of its sadness, so that it will
sink us. 4) The world is not persecuted by you, but by my Lord Christ.
Dear world, you do not persecute me, but my Lord Christ. Because I know
this, let only what you can do come here; here I stand in God\'s name,
and let you be angry with all the devils from hell, in their name; you
can persecute, chase away, yes, even kill me (if my Lord Christ wills),
but you shall not take away my courage and defiance, nor bring it so far
that you offend my heart. For because it is for Christ\'s sake, I will
confidently dare him, and only sing and shout joyfully against the
devil\'s raging. So he knows that he will lose his power, that he will
not be able to cut and thrust his sword and spear as deeply as he would
like. For he is not concerned that he should afflict us physically, but
is such a spirit that thirsts without ceasing for our tears and drops of
blood from the heart, that we should despair and pine away because of
sadness; that would be his delight and joy. But he shall not go so far
as this, but turning the page, we shall learn to mock both the devil and
the world. So that we, not they, may have our joy and laughter in them,
and so that they may lack the art of making us sad, angry and impatient,
so that they themselves may be consumed with their hatred and anger, and
see and suffer the burnt sorrow in us, so that we may be happy about it,
and despise them when they want to cool their sorrows in us to the
utmost.

So, in ancient times, the holy fairy-

3\) Original: \"of Damasco, the Christians of Jerusalem\". Jenaer: \"gen
Damasco, the Christians of Jerusalem\". Wittenberger: \"gen Damasco, the
Christians of Jerusalem\". Erlanger: \"from Jerusalem, the Christians at
Damasco\".

4\) \"to\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

582 Eri. 49, sos-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
440-442. 583

tprer, also the young maidens (as Agnes and Agatha) did, and the more
their judges and tyrants raged with anger, the more defiant they were.
Anastasia, a 1) noble citizen of Rome, when she was accused of having
burned her father\'s idols, and the judge was very angry about it: \"Yes
(she said), I have honored them with honor; for since they were full of
dust and covered with 2) cobwebs and other vermin, and the mice wanted
to nest in them, I threw them into the fire, so that they would become
finely clean. Item, further she spoke: How are you angry that I burn
your gods? Let me deal with them; if they are gods, they will defend
themselves against a poor woman. Behold, all these things flow from this
consolation, which Christ gives us, if we suffer but for his sake: as he
saith also Matt. 5:11, \"Blessed are ye, if men shall revile you, and
persecute you for my name\'s sake, and shall say all manner of evil
against you, lying in it. Be glad and of good cheer, for it shall be
well rewarded you in heaven.\" How could a preacher speak more kindly
and comfortingly than he 3) has spoken to us here? Or, how could he make
greater courage and defiance against the mighty devil and angry world,
and all that is not Christian?

209 This is that he says: \"Because I have chosen you from the world,
the world hates you. I am he whom the world cannot bear, and am the
cause of such hatred and persecution, and have therefore chosen you,
that ye should not be of the world, that is, be in the accursed devil\'s
hatred and envy wherein it is. Therefore, if it happens to you as it
does to me, be ready to despise it and to defy me, and you will remain
joyful and undaunted, and the world will be mad and foolish about it. So
we are separated from it. For there shall never be peace nor harmony
between the world and Christendom, any more than between Christ and the
devil. There are indeed fine, clever, learned, wise, pious and honorable
people in the world; but the wiser, more learned and more honorable they
are, the more hostile they become to us. How to read both, and

1\) Wittenbergers: the.

2\) \"von\" iehlt in the Wittenberger and in the Jenaer. 3)
Wittenberger: \"he, the dear HErr\".

Even now, many a fine, pious prince and honorable man is found to be
poisonous to this doctrine of the Gospel and hostile to it beyond all
measure. But let them be poor or rich, noble or ignoble. Pious or
wicked, it is decided, if they do not accept the gospel, they are
certainly enemies of Christ. On the other hand, we have the glorious,
sure consolation that we are not among them. For we do not despise his
gospel, but suffer for the faith and confession.

**V. 20. Remember my word that I said to you. The servant is not greater
than his master. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute
you; if they have kept my word, they will also keep yours.**

This is the third part, that he may comfort them by a similitude or
example. It would have to be a shameful, cursed servant who would lie
behind the stove and snore, or laugh and be of good cheer, if his master
were in danger of his life and limb. 5) The servant should not be nobler
or better than his master. The servant should not be nobler or better
than his master; and a pious servant risks his life and limb with and
for his master, saying, \"Where my master abides, there will I abide
also. Such a likeness Christ now points out to us, that we should not be
disdainful nor slothful, 6) whether we suffer anything for his sake and
with him in the world. I am your Lord (he wants to say), you are my
servants and slaves; why do you want it better than I? It does not rhyme
that the head wears a crown of thorns and the limbs sit on a soft
cushion. He also says Luc. 6:40: \"If a servant does as his master does,
he will be perfect\"; that is, he does right and as he should do, and is
a true faithful servant who suffers good and evil from his master.

This is the likeness. Now he concludes: \"If they have persecuted me,
they will also persecute you. He who strikes the master on the mouth
will certainly not celebrate the servant; he who despises the woman will
be in front of

4\) \"all\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

5\) \"Leib- und\" is missing in the Wittenberg, \"and\" is missing in
the original.

6\) i.e., not to be annoyed or sorry.

584 Erl. 49, SW-SSL Sermon on Joh. 15, 20. 21. w. VIII, 442-44p. 585

Do not be afraid of the maidservant. Therefore, do not let it be strange
or strange to you if you are despised and your word is not kept and
condemned; for it is the same with me. Therefore let it be ordered to
me, as it concerns the most, and only be bold and confident against it.
Do not let the devil and the world be good enough for you to let a sigh
or a gray hair grow for the sake of their throbbing and defiance; as I
also, praise God, have never done, nor 1) want to do. For the sake of my
sin, when it comes to my life, the devil may well frighten me and make
me afraid; but when I see that it is a matter of this Christ, I do not
ask about his terror and wrath anywhere. If he will devour me, let him
devour him first; or if he devours me, let him give him a stench for a
reward; in the matter of my Lord Christ he shall not grieve me, but only
be mocked and most hopefully despised. For I know that \[it\] grieves
him and his scales most of all, and can do them no greater mischief. For
they want to be unnoticed, but feared with their violence and anger.

**V. 21 But they will do all these things to you for my name\'s sake,
because they do not know him who sent me.**

This also is a comfort, as we have heard. The hatred so that they hate
you will be lifted up, not because of evil works or sin, that you are
scoundrels and thieves, murderers or adulterers, but only because you
want to preach about me and say that I shed my blood and died for the
world, and they cannot and must not be saved except through me. This
will be the cause of all hatred and persecution in the world. And truly,
a praiseworthy cause. The name of Christ from your mouth will be vain
poison and death to them, and must be called devil\'s doctrine and
heresy. Therefore, if you want peace in the world, only be silent from
me; let them live and teach as they wish, deceiving and seducing
themselves and everyone with their monasticism, indulgences, purgatory,
masses, 2c., and what is their own name and doings; then they will be
the cause of all hatred in the world.

1\) Wittenberger: \"noch durch sein gnad\".

which they leave you satisfied. But if you want 2) to teach against
this, and otherwise, how they must be saved through me, and their thing
helps nothing to this, then only consider that you must be hated and
persecuted by it to the highest.

213\. But that they do these things unto you, saith he, is all because,
For they know not him that sent me. You must not be angry with them, nor
seek revenge against them; they have already smelled too high, and have
already passed their punishment, so that you cannot do them so much harm
or wish them so much harm; they have it much worse on their necks. They
are smitten with blindness and madness, yes, possessed by the devil,
that they are mad and foolish; what more do you want to harm them? Let
them rage and rage as they will; they have already begun their judgment,
damnation and hell.

For what greater, more horrible punishment and plague is there on earth,
than that which is called spiritual blindness or insanity; namely, when
a man can no longer hear, nor will he suffer to be told how to be saved?
How would I take greater revenge on the pope, bishops and tyrants today
than to see with my own eyes how they are plagued by God, so that they
become blind, mad and foolish? When God is justly angry and sends his
severe punishment, he first closes the eyes of the people, so that they
go blind from one pit to another, just as it happened to King Pharaoh in
Egypt, until he drowned in the Red Sea; and then to the Jews in Christ
and his apostles, until not one stone was left upon another in
Jerusalem. Therefore they do so, both to me and to you, that they know
neither me nor him that sent me.

Yes (they say), should we not know him whom we praise and confess that
he is our God, who created heaven and earth, gives us all goods, land
and people, wife and child? 2c. So all the world on earth, Jews, Turks
and the Pope also praises: \"Shall we not know Him, the one, almighty
God, whom we serve and honor? Yes, even more, we also believe (says the
Pope\'s church)

2\) \"wollet\" is missing in the original and in the Wittenberg.

586 **Erl. 49, 368-370.** interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 445-447.** 587

in Jesus Christ and the Holy Spirit, and have baptism and sacrament and
the holy scriptures, and are the heirs of the holy apostles 2c. Should
we then be so blind as not to know him? Of course not, he says. For why
do they persecute and kill me whom God has sent? If they wanted to know
the Father, they would have to receive me as sent by him, with all honor
and joy, as their dear Lord and Savior. But now I come, and they go and
crucify me, and become murderers over me. This is the honor they do me,
and the thanks they give to God.

216\. Therefore it is because of the word, \"He who sent me. They say
that they know and have the true God, as the Creator of heaven and
earth, but it is a matter of some dispute that they should know him as
the one who sent me; they do not know the sender. Now he wants to be
known not only as the one who created heaven and earth, but in the
clothing and form in which he preaches to us that he has sent his Son to
redeem us. They do not want to know such a sender and messenger, nor do
they want to hear him. And even though they say in words, \"they know
God\" (says St. Paul Titus 1:16), they deny it in deed.

The Jews want to know God, who alone is the true God and Creator of all
creatures, as the Scriptures testify; but that the God should be the one
who sent this Jesus, they say no to, yes, the contradiction they say,
not God, but the wicked devil sent him. Therefore, although they already
know God as the Creator of heaven and earth, and yet not as the One who
sent the Son to help the world from sin and death, He is not yet known.
For in this form and shape alone he wants and must be known, if it is to
be called otherwise blessedly known. But so they do not want to know
him. For they have no need of God, as they think he will send his Son to
them as Savior to redeem them and make them God\'s children, because
they first boast of being God\'s children, so that they have the law and
through it think they will be freed from sin and saved. Therefore

1\) \"to\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

they cannot suffer Christ, but must beat him to death.

The papal crowd does the same. If we preach this article, that we must
be saved by Christ alone; pilgrimage, monasticism, anglicized masses 2c.
will not do it; one must take hold of this mediator, sent by God, and
learn to know the Father, almighty God and Creator, in this form
(namely, in this his Son, sent to us as Savior and Redeemer), - No, they
say, that is the devil talking to you: you are a heretic, sent by the
devil; should our thing be nothing and in vain? Shouldn\'t a monk with
his holy order and \'austere life deserve heaven? Should so many holy
fathers have erred? 2c.

. What else can be said here, but that they do not know him who sent
Christ? For they know and understand not why and for what purpose he is
sent, but look to their own righteousness, can by themselves make the
way to heaven, and think nothing of faith. They go on from such
blindness, condemning both God who sends and Christ who is sent, cursing
and persecuting all who teach and confess such things. This means that
they are struck with terrible, devilish blindness, that they do not know
God, which they boast about even against the true Christians.

Therefore it must follow, Christ says, that they hate your teaching,
just as they hate mine. Therefore, if you have my word, hold fast to me,
for we are one with one another; only do not let them condemn you,
knowing that they are blind and insane and do not know what they say or
do. But you learn to know me as the one who was sent, and the Father who
sent me, that through my suffering and blood I should reconcile you to
God and save you from sins and death, without any merit or effort on
your part. This is the true knowledge that only Christians have. All the
others, even though they hear, read, sing and say about God forever,
they never know Him. For they do not know what his opinion, counsel,
will and heart are, namely, that he sent the Son so that we might be
helped, John 3:16.

588 **Erl. 49, 370-373. Sermon on John 15, 21-24. W. VIII, 447-45V.**
589

They know nothing about the doctrine of God the Almighty Creator (where
they teach and live best). But of Him who sends His Son out of grace and
mercy, they know nothing; indeed, they can neither hear nor suffer such
teaching, wanting to settle it all before God by themselves and with
their works, until they must perish and perish.

**V. 22, 23, 24: If I had not come and told them, they would not have
sinned. But now they have no excuse for their sin. He that hateth me
hateth my Father also. If I had not done the works among them that no
one else has done, they would have had no sin. But now they have seen
it, and yet they hate both me and my Father.**

221\] Here all excuse and remedy is taken from them and cut off, so that
they might plead that they have persecuted Christ and his word, and say:
We did not know it; if we had known him, we would have gladly accepted
him with all our heart and received him with all honors. No, he says,
such an excuse of ignorance will not help them. For it is not hidden nor
concealed from them, but said enough that they might and should know it.
But now they are not only blind and ignorant, which could well be
forgiven and corrected, but willfully remain blind and ignorant, and
neither hear nor see, though it be laid before their ears and eyes. They
have two things that will condemn them, word and deed. For it is plainly
said unto them, that I am sent of the Father, both by John the Baptist,
who therefore was sent before me, and by myself, who now 1) have
preached into the fourth year, and have sent you apostles to preach, so
that the word hath gone forth before all through all the earth, and is
not hid, that they cannot deny it, let it be told them; wherefore the
blame of the doctrine is not mine, neither is it my Father\'s. Secondly,
they have also seen and heard such works as no one else has ever done.

1\) \"nun\" is missing in the Wittenberg. The original offers: only.

as he himself says Matth. 11, 5: \"The blind see, the lame walk, the
dead rise\" 2c. These two testimonies stand against them with force.
Because they do not know me nor want to know me, this is not my fault
nor my father\'s fault, but their wickedness.

So now we may also say against our adversaries that they cannot claim
that they did not know the teaching of the Gospel, for we have preached
it to them, painted it, written it and sung it, and they have heard it
and read it, and even written against it themselves, and they have also
seen that God has done wonders enough for us against their plots and
practices, at so many imperial congresses and elsewhere, that he has
done enough for them. What more can he and his Christianity do, than to
preach and confess freely in every way, and to suffer for it, and God
does wonders for them; that their lives cannot be punished with truth,
and their things are wonderfully preserved, and they are visibly helped,
and the enemies are often beaten back in their attacks, and yet they do
not respect all this. Therefore, such ignorance will not excuse them
from God at all, but will rather accuse them, and their sin will weigh
them down, yes, condemn them completely.

But that he thus says, \"If I had not come, they would have had no
sin,\" must not be understood to mean that they are therefore without
sin; for he speaks here of a new sin, which goes against his word.
Before they also sinned against Moses and the ten commandments; but now
that Christ has come to take away such sin, they go on; and as they did
not hear Moses before, so they will hear Christ much less. They did not
want to obey Most, who told them from God what they should do and what
they should not do, but resisted and sinned against him without ceasing:
but now he comes, who does not interpret the law to them, nor does he
threaten them with punishment, but wants to take away both punishment
and sin, does not demand anything from them, but wants to give them,
serve them and help them, they want and are able to suffer him much
less.

But is this not the wretched devil in the world? If I had such a servant

590 Erl. 49, svs-svö. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin,
\"so-tsg. 591

In the house, I told him what he should and should not do, and he
rebelled against it, and wanted to live against it, and I then proceeded
to overcome him with goodness, and lied to him with charity, whether I
could thus make him pious, gave him about a thousand guilders, and he
thanked me for it: I do not look at you, go to the devil with your money
and goods; do you hear, I do not want yours: What should I do further to
such a one, who neither asked nor asked by me, neither with compulsion
nor with love and friendship wanted to do me favor? And I would be
silent that he would not do what I would have him do, but that he would
be so proud and evil, and reject my gift and good deed, that would be
unbearable.

So they also did. They would not listen to Moses, but would have gladly
stoned him; now I come, says Christ, give my life and limb for them,
willingly shed 1) my blood, that I may save them from sin, the devil and
death, offering them, freely and out of great love, all that I have: nor
are they much more hostile to me than must, or anyone on earth. Now what
more shall God do to them? Nothing else, but as Christ Matth. 22, 7.
says before: \"He sent out his armies, and destroyed these evildoers;
and set their city on fire.\" For it is such a devil who not only does
not want to do good, but also does not want to suffer good to be done to
him, and rages and rages against the offered grace and good deeds. This
is the real sin, which keeps all the others. For if the word of Christ
were accepted, all their sins would be forgiven and given; but because
they will not accept it, it becomes a sin that cannot be forgiven.
Therefore, if I had not come,\" he says, \"they would have no sin. For
they might say, \"We would not have been so wicked as not to be forgiven
sin, if we had only known it; indeed, we would have run after it to the
end of the world, but, alas, we did not know it. No, he will say, you
have heard my word, and you have not known.

1\) The words: \"give \... vergieße\" stand alone in the Jena.

who saw that they had not been done before, and yet would not listen,
and about the sin against Moses, even this one did against the gospel.

226 As now also the pope and his mob, because they have lived shamefully
and practiced idolatry, approach, and charge sin upon themselves, that
they will not hear nor suffer the preaching of the forgiveness of sin,
sealing it with blasphemy and persecution. This is the real sin of the
Antichrist, yes, of the devil himself. For this is not yet a miracle,
that one is an enemy of one who demands and drives much; this is given
by nature, no one wants to be imprisoned and bound by the law. But here,
when nature is helped and given eternal life and all good things, that
it first wants to resist and resist is no longer a natural sin, but the
sin of the infernal devil who possessed it, that it cannot suffer its
own salvation and good. Therefore, if I had not come and preached to
them, both of the Father who sent me and of me, it would have remained
hidden from them, and they might have excused themselves.

227 Therefore, he says, \"Whoever hates me hates my Father also,\" for
whoever hates the one who was sent hates the one who sent him.
Therefore, because they are my enemies, they are also the Father\'s
enemies. 3) Be comforted, and let it be known to you that you are not
hated alone, but both I and my heavenly Father are hated. For they are
blind, and know neither me nor the Father, and yet without excuse,
though they be blind and ignorant. And even though they might have been
so far excused before they heard the gospel, they are no longer excused
now that they do not want to accept the gospel, so their blindness is
revealed to them and they are punished, because they willfully do not
want to know it. It has been preached to them enough, and witnessed to
with miracles. And it will not help them to claim at the last judgment
that they did not know that this was the right teaching, but they will
have to hear it: You have heard and seen enough, and yet you do not want
to know.

2\) \"they\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Erlanger: The.

[592 **Erl. 49, S75-S77. Sermon on John 15:22-25. W. VIII, 4S3-4S8.**
593]{.underline}

So these are vain comforting sayings, that we should not be frightened
by them, when we see that the world stands so securely and defiantly on
its thing that one would like to doubt whether our teaching is right.
But it must be so, they knowingly want to be and remain blind, and thus
perish. So much has been said and done to them that if it would help,
they should have come here long ago; but because they will not, let them
go. The word is not preached, nor the works performed, for their excuse,
but that they may be persuaded, because they will not receive it.
Therefore let not these things offend you, but abide in me; and know
that he that hateth me hateth my Father also. We are one with one
another in these matters; it is not only about you, nor also about me,
but whoever opposes you opposes me; but whoever strives against me
strives against the Father.

Let us now see if the evil, angry tyrants, pope, bishops and princes,
are greater and stronger than the Father and Christ. We will indeed lie
down between the cliffs 1) and let ourselves be caught, but we will also
wait and see whether they will thus cast him down from heaven. But if he
shall cast them into hell, they shall have it; for we have told them,
and warned them, and have directed our own.

**V. 25 But that the saying might be fulfilled which is written in their
law, They hate me without a cause.**

It must be done, he says, because it was written long before, Psalm
69:5: \"They hate me without a cause. They must fulfill this scripture.
For this is the rhyme of the world, which may well be painted on its
shield and over its door, even on its forehead: this is its noble virtue
and best glory, which it leads, that it not only does not accept and
despises the word of God, which is a great, grave sin, and yet would not
be so grave if it pursued it ignorantly, or out of pure blindness and
lack of understanding, but it must knowingly and deliberately oppose it,
and with feet

1\) Cliff a trap that collapses.

want to step. 2) is not called human wickedness, which is still to be
advised (for God has often helped those who have ignorantly opposed it,
like St. Paul before his conversion), but the devil\'s own sorrowful,
hellish wickedness and hatred. Such things are not read in the histories
of the Gentiles (who did not know about God), but only arise there and
among those who preach Christ\'s word; they must become devils, worse
than all the Gentiles.

Is it not a devilish wickedness of ours, pope, bishops and their
tyrants, that they cannot nor may not deny that the use of both forms of
the holy sacrament is God\'s order, and yet with sacrilegious thirst
condemn, chase away and persecute all those who use the same? For there
is no sin of ignorance, because their own testimony and confession
stands against them, and they cannot put forward any cause of their
poisonous hatred against the innocent Christians, except that they live
according to the order of Christ, and not contrary to it. Item, then
they must confess without their thanksgiving that our doctrine of
repentance and forgiveness of sins is right, that we obtain forgiveness
of sins by grace, through faith, for the sake of the Lord Christ. For
this they must say, that Christ shed his blood for this purpose, that we
might thereby be redeemed from sin and death 2c. Why then do they not
want to hear such teaching and preaching from us, nor do they want to
suffer it, and persecute us most horribly about it?

We have not known nor experienced such wickedness before, not even among
the Gentiles, nor among all who have not heard nor known the gospel. I
would have sworn a thousand oaths to see if any man could be so wicked
as to condemn wilfully the word of God and the truth, if he knew and
confessed that it was the truth, and to persecute, heresy and murder all
who hold to it. That the world is wicked against the ten commandments,
lying and deceiving, stealing, robbing and murdering, is not strange; it
has always been so. But that it should become so wicked, when the gospel
has been preached to it, how it should become blessed, and only, over
its heathen wicked sin

2\) Wittenberger: It.

594 Erl. \"g, S77-S7S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
4S6-4S8. 595

and evil, even against their God and Savior, who offers her all grace
and blessedness, and gladly wants to help her from all evil: this can be
nothing other than devilish wickedness, as the Pharisees and chief
priests, when they heard Christ and saw him before their eyes, marveled
with words and works, so that no reason could say otherwise, but that
this was God\'s miraculous work. Even the pagan judge Pilate himself had
to testify against them, saying that they had delivered him up out of
pure hatred and envy, and publicly recognized and judged him innocent.

Therefore, he paints the world beforehand for us, so that we will not be
surprised or frightened when we see such wickedness, which we would not
have believed to be in the hearts of men. How I would not have known nor
believed when I was a monk; and thanks be to God that I did not know it,
for if I had known it, I would never have opened my mouth. But because
Christ knows this, and sends his own to preach to the world, which is so
wicked that it neither wants nor is able to suffer the word, and only
gets worse from it, he comforts them first. As if he wanted to say: So
you will find the world, and worse than you can now believe, because I
know it. And not only this, but I have also experienced it in my own
person, against my teaching and works; and as it has happened to me, so
shall you also experience it. But do not let this frighten you, but know
that it is all to be done for my sake. If I were not here, you would
never experience such hatred and malice. For the world is not so hostile
to any vice or wickedness as to the name of Christ and his gospel. It is
beyond measure how the devil rages and rages with hatred and envy,
because he does not want to suffer this name and faith.

Now we Christians are called to this state, that we should experience
and suffer such things; not human hatred and envy of the world and the
heathen, but of the devil himself, who so possesses and oppresses people
that they are no longer human, or humanly angry and hateful. As we see
it, the devil\'s will will be fulfilled in bishops, princes, even in our
nobility, citizens and peasants.

before, they were much more moral as men, but now they are mad and 1)
nonsensical, as full of devils, if they go against the preaching of the
gospel. Where does this come from, if not from the wretched devil, who
is so hostile to the gospel of Christ that he would rather the world
fall on one another than have a pastor or preacher teach the gospel?

That is, he says, what the Scripture says: \"They hate me without a
cause. Know ye therefore what ye read in the Psalms, that this is the
glory and title of the world, and such tender fruits are they, that they
must persecute me without all blame and cause, yea, for vain benefits.
Me they hate, that is, I who preach to them of God\'s grace and their
salvation; and you, as belonging to me, being my disciples and
confessing me. Summa, it is all about the word that causes hatred and
anger; otherwise they would not be so 2) hostile and dangerous to him
and to us (for the sake of the person). But since we preach his word, we
must not only be despised, but also hated, and yet so that they have no
cause for it, but on the contrary great and much, even vain cause to
love, serve, and thank us.

236 We must know this, that when it comes to the point that we must go
forth and preach or confess the word, we will be guided by it. Then it
will come to pass, both outwardly among the enemies, and also inwardly
among ourselves, that the devil himself will also speak to thee, and
show thee how hostile he is unto thee, that he may bring thee into
sadness, impatience, gloom, and lay all plagues upon thee. Who does all
this? Certainly not Christ, nor any good spirit, but the sorrowful,
desperate enemy, who drives such arrows into the heart; not because you
are a sinner, as others, adulterers, thieves, 2c., but that he is
hostile to you, as a Christian, and does not want to suffer you to be
called a Christian, and to cling to him, 4) or to speak or think a good
word of him, but would gladly pierce your heart with vain poison and
gall, so that

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

2\) \"so\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

3\) dangerous - hostile, leprous.

4\) Erlanger: hangest. Wittenberger: und an Christo hangest.

596 **Srl, 4\", MS-SSL. Sermon on John 15:25-27. W. VIU, 458-4SI.** 597

you should blaspheme: Why has he made me a Christian? Why do I not let
him go? then I would have peace 2c.

237 Therefore, when you feel and experience these things, either in your
ministry or in yourself in particular, send yourself to meet him and
say, \"Now I see why the devil is so angry with me; he wants to frighten
me from my ministry, preaching, confession, and faith, and make me
despondent, so that I will not do anything good for my Lord Christ, nor
praise, glorify, or call on him. For he is his sworn, renounced enemy.
But even if you have the hellish fire, you wretched Satan, I will still
preach and praise this man all the more in spite of you, and comfort and
defy my heart on his blood and death, even if you should burst with all
hell. You must learn and practice this if you want to stay with Christ.
For this is the devil\'s doing, to tear us away from Christ, and our
flesh\'s way, that it does not respect him, but hates him, to whom we
should give all honor and carry him on our hands, and have our heart\'s
comfort and joy in him.

This is the conclusion of this text or painting of the world, so that he
may comfort his own, that it 1) must be so, and not for our sake, but
for Christ\'s sake. But they also deserve that there is no counsel for
their sin, and cannot excuse themselves, because they knowingly and
wickedly will not hear Christ nor us. Therefore let them do, saith he,
as they will; it is written in the scriptures, and declared beforehand;
and only let not your hearts be troubled, or moved to despair, when ye
see and feel such things, how all the world dare condemn you, persecute
you, as heretics, and as the devil\'s own, and boast of their holiness
and godliness 2c., but know that it must be so with me and my name that
they hate me more than any devil or evil thing on earth; but yet with
their hatred and malice they shall neither work nor accomplish anything
either in me or in you. For I will preserve you against them, and
against all wickedness, by the Holy Ghost; that he may yet

1\) Original: er. Wittenberger: ers.

shall remain and testify of me to them in defiance, and preach as
follows:

**But when the Comforter comes, whom I will send to you from the Father,
the Spirit of truth who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about
me. And you also will testify, because you have been with me from the
beginning.**

239\. About this (he wants to say), that I now comfort you with my
example, how it will go with me; item also with it, that you hear what
you will find in the world, namely, that they will run and storm against
the truth (if they still recognize) and against their own conscience,
about this I will also give you an addition and gift. This shall be the
Holy Spirit, who shall make these words, which I now speak to you,
understand in your hearts and declare them right, so that the longer you
understand and know what you both have in the world and in me, and give
you the courage and strength to cling to me and to continue. For if he
were not with you, and you were to stand daily in battle, both against
the devil and the world, you would not be able to endure it. Therefore
he must truly be with you, and not only resound to your ears with the
word, but also strengthen your heart with his light and fire, so that
you can lead it out, and have such strength, which is stronger than both
the world and the devil, with all their wickedness and power.

240 In this text the whole holy trinity, or all three persons of the
divine being and majesty, the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, is written
and named. And here it is to be noted first and foremost how he paints
the Holy Spirit as a consolation against the evil spirit that reigns in
the world, and calls him, as he also did above (Cap. 14, 26.), a
comforter and spirit of truth.

For the devil has two things to attack the Christians, either above
their office or for their own person, in the agony and others, namely
sin or 2) punishment of sins. The greatest, however, is the terror of
sin, by which he makes the heart dumb and mad.

2\) Wittenberger: \"horror of sin and\" instead: Sin or.

598 Erl. 49, SW-SS4. Interpretations on the evangelist John. W. VIII,
4SI-4W. 599

makes him timid when he reproaches him: So and so you have done. And he
can act as a good master, so that he not only takes the sin that you
yourself must confess, as murder and adultery, and blows it up with his
fiery breath so great that the heart melts before it, like salt in
water; but he can also turn your good life and the best works into
manifold sins and disgraces, so that you do not keep one stick of it. As
those who have been in the right battle with him know well. After that,
he does the same with the punishment: With this or that sin, you have
deserved that you should be reproached and revenged, put to death a
hundredfold, and hell eternally. And he makes it so hot and terrible
that heaven and earth become too narrow for a man, and he runs through
all the fires in fear, and lies and is crushed with such thoughts: O
Lord God, what have I done? If it is evil, it is not good; if it is
good, it is much worse. If he seizes you, and you do not know how to
defend yourself, he will soon win.

For this reason God has given us grace, that against this spirit of
terror he has appointed a Comforter, and such a Comforter, who is much
stronger with his comfort (than God himself is) than the devil is with
terror. If then the devil also comes with God\'s law, and presses upon
your works and life, and so destroys them that even your good works
shall be evil and condemned (as in this he is a master and excellent
theologian), let the Holy Spirit with his comfort speak into your heart:
Be confident and undaunted, go, preach, and do what you are commanded,
and fear neither sins, nor death, nor the devil\'s terror, though it be
given in God\'s name. For he will not be angry with you nor cast you
off, because Christ, the Son of God, died for you and paid for your sin,
so that it should not be imputed to you (if you believe in him), no
matter how great the sin; and your works, for the sake of faith, are
called pleasing to him, right and proper, even though weakness is
involved. What then dost thou suffer thy sin to be falsely blown out of
thee? Chri-

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: martert.

stus, your righteousness, is greater than your sin and the sin of all
the world; his life and comfort are stronger and more powerful than your
death and hell.

243\. 2) So he makes the heart joyful and bold again, so that it takes
up such courage and defiance: Now I will believe in Christ, preach him
and praise him, if the world and all devils are sorry. And even though I
am a sinner and have lived so wickedly, I will not deny and cast away
the man, nor will I hold his suffering and death in such low esteem (as
you devils do and pretend to me) that it should not wipe out and
extinguish all sin, with all your hell.

244 Behold, therefore, a heart that is brave and undaunted, that can
despise the devil with all his terrors and plagues, and defy all his
power: Sin, if thou wilt condemn me, do it first to Christ, my dear
Savior, priest and intercessor with the Father. Death, if you want to
devour me, look at Christ, my head. Devil and world, if thou wilt
afflict and terrify me, tear him down from the throne first. Summa, I
should and will fear nothing, even if the lightning of this moment
should strike down and throw everything into one another. For Christ is
mine with his suffering, death and life, the Holy Spirit with his
consolation, and the Father himself with all his grace, who sends the
Holy Spirit to preach Christ to my heart and fill it with his
consolation. This is the first glory and title of the Holy Spirit.

Secondly, he is also called a spirit of truth, against all lies and
false spirits. For the world is always full of spirits, as it is said:
Where God builds a church, the devil builds his chapel or tabernacle
next to it; that is, where God\'s word is pure, he leads sects and mobs
and many false spirits, who also lead the glory and name of Christ and
his church. But basically everything is false, and there is no truth nor
certainty. But I will give you (says Christ) the Spirit, which shall
make you sure and certain of the truth, that ye may not doubt in this or
that thing, if your

2\) This entire paragraph is missing in the Wittenberg and Erlanger.
Likewise, the first word of the following paragraph.

600 **Erl. 4S, SS4-sss. Sermon on Joh. 15, 26. 27. w. VIII. 46g-486.**
601

He will make you not only fighters and conquerors, but also put on the
biretta and be called doctors and masters who can conclude with
certainty what is right or wrong doctrine in Christendom. So he will not
only make you fighters and victors, but also put on the biretta, and be
called doctors and masters, who can certainly conclude what is right or
wrong doctrine in Christianity; the devil shall not pretend to be so
sharp, and no spirit of the mob shall be so nimble, that he will make
your doctrine wrong, or mislead you.

For this is also one of the greatest temptations, when a man comes into
doubt and goes astray in the faith. It is painful when the devil
frightens the conscience inwardly through sin, so that it fears God, or
outwardly through tyrants and various persecutions, so that it does not
grow weary. But this is so evil and difficult; when the devil sees that
he can neither win inwardly with his terror, nor outwardly with plagues,
he attacks it with wisdom and swift grasps, begins to entice with praise
and hypocrisy: O you are a fine Christian, continue, you are on the
right path. If then one creeps in among the multitude, among which you
are, and keeps company with you for a while, until he sees his time,
then he goes away, when he has found you out, and becomes your poisonous
enemy, and begins to boast against you that you have not only the
Scriptures and the Word of God; and as they speak now: Have we not the
Spirit as well as thou? 2c. As Moses did, through Aaron, and Miriam his
sister, Num. 12:2: \"Does the LORD speak through Moses alone? Does he
not also speak through us?\" must he alone be master and all that he
says be right? shall we then be nothing? And Köre and his companions
also rose up against him afterwards, 4 Bios. 16:3, saying, \"Will he
alone rule and exalt himself over the whole congregation of God? shall
what we say be nothing? are we not also the children and priests of God,
as well as he?

247 He does much more harm through such mobs than through tyrants. For
these, though they deter from the right doctrine with violence and
threats, are few in number. But here, when he spews his venom under the
name of the gospel, the Christian church, and pretends that he wants to
help the souls from error, the people are not yet right, or

We have never been taught enough, and now we must learn better and
differently: not one or two, but a whole city and country falls, and in
one hour tears down what has been built in many years. As has also
happened to us through the spirits of the enthusiasts and other groups.

For this reason Christ promises to give such a spirit, which not only
strengthens our hearts and courage, but also makes our faith sure that
we must not doubt, but can judge and judge all other spirits. We should
have such a promise, so that we can stand against the devil\'s lies. For
he is able to present them in the most beautiful way, so adorned and so
prominent that, as Christ says \[Matth. 24, 24\], even the elect would
be deceived by them. What would we have done if we had not had such a
certain understanding, given to us by the Spirit of truth? Who would
have been allowed to blame and condemn such a great, glorious appearance
of holiness in the papacy? Or who may do so even now, because they have
only begun to adorn themselves more and more highly?

But this spirit of truth passes through and pronounces the verdict: This
is the truth, that is a lie, and lets them adorn themselves and boast
with the false name and appearance of the church and Christ as long as
they can. Thus Christianity has remained from the beginning to this day,
among so many groups and lying spirits, which cannot be counted, as it
has been from the beginning and may yet come. But it passes through and
keeps its baptism, sacrament, gospel and Christ, ten commandments and
prayer pure and unadulterated, thus judging and separating from it all
false doctrine and that which opposes it, even though the devil becomes
a light angel and presents himself in such a 1) beautiful, glorious form
as if he were 2) God himself (like Christ, Matth. 4, 1. ff.). So St.
Paul boasts of the same Holy Spirit of Truth, 1 Tim. 2, 7, a doctor or
teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth, that all the world should
hear his preaching, and this

1\) \"so\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

2\) Regarding this intercalation, compare v. 25 of the sixteenth
chapter.

602 Erl. 4S, S8V-sss. Interpretations on the evangelist John. W. VIII,
IM-468. 603

He who wants to remain unconvinced and undestroyed must adhere to the
teachings and follow them.

250 Thirdly, he says, when you have been comforted and strengthened by
the Holy Spirit, and your mind and spirit have been preserved in certain
truth, 1) he will drive you to testify of me. For first he will testify
inwardly in your hearts; then also outwardly by miraculous works and
your confession and preaching, so that you may say, as those who were
with me from the beginning, what you have heard and seen, and such
testimony, by which I am praised, both against the angry lion and the
crafty dragon, that is, the murderer and lying spirit.

251 And these words are also to be noted with diligence. For herewith he
hath appointed the Holy Ghost, or rather shewed us, what and whereof he
shall teach and testify, or not. For he shall testify, saith he, nothing
else, but of me: this shall be the preaching, which is called the
preaching of the Holy Ghost. Therefore he will not be a Moses or a
preacher of the law, as you have been before and 2) still have; but I
will put into his mouth another, higher preaching than Moses gave you,
who taught only the law or ten commandments, though he also received
from God, namely, what you are to do and what you are not to do; but
this one shall make such preachers and confessors out of you, who do not
speak and testify of their doings and lives, but of me.

This is the true ministry of the Holy Spirit, and all other doctrines
are to be distinguished from it, so that none of them have the glory and
honor (even if they want to be praised for it) that it is the Holy
Spirit\'s doctrine or testimony, and by it we can defend ourselves and
preserve ourselves against the devil\'s lies and false pretenses, when
he attacks the heart and conscience, and drives us to argue before
God\'s judgment out of the opposition to our life and works. If I stay
there and get involved with him, he pushes me to the ground and I have
to sink. For here he is too mighty, and no saint on earth can stand
against him;

1\) \"is\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

3\) Original and Wittenberger: gleich sich. The Jenaer remarks in
passing: This little word \"sich\" seems to be too much.

for he has God\'s commandment for himself, to which no man on earth does
enough. But he cannot deny that Christ suffered, died, was buried, and
rose again for our sins, and sits up in heaven for our sake, as our dear
high priest and mediator with God.

253 Therefore, if he already wins me over with the law or ten
commandments, when he says that you are a sinner, I must say yes to it;
but if he wants to conclude that I am to be condemned and his own, I say
no to it: for I still have a sermon or word, which is called the
testimony of the Holy Spirit and the sermon of Christ. You hold up to me
Moses alone, who preaches God\'s commandment to me; but I shall not and
will not remain in the school. For I now know myself, and alas, all too
well, that I am a sinner, and will not dispute further whether I have
done something good or not; if it is wrong, let it be wrong. But now I
shall hear and learn what the Holy Spirit preaches to me, namely, how
Christ shed his blood for us and blotted out sin for me, overcame death,
extinguished God\'s wrath and hell, and through his suffering, death and
resurrection alone makes me an heir of eternal life. The devil cannot
overthrow this.

Therefore, there is no other way to comfort, strengthen, instruct,
protect and defend consciences than through this preaching and testimony
of the Holy Spirit. With this doctrine I can judge the devil in all his
interposition and disputation: You strike me before God\'s commandment
and law, I cannot punish that. But I shall not and will not dispute (if
I am to stand before God\'s judgment) what concerns my life, for I know
well beforehand that it cannot stand there. But you, you mischievous
one, want to drown me and immerse me in thoughts that I should think how
to fulfill the law and please God through myself, and thereby forget my
Savior Christ, and thus tear me away from the testimony of the Holy
Spirit.

255 Therefore, whoever has grasped this revelation and testimony of the
Holy Spirit can be against all such teaching and be right.

4\) \"wanted to deny\" \-\-- should be able to deny.

604 **Erl. 4S, \[ss-sso. Sermon On Joh. 15, 26. 27. W. VIII, 468-471.**
605

And so distinguish between them: One is my life and work, which I should
do according to the ten commandments; the other is that of my Lord
Christ, which is written in my creed, on which is my salvation and
blessedness, and all the consolation of my conscience. With this
difference I can meet the devil as he attacks me, and say: If my life is
not as it should be, according to the ten commandments, God forgive me;
but I hold to this man\'s life who died for me, which baptism and
sacrament I have received. Not that we should not do good works as much
as we always can, but that now, when we are in the battle with the devil
and our own conscience, there is no need to argue about it. For this
requires a higher life and piety than that of all men, namely Christ our
Lord, who died for me and rose from the dead, and baptism, if I have it
not in my works but in the same Christ, that alone should and must do
it. So I am sure of the matter, both with doctrine and life, that I
cannot fail. For the devil drives us, either on our life, against faith,
if he wants to make us devout; or if he rises high, and wants to make
you wise and sober, he leads you on your reason, against doctrine, like
the heretic Arium and others. But if thou dwell upon the life of the
Lord Christ, and say, I am not baptized into myself, nor into the life
of any man, but into my Lord Christ alone, he cannot gain anything.

So also, when he challenges you with the high article, and leads you to
your own head and wisdom, and no longer disputes about life, but how to
believe, and attacks the very foundation on which you are building: then
he will smother you with the pointed thoughts of reason, and ask how it
rhymes? 2c. Now if thou wilt proceed aright, lest thou be overthrown,
thou must say once more, Thou hearest, I believe not my wisdom and my
reason, but, as the children pray, in God the Father, and Jesus Christ
his only Son, and in the Holy Ghost. The

1\) \"Life and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlanger.

2\) \"HErrn\" is missing in the Erlanger.

is God\'s word, preached by the Holy Spirit into the world, and also
known to the children, which even the gates of hell shall not overthrow.

Lastly, here is also to be said of the nature of the Holy Spirit,
because the text gives it that He is true God, as our faith holds: I
believe in the Holy Spirit. For faith belongs to no one without God
alone, and no one should demand the faith that belongs to eternal life
without the one alone who can give it, namely God. Because we believe in
the Holy Spirit, we also believe in the true God.

This is enough for the simple, that they remain in their faith, and hear
no further the unruly clever ones, who want to be pointed in this, and
cavil with their sophistry\" For such belongs to the scholars, that they
fight with such in the school, and dissolve and refute their false
intrigues. But this article is clear and strong enough to prove from
this text, since it says: \"The Holy Spirit, whom I will send to you
from the Father\"; item: \"Who proceeds from the Father\". 5) For these
words testify and prove that the Holy Spirit is not called a bad Spirit
(as a creature, or something apart from God, and yet given by Him to
man, nor His work alone, if He works in our hearts), but such a Spirit,
who is Himself essentially God, and has His being from the Father; not
created nor made, but both proceeding from the Father, and also sent
from Christ. And gives him also such names, as are personal names, or
showing and naming a self-existent person, as that he is called the
Comforter; and also for this purpose personal works, as that he should
testify of Christ; item (as he speaks above 6) at the 14th chapter, v.
26:) \"he shall teach them all things\" 2c.

259\. so also in this it is sufficiently shown that the Holy Spirit is a
distinct and different person from the Father and the Son, because he
says: \"the Comforter whom I will send\"; item: \"who proceeds from the
Father\"; and still

3\) \"auch alsdann\" is missing in the Jena.

4\) cavilliren \-\-\-- quibble.

5\) From the beginning of this paragraph until now, the Wittenberg and
Erlanger.

6\) Erlanger: \"darnach\", \"am 14. Capitel\" is missing.

606 Eri. 4g, \[so f. so, s s. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W.
vm, 171-47.\" 607

the same right, true, one God, because he is to perform such work as God
alone does, namely, to enlighten the hearts inwardly and bring them to
right knowledge, to kindle, awaken and strengthen faith in them; item,
to comfort the consciences and keep them undaunted against the terror of
the devil and all creatures 2c.

This is strong and certain enough, without what other sayings are more,
to sustain this article of the divine nature of the Holy Spirit; as we
shall also hear in the following chapter. 1)

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: Amen.

**The sixteenth chapter.**

**V. 1. 2. I have spoken these things to you so that you will not be
offended. They will put you under ban. But the time is coming when he
who kills you will think he is doing God a service.**

In the previous two chapters, the Lord Christ told his disciples in many
words what would happen to them in the world after his departure, so
that they would be prepared against it and would act accordingly. He now
describes these things and puts them into short words: \"All these
things,\" he says, \"I have spoken to you for this reason, so that you
may not be offended,\" that is, so that you may not fall away from me or
despair of me. For when you see and feel that all the world will hate
and persecute you, and most of all those who are called God\'s people
and the true church, then you will be challenged and moved either to
doubt whether your faith and doctrine are right; or to become impatient
and sullen 2) and to think: I will let this doctrine have a good year; I
will believe and live just as much as the others, and then I will have
peace.

002 Even as the beloved prophets also were challenged, especially
Jeremiah the prophet, whom his own people afflicted sore, and gave him
no rest in blaspheming, reviling, and condemning, that he might preach,
and say that Jerusalem and the temple should be

2\) \"verdrossen\" taken by us from the old edition of Walch. The
reading of the old editions \"vberdrossen\" \[- überdrossen\] seems to
us to be a printing error, because we meet with Luther the form
\"überdrüssig\", but not \"überdrossen\". Cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition,
vol. X, 1758, § 2.

They burned his book and put him in prison, so that he began to say,
Jer. 20:8, 9: \"When I spoke of the plague and the destruction, the word
of the Lord became a mockery and a scorn to me daily, so that I thought:
Well, I will remember him no more, and preach no more in his name.\" As
if to say, What more shall I preach in vain? What do I get out of it,
but to be mocked, disgraced, and tormented without ceasing? What devil
can bear such hatred, contempt, and plague without all cause from the
world? But when I thought thus, saith he, and would have such wickedness
vex me, and cease, it was in my heart and in my bones as a burning fire
2c. That is, I was so afraid, and had such heartache, as if I lay in a
fiery furnace, and thought I must die, where I would keep silence.

\(3\) Thus all Christians, especially those in the ministry of
preaching, are challenged and so afflicted by the devil and the world
that they must grow weary and despair or give up unless they are
sustained by God\'s Word and Spirit. Therefore Christ comforts them with
this, that they should not be moved or angered to fall away from Him, 3)
or to give up, if they are in trouble and misfortune strikes them under
the eyes, so that they must see, hear and feel both from the devil and
the world, of which their hearts are in pain.

4 But he sets two pieces, that the enemies of the Christians may adorn
their persecution and ravings, and thereby the sufferings of the
Christians may be exceeding great.

3\) Wittenberger: to fall off.

[608 **Erl. M, 4-7. Sermon on Joh. 16, 1. 2. W. VIII, 476-47\".**
609]{.underline}

becomes heavy and great, and very strong and hard move to anger and
apostasy. The first is when 1) he says, \"They will put you under ban.\"
What does this mean? Recently it means nothing else than to be separated
from the people of God, cut off and cast away, as an unfit and condemned
member, excluded from God and everything that is God\'s, and the
sentence pronounced on you that you do not belong nor have a part in
God\'s people, deprived of God and of blessedness, and not partaking of
prayer and all the fellowship of the goods that are in Christ; and in
short, finally condemned to the devil and cast into hell. This, he says,
you must take care of and wait for, and you will be moved to fall away
from me, thinking, \"Perhaps this is not the right doctrine, and I 2) am
deceived by this Christ. Therefore I tell you beforehand, that you may
be prepared against it, and be able to withstand such trouble.

\(5\) For this has always been, and still is, a great argument and plea
(if not the greatest) that the devil and his members lead against the
true Christians. If they can only take the name of the Church of Christ
or of God from them, and bring it against them, they think they have
won. As when the prophet Jeremiah \[Cap. 26, 4. ff.\] may go forth, and
preach thus: Ye kings, priests, and all the people of Jerusalem, know
that God is angry with you, and ye shall be carried away captive by the
king of Babylon, and this city shall be pulled down; then they hold this
word against him: Knowest thou also that this is called the holy city,
and our king is set up by God, and our priesthood is ordained by God?
and we are the seed of Abraham, and God\'s people; what sayest thou to
this? With this they rejected him, so that no one would hear him, and
had to be called a false prophet. If this single man should appear, they
said, and open his mouth so wide against God\'s word and promise, that
this divine kingdom, priesthood and chosen people should be thrown down
so that a foreign, godless king should destroy the temple and

1\) Erlanger: that.

2\) \"I\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

drag the city and take everything away? This is the devil\'s damned
heresy and blasphemy. For it is not fitting that it should be God\'s
people and city, God\'s king, priesthood and temple, and it should be
said that it should all perish or be taken over by the Gentiles. This is
just as much as saying that God would not be God to His people and would
not keep His promise. Summa, it would all be nothing else but God\'s
people, God\'s temple and order and His word, yes, God Himself condemned
to it. They remained stiff-necked, and did not stop condemning and
persecuting the prophet for such preaching, until they passed over it,
and faith came into their hands.

\(6\) Thus it has always been with the dear prophets that they have been
troubled with the appearance and name of the church and God\'s people.
For they have always contradicted them with it: Dear, let them say what
they will: Non peribit lex a Sacerdote, neque visio a Propheta,^3^ )
neque consilium a Senioribus: if a thousand Jeremiä stood there, we have
the three pieces, we cannot lack them: The priests, who preach the law,
will not teach unjustly; the prophets, who have God\'s word, will not
prophesy falsely; and the elders and wise men (as the council of
Jerusalem, and the king), they will know what to do \[Jer. 18:18\]. It
is ever God\'s order that the priests teach the law, the prophets have
the word and revelation, the lords give counsel and rule. These three
must remain as they are given by God. Therefore, they had to be damned
heretics who preached against these pieces.

7 Behold, these things might yet vex a man (even the strong Christian),
that he should say, Whither leadest thou me? Shall I alone stand up and
preach against thy people, against thy kingdom, priest, and word? For
there is thy name, they have thy law, thy temple, and both spiritual and
temporal government, ordained of God himself. What shall I do, that I
alone shall lay myself against

3\) The following Latin words are missing in the Erlanger; instead:
\"etc\".

[610 Erl. so, 7-s. Interpretations about the evangelist John. W. vm.
611]{.underline}

all that is of God? I want to say that they are right, and revoke my
sermon, or ever remain silent. This has been the greatest annoyance to
them and the strongest argument against them, just as we have the
greatest trouble with it. And St. Paul himself had to fight against
this, and even against himself, Rom. 9, 4, and says: \"What am I doing
with my preaching? I must preach against my own people, who have God\'s
law, promise, miracles, prophets, temple and worship, and Christ
Himself. This must be a bold man, who should not get angry and pull in
the pipe.

\(8\) So also now the pope and his crowd cry out against us that they
are the church, because they have baptism, sacrament and scripture from
the apostles, and sit in the same chair; where else should God\'s people
be, since His name is praised, and His apostles are descendants and
heirs of the chair? They will not be Turks, Tatters and Gentiles!
Therefore we must be, or there will be no people of God on earth.
Therefore, whoever opposes us, opposes the Christian Church and Christ
Himself 2c.

\(9\) Whoever is not equipped here with other armor and strength, and
shall hear nothing else but such a judgment of the highest and most
excellent people on earth: You are a heretic, and the devil\'s apostle,
preaching against God\'s people and the church, yes, God Himself, he is
thus thrust before the head, that he must fall back. 1) For it is an
argument that is difficult to take away from them and to talk them out
of it, yes, it is also difficult for us ourselves to dissolve and to put
aside, especially if one has to concede as much as we concede to them:
that it is true that in the papacy there is God\'s word, apostleship,
and that we have taken the holy scripture, baptism, sacrament and
preaching chair from them; what else would we know about it? Therefore,
faith, Christian church, Christ and the Holy Spirit must be with them.
What am I doing, then, preaching against such as a disciple against his
masters? Then such thoughts rush into the heart: \"Now I see that I am
wrong; oh, that I do not acknowledge it!

1\) Jena and Erlangen: had to.

and never preached a word. For who may sit down against the church, of
which we confess in faith: I believe in a holy Christian church 2c.? Now
I find the same also in the papacy; therefore, if I condemn it, I am
under the highest ban, rejected and condemned by God and all the saints.

Now, what is to be done here? It is difficult to stand here and preach
against such a ban. But if we allow ourselves to be frightened by this,
and do what they want us to do, that is, revoke our sermon, if we know
that it is right and God\'s word, or desist from it, we would be like
the prophet Jeremiah, and God\'s word would set fire to an oven in us,
from which the heart would have to melt and burn so that no man could
bear it, that I would much rather be dead ten times over than carry such
a conscience upon me, since I would soon die of it. But what is now the
defense and the reason on which we may stand against such anger and
maintain our defiance against it? Nothing else, but the masterpiece, so
St. Paul uses Rom. 9, 7. and says: \"They are not all Abraham\'s
children, who were born of Abraham\". They are not all called Israel,
just as it is said, \"They are not all cooks who carry long knives. So
not all are the church, who boast and carry the name of the church. For
there is often a great difference between the name and the essence. The
name goes on, and all are called God\'s people, Abraham\'s children,
Christ\'s disciples and members; but they are not all so. For under such
a name there were nevertheless many wicked boys and husks, who would not
obey God\'s word, but only did contrary to it, and yet were called 2)
nevertheless the heirs and descendants of the holy patriarchs, priests,
prophets 2c. They had God\'s law and promise, temple and priesthood, and
were supposed to be God\'s people, but they also did so much idolatry on
the same glory that God had to say: Now this shall no longer be my
temple and priesthood, and my people shall not be my people, but this is
not my people.

2\) \"doch\" is missing in the Erlanger.

[612 Eri. s-ii. Sermon on Joh. 16, 1. 2. w. vm, csi-tsi.
613]{.underline}

to whom it shall be said, \"You are children of the living God,\" Hos.
1:10.

\(11\) So we must also say: I believe and am certain that even under the
papacy the Christian church remains. But on the other hand, I know that
the large number among them, who have the prestige above all, are not.
Our popes, cardinals and bishops are not God\'s, but the devil\'s
apostles and bishops, and their people are not God\'s, but the devil\'s
people; and yet some of them have remained true Christians, even though
they have been led into error (as Christ foretold in Matth. 24, 24.),
but they have been wonderfully preserved by God\'s grace and help.
Therefore, it is not valid that they boast and defy with great splendor:
We, pope, bishops, and what is among us, are the Christian church. For
we are called after Christ, and are the descendants and heirs of the
holy apostles and fathers. Therefore we justly condemn you who oppose us
and believe or teach otherwise. Yes, dear sirs, we grant you the name,
but let us see whether you are also the 1) and do what you boast of. For
to be called so, or to be called so, and to be so, are two different
things. I would like to call myself a king or emperor, if it were enough
to do so, to bear the name alone, and the people would have to become my
subjects for it. Some are called a pious man (says the proverb) and some
a rogue, and do them both wrong. For it is the way of the whole world to
use beautiful names, glorious and splendid words, and yet it is not so
in principle; and if it were written on the forehead of any man what he
was, he would not keep the name long.

\(12\) Therefore, I say, this distinction must be kept and driven out of
St. Paul, that not all are God\'s people or the Church, who are thus
called. For from this we can take both. From this we can take both
instruction and strength, so that we do not take offense at their
banishment and condemnation, but say against it, \"If they banish me,
happiness will strike. For such banishment is a mere false name, just as
all their

1). \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

Christ himself warned and admonished me beforehand that I should not
turn my back on it. Yes, you say, but what do you say to this? The
Christian church has nevertheless banished you. No, it has left that
alone. For it is not the church, if it boasts of the name; and if they
banish me, if they have nothing but the name, what do I ask of them? But
if they were truly the church of Christ, then I would have to fall under
her feet and beg mercy, and offer myself to all obedience.

\(13\) Thus you say: Yes, how then do I know which is the true church,
or which is not? Answer: It all depends, as I said, on knowing the
nature of the church, and distinguishing between the name of the church
and the nature of the church. This distinction and evidence is given by
Christ himself in the following words, when he says: \"They will do this
to you, for they know neither the Father nor me. With this touchstone, I
can easily and certainly judge which ones they are or are not. For this
is good to see, and reveals itself, which know the Father and Christ, or
not.

\(14\) Now here I bring the pope and his bishops, and all those who are
called the church, before the court, and ask: Do you also believe in
Christ, that through his blood alone you have forgiveness of sins and
are saved, and that this is the will of God the Father, and that you
were baptized into it, and received the sacrament, and are waiting for
eternal life? Yes, they say, we also believe. But in order to see
whether they truly believe this, I ask further: Why then do you teach
that we old people have long since lost our baptism, and that everyone
must now atone for his sin and be saved through good works? And how they
now impudently preach and write that Christ alone died for original sin
and has done enough, but we must think how we atone for our own
committed sin. Here it is found that they have fallen from the faith,
and lead the people away from Christ to their own works: Go to a
monastery, or go to the church.

2\) \"a\" is missing in the Erlanger. Immediately following, the
original says: \"through his\" sin\", which the Wittenberg has retained.

614 Eri. so, n-ig. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
484-486. 615

Rome and Compostel, practice a strict, hard life, or ask the Virgin Mary
to intercede for you with these or those saints, so that you may be
saved through them. So they make nothing out of Christ but a stern,
wrathful judge, before whom one must be afraid, as he wants to cast us
into hell. As he was painted sitting on the rainbow in judgment, with
his mother Mary and John the Baptist on either side, interceding against
his terrible wrath.

\(15\) This means that Christ has been taken away purely and not only
unrecognized, but also badly covered up, buried, and entombed, so that I
no longer look at him 1) as having been born, suffered, died, and risen
for me (as children in the faith say), but only as wanting to be judged
according to my life and works, whether I have paid for sin and have
done enough or not. So when I look at him, I cannot run to him, but must
flee from him, and have more refuge in Mary and other saints than in 2)
Christ and his salvation. Behold, this is the people who want to be
called the Christian church, and yet reject Christ, whom we should obey,
and fear her ban and judgment more than Christ Himself.

16 Therefore let this be to thee the touchstone, the rod, the lead, and
the balance, to judge them that they know neither Christ nor the Father,
and neither can nor will hear him. For the pope does not want to suffer
at all that his own human doctrine, of our works and nature, is touched,
and that Christ is preached purely. So we, in turn, do not want to let
this Christ be dampened, and let our works take his place. Then the
quarrel arises that they approach and condemn and banish us in the name
of the church. But we stand against them and say, \"This is not done by
the church of Christ, but by the wicked bride of the devil and the
company of the end of Christ. For the true church, knowing Christ, will
certainly not put anyone under ban for the sake of her word, because she
herself preaches it, believes it, and is glad to hear it.

1\) Erlanger: see.

2\) In the original: \"of\", which the Wittenbergers and the Jenaers
retained.

17 Thus St. Paul boasts against his Jews: \"Those who are the true
Israel of God will not be hostile to me, nor will they persecute me, but
only the other group who have the name and yet are not; as Christ also
says, John 8:43: \"If you knew my Father, you would understand my
language. 2c. For they do indeed have these words and names: God the
Father, God\'s word, God\'s service and people; but (as St. Paul says
\[2 Tim. 3, 5.\]) in deed they denied it. Therefore the apostles must
badly hear the judgment of them about themselves: You are the devil\'s
preachers, and not God\'s. For you preach against the law, against this
temple and worship, against the holy people, who were chosen by God and
have His promise. Then St. Paul must open his mouth and say: \"Dear
sirs, we must speak of two kinds of God\'s people. One is the one who
believes in the promise of Christ, who has now come; this is the right
people and the right seed. Then there is the other people, who were born
naturally of Israel and came from the holy fathers, but they do not
believe in Christ and do not want to be sanctified and saved by grace
but by their works. These are the false, disowned children; yes, not
children, but enemies of God, even though they are the great multitude
who have the rule and prestige, as if they alone were the right people.
Therefore, whether they banish others, we say to them: You may be called
God\'s people, but you are not. Ye have the name, that ye are of the
saints, 3) and are among the saints: therefore think ye that all things
which ye do are right, but not by a long way. For it is said, Not all
who come from Israel are Israel \[Rom. 9:6\]. So also, not all are the
church, who are thus reproached; but it must be seen how they believe
and teach. If I see that they preach and confess Christ as sent by God
the Father to reconcile us to Him through His death and to obtain grace,
then we are one in this matter, and I consider them my dear brothers in
Christ and members of the Christian church.

3\) Wittenberg: holy fathers.

616 Eri. so, is-is. Sermon on Joh. 16, 1. 2. W. vin, iss-iss. 617

18\) How nevertheless also under the papacy this sermon is kept
according to the text, together with the baptism and sacrament of
Christ, and articles of faith 2c. Although much error and deviation have
been introduced, many people have been preserved in death by it, who
have fallen from the other false trust, and have held to Christ alone,
and have confessed the same in faith. That nevertheless the true church
has never perished; But yet the greater and greater part, who boast of
the name, have forgotten baptism, have cast away Christ, and have
despised the word of God, and instead have made up their own idolatry,
saints, idolatry, and mass offerings and fairs for all the living and
the dead, and even for cows and oxen, and filled everything with the
pope\'s stink and filth, and thus suppressed the Christian doctrine by
force, so that no one could recognize it without whom God had specially
enlightened and torn it out of error.

19\. See, this is what Christ wants to teach here, that Christians
should know, if they are banished by those who are called the church and
God\'s people, that they should not turn away from it, but first make
sure of the matter, so that they can distinguish pure and dry between
the supposed church, which boasts of the name, and the true church,
which does not lead the glory, and yet is true, and hold to the same,
although the great multitude of the high, mighty, and holy ones are
against them, and persecute them, as at that time (Christ1) were the
rulers of the people, princes, high priests, scribes, and prophets. For
Christ comes and asks nothing of them everywhere, as they condemn him
and his own, but continues always, and overthrows all their rule and
being to the ground, as he will also do with the present his enemies at
last.

20 However, we keep the distinction that Christ makes here, that we do
not consider those to be Christianity who do not remain right and pure
in what Christ has taught, given, and established, however great, holy,
and highly learned they may be, but tell them that they are the church
of the devil. But again, let us recognize and honor as the true bride of
Christ those who abide in the pure and holy things of Christ.

Word of Christ, and have no other comfort of heart than this Savior,
whom they have received and confessed in baptism, and have taken the
sacrament thereon. These are the true church, not only in one place, as
under the pope, but wherever they are, as far as the world is. According
to the outward nature they may be scattered now and then, but in this
piece they come together, which is 1) I believe in God the Father
Almighty, and Jesus Christ our Lord, born for us, suffered, died on the
cross 2c., praying at the same time: Our Father in heaven; having one
Spirit, Word and Sacrament; leading one holy, blessed estate, each
according to his profession: father, mother, overlords, servants 2c. And
so, 2) what we preach, believe and live, so they also preach, believe
and live; bodily separated from one another and tossed to and fro
through the wide world, but gathered and united in Christ. 3)

\(21\) Behold, the true Catholic Church, the common Christian Church,
will certainly not banish us or persecute us, but will gladly accept and
confirm our teachings with all their hearts, and consider us their dear
brothers. But whether the pope banishes us and condemns us to hell, we
can happily bear and despise, but wait for the judge from heaven, our
Lord and Savior, who will separate us and grant us and give us the right
name of the church (which they now take from us), and publicly present
it as the devil\'s bride, eternally separated and cast out of his
kingdom.

\(22\) So the apostles, Paul and others, had to reproach their Caiphas,
Annas, Ananias, and all the Jews: \"Sirs, if you will not let us be
apostles and preachers, nor give God\'s word, baptism, and sacrament
yourselves, which you ought to do, as those who sit in office and proper
government, we will give it among ourselves and not look to you. After
this, let the judge come and pass judgment on those who have the right
name or not;

1\) Walch and the Erlanger: that that.

2\) \"Thus\" is missing in the Wittenberg. Instead of the following
\"thus\" there is: that.

3\) Wittenberger: \"vnreinigt.\"

618 E\". so, is-18. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
48s-\^W. 619

as he also did afterwards 1) so that their kingdom, land, priesthood,
temple, and everything is torn apart, destroyed, and thrown into a heap,
that not one stone is left upon another, and the people must be cast out
into all the countries and go astray, have no word of God, priesthood,
nor regiment, and have shamefully lost the name they had, and have come
to the Gentiles, who had no name before, as the prophets also proclaimed
to them. So now the pope snatches to himself the name of the church, the
right worship, takes it from the right Christians, and gives it to his
godless bunch. But the game will also turn with them, that we will take
the name away from them again, that they will also have to be condemned,
and be deprived of all honor and glory, which they now want to have,
before all the world and remain deprived forever.

\(23\) Thus we have the armor and defense against the first part of the
great temptation and battle, which both weak and strong Christians are
afraid of and moved to anger, and which was also difficult for the
apostles to overcome, that one should preach again the ban of those who
are called God\'s people or church, and have God\'s word, both law and
promise, given by God (2c), that we must bear the guilt, as if we were
preaching against God and all His order. Just as St. Paul Apost. 21, 18.
ff. was also accused of preaching publicly against the holy people,
against the law, against the holy temple. But he uses a fine dialectic,
and makes a sharp distinction, which they do not understand, and says:
\"Yes, it is true, the law is holy and good, the people are holy, the
city and temple are also holy; yes, if it were also needed rightly; the
priesthood is right and holy, if they conduct their office rightly; you
are the holy people of God and Abraham\'s seed, if you only keep it
rightly.

024 So we say also unto the pope and bishops, We will gladly bear you up
in our hands, and keep your law, and your ban, and all things with you,
if ye have but need. Yes, they say, you shall not teach us that: We are
the church, and have the office of God, therefore thou shalt hear us,
and follow; what we have

1\) \"hernach\" is missing in the Erlanger.

say and do that is right. Then we say with St. Paul: If you want to go
there and abuse this holy name and office, then we will, regardless of
you, tear up the temple and the law and everything before everything and
let it perish. We will gladly let it be holy and good, and keep it, but
if you want to use it differently than God has ordained, then it will
be: Either you give up the abuse, or both priesthood, temple, people,
law and everything will be lost. So we also say to the pope and his
people: \"Dear lords, see to it that you use your office, which you
have, properly and conduct it as you should; or else you will lose
everything together, and the pope\'s office will be torn apart and
destroyed. For God did not give His law, temple, priesthood, preaching
office, sacrament and key for us to do with them as we pleased, but that
we should act and conduct them according to His command. But if we do
not, he gives us leave and takes it away from us.

\(25\) So St. Paul and our preaching goes against the law, and yet not
against the law; against the church, and yet not against the church. For
it does not go against such a divine foundation, but against the false
understanding and abuse, which they adorn with the name of the church,
and thus pervert the law and God\'s word, and with it destroy the true
church and God\'s people. Therefore, we must pull the lid off them, and
show what the gospel, baptism, and the ministry of preaching are rightly
called, and separate their abuse from it. For the devil always adorns
himself with such an angelic, even divine appearance and color, as he
makes himself God in Matthew 4:9. Christ himself must fight, not against
men, but against God; but not against the true God, but against the
devil, who uses God\'s name and adorns himself with divinity.

\(26\) So also St. Paul fights against God\'s people, temple, and law;
and we likewise must sit down and preach against the church, and yet not
against God\'s temple, people, nor law, but against such a false angel
of light, that we strip him of his angelic garment, and show that it is
the devil; item, against the church, if yet not the church.

620 **Erl. so, 18-so. Sermon on Joh. 16, 1. 2. W. VIII, 492\^94.** 621

but against the rogue who has adorned himself with the beautiful name
and color of God and His Word, Sacrament, preaching ministry and the
Christian Church.

\(27\) Therefore, says Christ, do not be frightened by the fact that
they have and use the name of God, and yet misuse it as they wish, and
turn against you, and thereby banish and curse you (as blasphemers,
heretics and apostates), but be wise to distinguish between the name of
God, the ministry and the priesthood, and their false addition, as St.
Paul does. The law, God\'s people, priesthood and temple I let remain,
and do him all honor; but the husks I challenge, who abuse it all, or
more of the devil\'s larvae, which he put on, which they defend, and do
not want to pull off; there we tear ourselves over, and let ourselves be
cursed, blasphemed and done to us, what they can, until we, or God
through us, tear off their larvae again, so that nothing remains of it.

\(28\) This is one of the ways in which the devil attacks Christianity,
and it belongs to the first of his weapons, which is called lies, which
he adorns with the holy names of God, Christ and the church, and thus
condemns the truth and wants to turn it into lies. After that, if he
cannot do it with lies and false banishment alone, he takes the other
weapons and attacks it with murder; so that Christians are not only
banished by spiritual power in the name of God and the church, but must
also be persecuted by secular power with the sword. For as the devil is
a murderer from the beginning, so he must murder people; either the
souls by 1) lies and false teaching, or the body with the sword and
other deadly weapons. This is what Christ is talking about:

**V. 2. The time is coming when whoever kills you will think he is doing
God a service.**

29\) Then comes the devil, who disguises himself as an angel of light,
and adorns his murder with the beautiful adornment called holiness and
worship, as he adorned the lies before with the name of truth and God
Himself. Here is never no

1\) Erlanger: the.

A prince or regent who punishes the wicked and maintains discipline and
peace has been praised as piously and praiseworthily as one who murders
a Christian. For this is a right princely office, to punish murderers
and evil-doers, so that the pious and innocent are protected. But it is
nothing against the praise that he has before the world who murders an
apostle or preacher. This is a very holy work, so that they think they
have earned heaven from God.

\(30\) And this they will do, he will say, not secretly, as if they were
ashamed, or did not want to have it said of them; but in public court,
and with all honor and glory. And they will not only have to defend
their secular authorities, but they will have to do it for the sake of
God and the Christian church, as obedient members of it, to obey their
judgment and ban (against the Christians), and to preserve both, God\'s
and their obedience. So that the Christians must suffer and die as the
devil\'s members, blasphemers and rebels, whom one should not nor can
suffer on earth, so that everyone may boast and say: This emperor or
prince has executed and burned the evil-doers. O what an excellent,
princely, yes, Christian virtue, and a right holy, priestly work and
sacrifice he has done 2) to God! For it is not better, than with such
cursed people out of the world, the sooner, the better, and cast them to
the devil. This tastes God in heaven, and all the angels 3) rejoice in
it.

\(31\) With other shameful murderers and evil-doers, who are judged for
their evil deeds, who have done harm and damage to the land and people,
both judge and executioner, and whoever is entitled, have mercy and
compassion, and should be desperately wicked people, who could laugh at
such things and be in good spirits; but where a Christian is judged (for
the sake of his faith and confession), there is joy and rejoicing among
all. Oh, then it is 4) right and well done, one cannot do it so cruelly
and wickedly with the punishment, they have deserved much more.

2\) \"hat er\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Erlanger: darob.

4\) Wittenberger: that is.

622 Erl. so, so-LL. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
181-497. 623

\(32\) This is also what hurts so much in such suffering that they must
die, not only without all compassion, but also with the highest shame,
scorn and mockery, and with all the joy and rejoicing of the world, who
sing Deo gratias and Te Deum laudamus, and want to be specially praised
before God and held holy by it, as those who thereby earn high and great
things for God, so that he must reward and repay them greatly.

For this very reason Christ proclaims these things beforehand, so that
righteous Christians may be prepared against them and not be frightened
by such a terrible example and image. For in this way he himself had to
die, when he was cursed by God and was to be killed, so that his name
would be taken from the hearts of men, and everyone would be afraid to
remember him; and they thought that if they had brought him to the
cross, they would be blessed, and would have reconciled God and done the
dearest service, that they would have put away the cursed man.

34 St. Paul also praises him and other apostles in 1 Cor. 4:13: \"We
are,\" he says, \"a curse of the world and a sacrifice of all people.
For curse and sacrifice are the names of such people, who are considered
to be so evil that God and all creatures are hostile to them, and
therefore he must punish the land and the people with all plagues, and
cannot be reconciled, because they are 3) executed. So the world
considers us apostles and preachers of the gospel (says St. Paul) to be
the most poisonous. Paul) as the most poisonous worms and greatest
plagues on earth, above war, pestilence, and all that is evil, since
everyone cries out and asks that they may only be rid of us, thinking
that when they have executed us most shamefully, the world will be
healed and God\'s wrath will be appeased, that whoever slays such a one
will receive much greater thanks and honor than he who drives a common
pestilence out of the land.

35\) This shall be the happiness of Christians on earth, that with such
disgraces they shall have their body and

1\) Wittenberger: fine.

2\) Erlanger: ans.

3\) \"they\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

They are the ones who daily bargain for life and allow themselves to be
given to the devil, and grant their persecutors the praise and glory
that they are called God\'s dear children. As we now also see and
experience in the enemies of our Gospel, how exceedingly greedy and
meager they are for the blood of pious Christians, and how they rejoice
when they have killed one who has done nothing but preach the Gospel or
publicly confess it, as if they had pleased God in heaven. These are
called the right holy people, who are to be lifted up to heaven; there
the pope and bishops give their blessings and indulgences most
abundantly; there they cry out and write together: O right, so continue,
you are on the right track, God will reward you in heaven and your
children\'s children will enjoy it 2c. For they are not so hostile to
any serpent, to any evil worm, to any Turk, to any sin or shame, even to
the devil himself, as they are to us and our doctrine; just as they
write impudently of it: There is no Turk or dodderer so wicked as we,
that emperors and princes can earn no greater reward from God, 4) than
by eradicating this heresy.

36\. Now such bitter hatred, murderousness and bloodthirst cannot be
natural nor human, but must be diabolical, which cannot be satiated at
all, nor can it be quenched and cease to persecute and murder such
people, who neither do them nor anyone any harm or harm, nor intend to
do so; but do good to everyone, serve and help the world, suffer
violence and injustice patiently, and pray for their enemies; summa,
about which they have nothing to complain, nor can they blame them
without preaching about Christ, and would gladly bring people, from
sins, death and hell, to God and heaven. This is the great sin, that we
teach, first, to believe in Christ, that for His sake, and not for our
own merit or holiness, God wants to give us eternal life, 2c., then
also, to praise and obey God and to benefit our neighbor, to teach to do
good works, to be obedient, peaceful, charitable, patient, chaste.

\(37\) They must be desperate, devilishly wicked people, so the poor
Christians for the sake of their good deeds,

4\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: could.

624 **Eri. so, SS-S4. Sermon on Joh. 16, 2. 3. W. VIII, 4S7-SVV.** 625

They both, with doctrines and examples, show to everyone, so fiercely
persecute that they must die over it as the worst of the avengers and
most disgraceful evildoers. Well, what shall we do about it? We must
consider this, if we want to be Christ\'s disciples, and know that it
must be as he has prophesied and proclaimed here. But what is the cause
of this raging and fuming, he also clearly adds, saying:

**V. 3. And they will do this to you because they do not know my Father
or me.**

\(38\) This, I say, is the cause of the foregoing text, why Christians
must both be persecuted with banishment and murder by those who would be
the holiest and highest ministers of God. It is nothing else, he says,
but the sorrowful blindness, so that they are struck, that they cannot
recognize me, nor know what I am, and therefore also do not know my
Father. For if they knew the Father and me (as sent by him to help
them), they would certainly do no harm either to me or to you, who will
preach about me, but accept us with all joy and thanksgiving, as St.
Paul 1 Cor. 2:8 also says: \"If they had known, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory.\" Now, however, they can do nothing else,
for as they know and understand, so they go according to their
blindness, so that both of them, by nature, are also possessed by the
devil, as St. Paul 2 Cor. 4, 4. says that \"the god of this world blinds
the minds of unbelievers, so that they do not see the bright light of
the gospel,\" that is, they cannot recognize Christ; so that even though
they are told, and the Holy Spirit with his light of the gospel pushes
it before their eyes, they do not want to see or know it, but
deliberately remain in their blindness. So much has the devil bewitched
them with the delusion of their own holiness and righteousness, in which
they drown, dreaming that they themselves can be pious, fulfill the law,
and please God without Christ, that they can neither see nor understand
anything before it.

39 But this is said to us for our comfort and strength against their
banishment and murder, so that we will not turn back or be offended. For
here we have the testimony and the

Glory, which they themselves must give us by their own confession, that
they do not persecute us for such things as they might publicly prove
against us, that they would do well and justly in them, as in those
things where the world has right and cause to condemn and punish, which
are publicly wicked men, thieves, murderers, and seditioners; but in
those things they persecute us, because they neither understand nor
know, that we preach of Christ and the Father, which they know not, and
yet, according to their blindness, run and rave against such preaching.

40\. For they cannot bring it upon us that we have sinned against them,
or attacked the authority, honor and power due to them, or coveted any
of theirs; Indeed, they themselves must confess that we have not only
taught them to give and leave all that they have, and let them remain
and sit as they are, but have also commanded us to all obedience and
abundance, even more than we owe them, and have desired nothing more,
without which it does them no harm at all, that they leave us God\'s
word and faith free. They do not want to do this, but force us to teach
and believe what they themselves want (against Christ and his word),
even though they themselves either believe nothing at all, or do not
know what they believe. (Although there are many of ours, indeed many
more, who know and confess that our doctrine and faith is right, and yet
out of pure sacrilege and will of courage persecute such doctrine, and
torment and murder pious people on it, so that one can see how they must
be poisonous devil worms). For what harm is it to you that I understand
and believe something for myself that you do not want to understand or
believe? What harm does it do me that a farmer can plow better, an
artist can paint 3) or carve better than I can; should I therefore be
angry with him and persecute him as an enemy? How would I come to the
shameful envy and hatred, if I do not know an art or craft, nor want to
learn, and yet wanted to defend another,

1\) Jenaer: the.

2\) Erlanger: darob.

g\) Erlanger: \"paint, carve or turn\".

626 Erl. so, 24-20. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
soo-502. 627

Is it not fair to say to me, thou wicked, desperate man, if thou wilt
not, or canst not, do it thyself, let others do it; is it not enough
that they let thee do what thou wilt?

So we say to our larval bishops, if they themselves do not want to
teach, believe, preach, govern churches, nor do anything that is their
right, that they should let us believe and do what we know is right; for
which they should still thank us that we relieve them of toil and care,
and gladly let them have their honor, power and good days. But it is of
no avail with these people, but they are worse than raving and furious,
yes, full of devils. We do not want to believe in Christ, nor do we want
to teach the gospel, therefore you should not believe or preach it, but
only say and do what we want. If we do not do this, and do not approve
and worship all their shameful nature and life, we shall die as heretics
and rebels without any mercy.

\(42\) Therefore, if it comes to this, says Christ, and you see that it
is because they do not want to know me, nor do they want to know about
me, then let them go, rage and rush as they wish, and be undaunted by
it. For they cannot do otherwise, and you will not make them do
otherwise; the devil has 1) completely possessed them, and rides them
with hardened blindness, so that 2) they can no longer be helped. For it
is, as I said, not bad human blindness, which they would still like to
excuse, but wilful obduracy of the devil, that they do not want to
recognize, even if it is told to them so clearly that they would like to
grasp it, but want to remain badly blind, and neither hear nor suffer
anything that is said to them; as he said just now at the end of the
15th chapter, v. 24: \"If I had not come and told them, they would have
had no sin. But now they have nothing to excuse their sin\" 2c.
Therefore let this be your comfort, and thank God that you are not also
in such blindness.

1\) \"to\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) Erlanger: da.

but know the Father and me, and suffer these things for my sake, that
you may abide in my faith and gospel.

43\. But sayest thou, How saith he, they know neither my Father nor I?
Did not all the Jewish people boast of this knowledge of the one God,
when they wanted to be called God\'s people alone, as they say John
8:41: \"We have one Father, God. Likewise now our enemies also boast,
both of God the Father and of Christ; for they do not want to be called
and held otherwise than Christians and servants of God (as Christ
Himself said of such); how then should they not know Him? Answer: What
the knowledge of God and Christ is, is now often established, namely,
not a lazy, loose thought or dream, as reason may think of God and
Christ, from hearsay, and according to such its own thoughts depicts God
and acts against him, but it is the right, living faith, which grasps
the word of the Gospel, and according to the same knows him, and knows
the Father\'s will and heart, that he sent his Son, Christ, to save the
world from God\'s wrath and eternal death by his blood and death, and
that Christ has accomplished all this, has obtained forgiveness of sins
and eternal life, and truly gives it to all who believe in him, so that
Christ\'s knowledge and the Father\'s knowledge are bound together and
are one knowledge; As it is often said above, that the Father alone is
known in Christ, and neither will nor can be attained and met, nor
worshipped and invoked, apart from this Mediator.

\(44\) Therefore, this article of Christ is the most important, and
everything depends on it; he who has it has everything, and Christians
must fight and contend for it constantly, so that they may remain in it,
which is why Christ and the apostles do not insist on it everywhere
without cause. For the other articles, although they are also founded in
Scripture (as that Mary, a pure virgin, gave birth to Christ), do not
drive them so hard that St. Paul (when arguing about this article) does
not even care to call the mother, nor the honor of the virgin.

3\) Wittenberger: on it.

628 **Eri. 5°, SS-S9. Sermon on Joh. 16, 3. W. VIII, sos-5\".** 629

but says badly, Gal. 4, 4: Natum ex muliere**,** \"born of a woman\".
But in this he is complete, that we do not attain grace and salvation
with God through works and law, but only through this mediator, Christ.

For this is the only article that must always suffer persecution from
the devil and the world: as it was proclaimed soon after the beginning,
in the first divine sermon that came to man after the fall, Genesis
3:15: \"I will put enmity between your seed and the serpent, and the
same seed shall bruise your head, but you shall bruise his heel\" 2c.
This is the very enmity of which Christ here says that His Christians
must both be banished and put to death for the sake of His knowledge,
and that they preach of Him. Other articles have also had contestation;
but none have made so much bloodshed and martyrdom as this one. For it
began so soon in the first two brothers, Cain and Abel, that the one
died at the other\'s hands, and will not cease as long as the world
stands. Where this one rises, the devil is mad and foolish, and the
world burns like fire and is bright with wrath and rage.

46\. And one sees in all histories that all heresy and error arose where
this article fell, since people became sure as if they could very well
know it; And so they fell from this to other things, and began to
dispute about the person of Christ, whether he was truly God or only
man, and with such speculation and questioning introduced all
misfortune, since one denied the deity of Christ, another the humanity,
item, some the person of the Holy Spirit, some the virginity of Mary;
but all at least, as many as there were, also erred and deceived in this
main item. For in this all depends and stands, and draws the others all
with it, and all is to be done for this one, so that whoever errs in the
others certainly does not have this one right either, and even if he
holds the others and does not have this one, it is still all in vain.

47 Again, this article also has the grace, where one with diligence and
seriousness thereby

that he does not fall into heresy, nor run against Christ or his
Christianity. For he certainly brings with him the Holy Spirit, who
thereby enlightens the heart and keeps it in right and certain
understanding, so that he can 1) make a pure and dry distinction and
judge from all other articles of faith, and preserve and defend them
mightily. As can also be seen in the ancient fathers; where they
remained with such article 2) and based their doctrine on it or led it
from it, they remained pure in all points; but where they went away from
it and disputed apart from it, they also went astray and stumbled on it,
as also happened to the oldest, Tertulliano and Cypriano, from time to
time. And what else is lacking, not only in the papists, but in all of
our fools who rave against baptism and other articles, but that they
have already fallen from this, have not bothered about it, and have
raised other things instead, and have thus lost their minds, so that
they teach nothing right about it, and can receive no article with
certainty? as one can well see in their books; then they continue to
fall from one error into another, until they finally lead themselves and
other people to ruin.

For when this knowledge of Christ is gone, the sun has lost its light,
and is darkness, so that nothing is rightly understood, and one can
neither avoid error nor the false teaching of the devil. And even if one
keeps the words of faith and Christ (as they remained in the papacy),
there is no reason for any article in the heart, and what remains is
vain foam and uncertain persuasiones or conceit, or a painted, colored
faith. As they themselves call their faith fidem acquisitam et im
formem, that is, a loose, lazy, single thought that neither does nor is
good, neither holds nor fights when it comes to the meeting that it
should hold and prove itself. And that their boasting of faith and
Christ is completely false and untruthful, they prove themselves by the
fact that they do not want to suffer this article, the knowledge of
Christ and right faith, but rage against it with banishment and murder.

1\) Erlanger: es.

2\) Jenaer: such articles.

630 Erl. 50, LS-SI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII.
SÜS-S08. 631

49 Again, where this sun shines and glows in the heart, there is a right
certain understanding of all things, so that one can stand firm and hold
fast to all articles, as that Christ is true man, born of the Virgin
Mary, and also true almighty God, born of the Father in eternity, Lord
over angels and all creatures. Item, so he believes and teaches rightly
of the Holy Spirit, of baptism, sacrament, good works, resurrection of
the dead; so he walks simple in faith, does not dispute and argue about
God\'s word, does not cause quarrels or doubts. And if anyone comes who
attacks one or more of these articles, a Christian can defend himself
and repel them, for he has the right Master (the Holy Spirit), who alone
reveals this article from heaven and is given to all those who hear and
accept this word or sermon from Christ. Therefore, such a one will not
be led astray into heresy and error; and even if he falls short or
stumbles, he will soon get back on track (if only he does not fall from
this). For this light consumes and dispels the clouds and darkness, and
directs 1) and aligns him again. But if he loses this light, he can no
longer be helped. For where this knowledge is gone, it takes everything
with it, and you may lead and confess all articles after it (as the
papists do), but it is neither earnestness nor right understanding, but
like one groping in darkness, and a blind man hears talk of the color
which he has never seen. This is done by those who are the best and most
pious among them. For the other great multitude must fulfill this, as
Christ says here, that they run headlong against it, blaspheme and
persecute, banish and murder the true Christians from no other cause,
but for this knowledge alone, and thus become possessed, blinded and
obdurate, yes, vain devils from those who do not have this article
knowledge (although they otherwise earnestly strive to be holy and
pious), just as from those who recognize and believe him become vain
children of God.

50 Behold, this is the reason why Christ gave the apostles this piece so
hard and steadily.

1\) Wittenberger: unterweiset.

and warns them against all kinds of troubles that they might get into.
For he knows that where they abide in this, as on the foundation and
main, they are in the bosom of the Holy Spirit, who arms them and keeps
them, so that they are strong enough to stand against all trouble and
error, and to overcome everything that may befall them. For this
knowledge does it all, brings us all wisdom, God with all His goods,
opens heaven, breaks hell, devils and the world with all their wisdom
and power, lies and murders.

\(51\) Therefore keep this text, both of you, as a reminder, that we may
take this doctrine or article of the knowledge of Christ rightly before
all things, and hold fast to it as the certain, firm foundation and
highest treasure of our salvation, and after that also for strength and
comfort. For therein stands our defiance, that Christ Himself is judge
here, and pronounces judgment for us, separates those from us, and
confesses to us that we (who have His word, and therefore suffer
banishment and persecution) are those who know the Father and Him, and
they not. From this you have the judgment of who is or is not the true
church of Christ. They have the appearance (this is true) that they are
God\'s servants and have the right doctrine, and we are called heretics
and children of the devil; but against this he says: \"Because you have
my word and knowledge (which they do not have), then be undaunted; it
has already been established before God the Father that you are the
right church, although you do not have the name and honor before the
world, but must grant them.

52 We must also now be well accustomed to this. For (as I have said),
when it comes to the battle to stand against the world, or when
someone\'s conscience is rightly challenged, this is a hard argument
that the devil uses against us: Do you think that you alone are wise?
May you condemn so many fine, high, noble, pious people, who are also
baptized and of the Christian faith, and consider them all fools? A
difficult argument (I say) is that it applies in the community, or to
one alone, especially where one thinks about it, and is not armed
against it with the right reason.

53 Therefore, it must come to the point that one must

632 **Erl. 50, SI-SS. Sermon On Joh. 16, 3. W. VIII, \"08-810.** 633

Know this, that here Christ says and concludes: All those who do not
know the Father and me, will certainly spread lies and murder against
you. For the devil incites and drives them, so that they must defend
their lies by banishment and murder. They did it at the time when the
pagans practiced such gross idolatry, which had no appearance at all,
except that 1) they worshipped stones and wood, yes, the Egyptians
onions and garlic, cats and evil worms, which also reason teaches that
they are not gods. Nor did they think so strongly of such palpable lies,
which even the pagan poets considered foolishness and condemned, that
they raged against the Christians with persecution and killing, as
against rebels and blasphemers, if they would not worship their cow or
crocodilum.

\(54\) The devil cannot suffer his lies to be attacked, when they have
no semblance of truth in the sight of reason. How much less can he
suffer it where he has a semblance of great holiness? as was the case
with the Jews of old, or even with the Turks, who boast most highly
against us that they alone worship the one God. And where there are
those of whom Christ says here that they do not worship garlic, nor
idolatry, but want to be God\'s servants, and persecute the Christians
for it, such have much greater cause to rage. What do these (they say)
want to preach for a God and make new things? Do we (say both Jews and
Turks) believe in the One, true, truthful God, who created heaven and
earth? Yes, the Turks also admit that Christ was born of the Virgin,
crucified, and resurrected 2c. And our papists storm against us without
ceasing with this single argument: \"Do we believe everything that is
written in the Scriptures and keep all the articles of faith, of God and
of 2) Christ; why then do you fight against us? You did not bring these
things up yourselves, but took them from us. How then may you condemn
us, and separate and segregate yourselves from us? What better can you
teach and have than we? 2c. Should those who have always believed the
church

1\) Wittenberger: da.

2\) \"von\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

Who are the descendants of the holy apostles and fathers, who are all
wrong and in the wrong? This is their best armor, and strongest defense,
so that they think they can push us over the head and collect us,
namely, with the name of God, the faith and the Christian church.
Therefore, we must be called liars and heretics, apostates and enemies
of the church, and the cry of murder goes out over us, that we should
only be executed from the earth, for God\'s service and praise, and for
the protection and preservation of the Christian church.

\(55\) But here you have the right judgment, as Christ speaks of them,
that in truth they know neither the Father nor him, though they boast
much of it in words. And add to this the sign by which they may be
known, as by their fruits, that they are liars and murderers; as their
own deeds bear witness against them, that they go against the true
doctrine of the gospel (which they boast of), both in doctrine and life,
and persecute them for it that teach and believe rightly and truly. But
because their appearance and fame are so great that it is hard to
believe that they should be those who do not know God and Christ, their
teachings and nature must be considered and contrasted with how it
rhymes with the Gospel, and they must know how to distinguish between
the right faith and their dream faith. As Jude in his epistle portrays
them well and finely, and calls them by their name \[v. 8\]
\"dreamers\", that their doctrine and faith is a mere dream, that (their
dream) has with them the name and delusion of a right being, and yet in
truth is nothing. For what they know of it, read, speak or preach, they
have out of mere habit, just as a drunkard speaks in his sleep, since he
does not know what he is doing or how he feels. So they know nothing at
all what they read, sing, or say; they are even as if drowned in a deep
sleep, in other thoughts, without the words passing through their
mouths, of faith, of the Lord\'s Prayer, and of all the Scriptures which
they have received from the dear fathers. For if they knew God the
Father and Christ His Son correctly, they would have to conclude with us
from such knowledge and say: \"We believe that we cannot be saved
without being saved only by the faith of God.

634 Erl. so, SS-S6. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
SI0-5IL. 635

the one Mediator Christ, as sent by the Father to bear and pay for the
sins of the world, as the apostle St. Paul sharply and powerfully argues
and concludes. For this is to acknowledge the Father, that we may know
what the Father has decreed concerning us, and for what purpose he sent
his Son, namely, that through him we might be delivered from sins, since
we could not be saved by the law, Romans, chapter 8, v. 3.

\(56\) If they knew and believed this, they would have to go further and
conclude that the foundations and monasteries (erected for the atonement
and remission of sins) must be error and the devil\'s lie. For if I come
so far, and know that no one, without Christ, can help me from sins, and
that such is the will and opinion of the Father, then this will bring
the consequence itself, that I must say: Is this true, what have I
sought for so long a time in the monastery? For what purpose have I read
or prayed so many masses, horas, rosaries? Why have I placed my
consolation in the deceased saints, run here for pilgrimage, there for
indulgences? It was all done (as no one can deny) so that we could atone
for our sins, reconcile with God, and become blessed. And, even more
unchristian, we monks have taken upon ourselves to help other people to
heaven with it, as if we did not need our works for ourselves alone, but
sold or gave them away as other merits to the dying, and comforted them
with them, and called them to pass away. We cannot deny this, for our
books, which we have written and read, and our letters and seals,
confirmed with the names of God and the saints, testify against us.

\(57\) Now how does this rhyme with faith in Christ, which thus saith,
By me, and not by thee, nor by any other name in heaven or in earth,
shalt thou be saved? But they say that Christ is the Savior, and that he
shed his blood for us; and yet they put up their pretense that our work
and life should also be to atone for sins and to obtain forgiveness.
Yes, what is the

1\) Wittenberger: with it.

The whole of monasticism other than such vain dream doctrine against
Christ? since they have nothing of their own from their vain, foolish
works, as wearing caps and plates 2c. (which any wicked wretch can do),
make a state of perfection above and against the common Christian state,
which they consider imperfect, even despise, and say that it is a
dangerous state, in which no one can be saved, unless they come to his
aid through their perfect state, and share their merits and works, so
that they may also go to heaven. What is that but a mere dream, yes, a
grievous blindness? since they themselves neither know nor see what they
say or do, they want to be called Christians, confessing with their
mouth the faith that Christ died for our sins, 2c., and yet teaching and
living contrary to it in deed.

\(58\) For if it be true that the common Christians (whom they call
laymen), having holy baptism and faith in Christ, cannot be saved by
their baptism and Christ\'s blood, they must also buy the merit of the
monks, and be made partakers of their works; for what use is Christ with
his blood and baptism? Or what is this other than thus taught and said:
Christ is not enough to make people blessed with his suffering, death
and merit, but we want to do it much better, and establish such a being,
by which we not only become blessed, but also acquire many other merits,
which we do not need for ourselves for salvation, but as an overflow and
excess give to others, and they must buy them from us, and thus enjoy
ours, so that they may also become blessed?

59\. Is not this blaspheming openly and unashamedly, saying, Christ is
nothing and helps nothing, but we are Christ, yea, much more than
Christ? for we are so holy that we must be nothing; so also he alone
cannot help others, if we come not to their help with our exceeding
works? Is this not a shameful, cursed abomination, and a true
counterchristian doctrine? And who could believe that such a thing is
taught in Christianity, in all schools and in all preachers\' offices,
and that it is practiced with all seriousness?

[636 **Erl. so, \[s-37. Sermon on John 16:3. W. VIII, SI3-SW.**
637]{.underline}

If we had not heard it, seen it, and been in it ourselves, from the best
to the least, as deeply as the others, and that their books, seals, and
letters, which testify to this, still existed? Otherwise a man should be
surprised to death when he hears that those in the church who have been
baptized into Christ and called Christians by him have fallen into such
blindness that they teach in public and sincerely believe it: Whoever
puts on a gray or black cap in his deathbed should have obtained
forgiveness of sin with it, and take more and higher comfort in it than
in his baptism and the blood and death of the Lord Christ. This is
called terrible blindness; but much more terrible blindness, and more
astonishing, is that those who want to be called the Christian church,
and receive the name by force, are still supposed to be so wicked and
devilishly evil, that such blindness and darkness is now so publicly
discovered and taken away by the preaching of the gospel, that they
themselves see and know it: nevertheless they do not want to let go of
it, but defend their old deed and darkness by force, and do not suffer
that one preaches or lives against it.

From this you see clearly that Christ rightly says of such and
concludes: \"They neither know my Father nor me\"; to strengthen us that
we do not make any doubt how great the appearance is against it, but
certainly conclude that their thing is nothing but vain dream teaching
of such people, as St. Paul says 1 Tim. 6, 5, \"who have broken senses
and are deprived of the truth\", and do not know what they say or do.
With their mouths they say they confess God (St. Paul again Tit. 1,
16.), but with their works they deny it; as also Christ \[Matth. 15,
8.\] says of His Jews from Isaiah Cap. 29, 13: \"This people draws near
to me with their mouths, and honors me with their lips,\" they can use
my name gloriously and magnificently, and thus come almost close to me;
but with the heart no one departs so far from me.

61 The dear prophets themselves had to have and give such a distinction,
so that they could separate their true Jews from the false dream Jews,
who were leading the

the same words, and boasted of the God of Israel, who brought them out
of Egypt, and of his worship and sacrifices (as Jeroboam also did with
the golden calves); this was rightly spoken with the mouth, but in
essence it was idolatry, or false trust in their own deeds and
fictitious worship, contrary to God\'s word. So now the Turks boast that
they believe in God, who created heaven and earth; this is also rightly
said with the mouth, but basically they know nothing of God, without
what their dream is, and as much as they have from hearsay. In the same
way, the Pabst\'s faith and service to God, which he praises with his
mouth, is nothing but a mere babble and a dream, yes, a vain lie. For
what they say of God, Christ and His baptism with their mouths, that is
denied with their whole being and works, monasticism, masses,
indulgences, saintly service, and they act contrary to it. Therefore it
is vain lost and damned worship.

62\. and what wonder is it that they do not know Christ and the Father?
For how could they have this high knowledge, which surpasses all
knowledge and wisdom (as St. Paul says), because they lie in such
blindness and darkness that they do not yet know what they themselves
are. For they do not recognize and believe that they are by nature
nothing but sinners (like all men from Adam), born under God\'s wrath,
and condemned to hell, with all their doings and abilities, except
Christ, but presume and boast to find and accomplish so much in their
powers and free will that they obtain God\'s grace; and so presume to
deal with God, like all heathens and Turks, without Christ, as if he had
to look at their own imaginary works and worship, and give heaven for
it; wanting to teach and say much about good works, and yet not
understanding nor having a good work, which God demands or praises, but
dealing with vain own imaginary and dreamed-up works.

63 After that, if they follow such dream teaching, and are outwardly
attacked with works and practiced all their lives, and very much

1\) Wittenberger: leidiger.

638 Erl. so, 37-40. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
\"I6-SI8. 639

They teach and hold that if a man has done everything, he must still
doubt, and cannot know whether he pleases God and is in grace or not; so
that they lose all effort and labor, and accomplish nothing but vain
despair. Are these not blind, even foolish and furious people, who boast
so highly and presume on their own works and merits that they can not
only be blessed with them, but also sell them to others, and call them
to comfort themselves and rely on them; and yet, when it comes to the
meeting that they should stand on them before God, they just close the
contradiction, and punish themselves with lies?

64 But so it shall be with them, nor can it be otherwise. For it is true
that where there is no faith or knowledge of Christ, both doubting and
despairing must follow. For in the end it is clear that our lives and
works (even if they were good and done according to the ten
commandments) cannot stand the test, nor can they stand against God\'s
judgment, but both such foundations, on which we had previously relied
and what we had built on them, must perish.

Behold, this is the judgment and punishment that God inflicts on those
who do not see this light (that is, do not accept and believe God\'s
word of Christ), so that they are drowned in vain blindness and
darkness, and no longer know anything about divine things, and do not
understand a bit of Christian doctrine, which is sin, which is man\'s
ability, how one can get rid of sin and become righteous, which is law
or gospel, which is faith, which is good works, and which is Christian
standing. And as they do not know Christ, so they cannot really know or
regard any Christian, but must condemn and persecute the true church and
Christians who teach the Lord\'s word, and thereby punish and remove
their darkness and blindness. And it serves them, by God\'s judgment,
justly and rightly, that they thus cast themselves away from God,
Christ, and His Christianity, like chaff from grain, Psalm 1:4, and in
their blindness and hardening, both themselves and the other.

1\) Erlanger: \"and not\" instead of: yet.

corrupt, and lead others with them to ruin.

66\. Therefore we conclude from this text with Christ that such are not
God\'s people, nor Christians, as they boast, but anti-Christians, and
not the church, but enemies of it, because they both continue with the
teaching against Christ and his word in their blindness, They also act
contrary to it with their works, and thus prove and testify by deed that
they are those of whom Christ says here, namely liars and murderers, who
condemn and persecute the right doctrine and right Christians as
children of the devil, who do the works of their father, as he said Joh.
8, 44 to his Jews, who only wanted to be God\'s people.

\(67\) Therefore, we should not be frightened by it, nor should we turn
back to the anger that we have to live among the people who bear the
glorious names of God, Christ, the Holy Spirit, the Christian church,
God\'s word and commandment, forgiveness of sin, keys, etc., which we
also call with them, and yet they fight against us with them and want to
oppress us. And it seems a ridiculous warfare that we fight over it,
while we agree with each other. They call themselves Christians,
believers, church, boast of God and his word 2c., we do the same; we
speak the same word on both sides. In this we are one; but in the matter
and in the 2) mind we are far from each other. Now this strife is not
new, but has been so from the beginning and always. For all the prophets
quarreled with their Jews, who spoke the same words: We believe in the
God who brought us out of Egypt 2c. And what does St. Paul have to fight
against his false apostles, if they do not also want to be apostles, and
boast and preach about Christ? As he himself says in 2 Cor. 11, 13, that
they seek cause everywhere, that they may boast like him, and may
pretend to be apostles of Christ, so that he also must come out with
boasting against them, and say v. 22: If they are Ebramites, Israelites,
Abraham\'s seed, so am I; if they are servants of Christ, so am I, yes,
I am more 2c.

2\) \"im\" is missing in the Jena.

[640 Erl. so, 4o-4s. Sermon on John 16:3-7. W. vm, sis-ZW.
641]{.underline}

68 For this reason we cannot be separated here, nor can we deny them the
name; but there we are separated, when we see which of the two (who have
the same name) are false or righteous. As even in the papacy they must
make such a distinction and say that among the Christians there are some
who are true Christians; some who are called Christiani nomine et
numero, who alone have the name, and are in the same number. But how one
is to make the right distinction between those who are righteous and
those who are false, as much as one can sense and examine by heart, has
been said enough so far; namely, that one should see where the teaching
of the gospel of faith in Christ, without addition or secondary
doctrine, goes right with its fruits and right good works, according to
the same word; And on the other hand I see where there is a
contradiction, where people call the gospel and faith by their mouth
alone, and yet cast out other things against it, so that faith and
Christ are denied, and their own imaginary works with false confidence
are set above both faith and true good works. This is also proven by the
fruit, that one wants to defend such against the right doctrine and
faith with banishment and murder 2c. Now continue in the text:

**V. 4. But these things have I spoken unto you, that, when the time
shall come, ye may remember that I have told you. But I did not tell you
this at the beginning, because I was with you.**

\(69\) The Lord Christ himself feels that it is very necessary to tell
them this and to preach it to them, so that they may be prepared against
the great trouble (of which he spoke) and be able to stand. Therefore,
saith he, I tell you now, that hereafter, when it shall come into your
hands, and ye shall see that they will banish you, and kill you, with
the appearance that ye are enemies of the church and of the people of
God, that ye be not dismayed at it; but think behind you, and strengthen
yourselves with this, that I have told you before, that it must so
happen unto you. If you want to be my disciples, for my sake you must be
called heretics and children of the devil, and those who persecute you
must be called devout Christians,

God\'s children and servants. You must be warned of this, and know
beforehand that you do not turn to the great, glorious, divine names and
words, and excellent appearances, which they use, but see and judge
whether they know me or not, that is, whether they teach and live from
the heart and in deed as those who know me and cling to my word; then
the contradiction will be found, that under God\'s name and mine they
lead people away from my word and from faith in me, and put their own
deeds over it. Stay with this guide and certain test, so that you can
conclude for sure and without doubt that you are my Christians and the
right church, and they are not; and do not let their shouting and
boasting deceive you, whether they do not grant you the name and take it
to themselves alone, there is no power in it; it is enough that I grant
it to you and want to keep it, that it should finally remain with you.

\(70\) These things, saith he, I have not wished to say unto you from
the beginning; for hitherto it hath not been necessary, because I have
lived with you. For because you have me with you, they must leave you in
peace, and can do nothing to you, they must have done it to me before;
but now it will come about that I must endure and be crucified, and will
no longer be visible with you, so it will also happen to you that you
must suffer for my sake. Therefore I must tell you, that you remember it
and are prepared against it.

**But now I go to him who sent me, and no one among you asks me, \"Where
are you going? But because I have spoken these things unto you, your
hearts are filled with sorrow. But I tell you the truth, it is good for
you that I go.**

\(71\) He hath sufficiently declared unto them, and hath told them how
they shall fare henceforth in the world, and hath shewed cause why it
was necessary to tell them these things; that they should not be
offended at them, but should know beforehand, or remember afterward, if
it befell them, that they should fare so, after he was taken from them,
and should himself be put to death with shame by his Jews. These things,
saith he, I would not have told you at first, when I took you to be my
disciples,

[642 Eri. so, 4S-44. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S26-W8. 643]{.underline}

and kept in my protection, so that I would not frighten and afflict you.
And if I had stayed with you longer, I would not have said anything of
this kind to you, but would have borne everything alone (as I do now);
but now I am leaving you, I must not leave it unsaid, but must leave you
my word behind me, so that you may know what I think of it, when you are
so shamefully and angrily persecuted and treated by those who want to be
God\'s people and the church, so that you may have a consolation and
stand. But now you are so distressed that you do not understand
anything, nor do you pay attention to what I say to you because of
sadness, yes, even do not ask 2c.

Seventy-two: But what is it that he saith, None of you asketh me,
Whither goest thou? 2c. In the 14th chapter, v. 4, he said to them,
\"Where I am going, you know, and the way you also know\"; and before
that, after the Lord\'s Supper, he had often enough said that one of his
disciples would betray him and deliver him up to death, so that St.
Peter also said to him \[Luc. 22:33\], \"Lord, I will be betrayed and
delivered up to death. Peter also says to him \[Luc. 22, 33.\]: \"Lord,
I will go with you into the dungeon and to death; so also St. Thomas
asked him above, where or which way he would go from them; how then does
he say here the contradiction, that they do not know and are not allowed
to ask? If here the sharp, clever masters (I mean our rough Pabstles)
had heard such things, they would soon find anti-logias, and make Christ
himself repugnant to him, as not knowing or thinking what he speaks. But
there is epitasis^3^ ) and understanding in the word, when he says:
\"whither I go\". As if he should say: You are so completely struck and
frightened by this word, when you hear that I will no longer be with
you, that you do not think, nor do you go into your heart to ask further
where I am going 2c. For if ye knew what it was, ye would not be so
grieved and affrighted. But now, since you know nothing about it, you do
not ask about it, since you ought to ask and investigate what it means
that I am going, so that you may have comfort from it,

1\) Jenaer: not.

2\) Erlanger: es.

3\) i.e. the reprint.

and you are not concerned about my going away.

73\] So they spoke above \[Cap. 14, 5\] quite simple about his going
away, and thus roughly asked about the place and road. But here he
speaks of it in such a way that he wants them to imagine, not how he
will go away, but how perfectly good it is that he goes. Therefore ye
shall not ask,\" he saith, \"what is the way or the highway by which I
go, whether I go again to Bethany, or into the garden; but for what
purpose and why I go away, that is for your good. For such going away is
not for my sake, but for yours. But I must now give you credit that you
regard so little where I am going, and cannot comfort nor rejoice in it,
but are so utterly distraught at hearing how I am going from you that
you can think no further nor ask; and so that which should be to you and
in truth is a comforting thing, is now terrible and repugnant to you.
For you are so used to me, and have me so gladly with you, that nothing
unfortunate can happen to you, but that I should be taken from you.

So he wants to cheer them up and wake them up a little from their
sadness, in which they are drowned, because they hear that he wants
them. For he has been a kind man out of all measure, and they have
rejoiced in him and been glad to have him, so that it must naturally
grieve them to be deprived of such sweet company and friendship,
especially since they are to be left alone and find neither physical
protection nor friendship in his stead, but hear the contradiction that
they are to be condemned, persecuted and tormented in the world, and
especially by their own people. That they would gladly go out if they
could, or if they could because of grief, and complain, \"Are we then to
be abandoned? 5) Whom shall we have in your stead, that we may comfort
ourselves? Therefore, before they begin to ask, he himself answers their
thoughts: \"Oh no, not so, dear disciples, do not think how it will
hurt.

4\) Jenaer: bodily.

5\) Wittenberger: so.

644 **Erl. so, 41-46. Sermon on Joh. 16, 5 7. W. VIII, S28-S3I.** 645

It is natural for you that I leave you, but think how good it is for
you, let us talk a little about what I mean by this; here you should ask
and worry why I am leaving and what it is for you.

For I say to you (he speaks and swears), as true as God is and as I am,
only understand this departure to be much better for you than my
remaining. For if I remain, you have no more in me than a bodily,
natural comfort, and cannot come to the high, great, spiritual regiment
and eternal being. Therefore my going away, which now grieves you so
much, shall be your highest joy. Let me only go away and be highly
afflicted and most shamefully killed, and you are unconcerned, but know
that it happens only to you. For my sake I have no need of you, neither
to come nor to go away, neither to suffer nor to die; but it is
necessary for you and your help, joy and comfort, because I will
accomplish the very thing for which I came. And set up the cause of it
yourselves:

**V. 7 For where I go not, the Comforter cometh not unto you: but if I
go, I will send him unto you.**

\(76\) It is thus proclaimed in the Scriptures, and prophesied by all
the prophets, that Christ shall suffer, die, and be buried, and rise
again, and so begin a new and everlasting kingdom, in which men shall
have eternal life, redeemed from sin, death, and hell. This must be
fulfilled, and the hour is now here for this to happen. For the prophecy
of all the prophets goes to this time, and I am the person who is to
bring this about. Therefore now your joy and salvation begin; only that
you learn to forget my bodily company a little, and wait for the
Comforter. For my kingdom cannot begin, nor the Holy Spirit be given; I
must first die, and depart out of this life; my death and resurrection
shall make all things new in heaven and earth, and establish such a
being, that the Holy Spirit shall reign in all places through the
gospel, and your ministry, that ye should sit (as he saith elsewhere
\[Matth.

19:28) And judge the twelve tribes of Israel, and have rule and
authority over sin and death, unto righteousness and eternal life; that
they all may hear you, and follow you, who desire to be saved. This is
the treasure and the glory which I am to bring to you and to obtain for
you; but it cannot happen to you, I must first bring it to pass, and by
my death pay for it and obtain it.

This is the meaning of these words: \"If I do not depart,\" that is, if
I do not die, and thus come out of this bodily being and life, nothing
will be accomplished, but you will remain as you are now, and everything
will remain in the old nature as it was before and still is: the Jews
under the law of Moses, the Gentiles in their blindness; all under sin
and death, and no one can be redeemed from it nor saved. If therefore no
scripture were fulfilled, and I came in vain, and all things in vain,
which both the holy fathers before you, and ye believed and hoped. \"But
if I go\" and die, and accomplish what God has determined in His counsel
to accomplish by me, the Holy Spirit will come to you and work in you,
and give you such courage that you will be my ministers and co-regents,
turn the whole world around, abolish the law or Judaism, destroy pagan
idolatry, and (as will follow) punish and change all the world, and your
doctrine shall abide and prevail forever, whether it will displease the
devil and all the world. This is the good and the glory, so my going
away brings you.

78\. Therefore, do not be anxious for me to leave you, but where I will
stay and what I will do. Do not think of my going away, but of my coming
to the Father; there you will find all comfort, joy and life for the
sadness and sorrow you now feel at my departure, namely, that I am
coming to take power from the Father, and be the Lord over all, and give
you the Holy Spirit, who will transfigure me in the world; and thus
begin and advance my kingdom through you, which shall never have an end,
and perform such a miraculous work that the devil and the world will be
terrified of it, and the Father and the Holy Spirit will be able to take
power over all things.

646 Erl. so, 46-49. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
M-SS4. 647

be subject to you, and you will help many people and make \[them\]
blessed. All of which would have to remain if I did not go and die.

79 This is the comfort he gives them, teaching them that they should not
look at the present, that he is departing from them and leaving them
alone, but at the future, what he is doing with them through this
passage. Which they cannot see with their physical eyes, but must
believe in him who knows where he comes from and where he is going.
Although it does not yet occur to them to believe that he must give them
credit for it. But he must tell them this beforehand, so that when the
Holy Spirit reminds them of it and puts it into their hearts, they will
understand it all the better, just as they heard it from him.

**V. 8. 9. 10. 11. And when he comes, he will punish the world for sin,
and for righteousness, and for judgment. For sin, that they believe not
on me. And for righteousness, that I go to the Father, and ye see me not
away. For judgment, that the prince of this world may be judged.**

80 Because he gave the promise and the consolation of his departure,
that he would send them the Comforter, who could not come to them unless
he first departed, they might now ask, What then shall the Comforter do
with and through us? To this he hereby answers, and clearly gives him
the office and work, that he should punish the world, and administer
such punishments by the apostle\'s word over the whole world. Say
therefore of his kingdom, which he shall begin on earth after his
ascension, and which shall pass mightily through all the world by the
power of the Holy Ghost, and shall make all things subject unto him; but
that it shall not be a temporal government, that he should smite with
the sword, depose kings and lords, and set up others, or make new order
and judgment, 2c. but such a government as shall be conducted by the
word or ministry of the apostles alone, and yet by such all the world
shall be subject unto him, and brought into obedience. And clearly calls
it such an office, which is called \"to punish the world,\" that is, to
attack all its doings and being,

and tell them that all of them, as they are found, are reprehensible and
unrighteous before God, and must obey their preaching of Christ or be
eternally damned and lost.

So he gives his apostles and preachers of the gospel supreme authority
and power over all authority on earth, that they should and must punish
the world with their preaching, and that all men should be subjected to
this preaching ministry by God, and be punished by it, if they otherwise
want to have God\'s grace and be saved. Now it is much taken in one
bite, and a war begun, which is great and heavy, that the few, lowly,
poor beggars, the apostles, should burden themselves, and set on their
neck the whole world. For what does \"the world\" mean? Not one or two
of your kind, but all emperors, kings, princes, and whatsoever is noble,
rich, great, learned, wise, and anything on earth; all these shall be
punished by this preaching, as the ignorant, unjust, and reprobate
before God, with all their wisdom, righteousness, and ability, which
they have hitherto had and boasted of. Oh how sour and difficult this
will be for the great, mighty, highly learned, wise and holy servants of
God! Therefore it is no wonder that the apostles will be beaten on the
mouth and persecuted, banished and killed. Why do they not keep quiet
and let such people go unpunished?

The world cries out in hostility when this sermon is preached, saying
that it is an annoying, unpleasant sermon, causing discord and
disruption, giving rise to disobedience, indignation and rebellion. And
there is no need to complain. For it is a vexatious thing that preachers
should presume to punish everyone without distinction, and leave no one
anything to be right or good in the sight of God. Who can consider it
right or just that this preaching should cause such turmoil, and change
or innovation, that the whole of the former religion, worship, with so
many beautiful ordinances, and which had stood so long, should be
despised and fall? Especially has this been offensive to the Jews, who
were called God\'s people, the beautiful worship, priesthood, temple,
circumcision 2c..,

648 Erl. so, 49-51. Sermon on John 16:8-11. W. vm, \"N-SR-. 649

1\) and shall be punished with all this, as if it counted for nothing in
the sight of God, and were no better than the heathen, nor were they to
be kept any longer, 2c., and thus shall see that such beautiful rule and
order shall come into contempt and fall, 2c.

And above all, the most vexing thing is that such punishments are not
imposed on high, mighty, learned, or otherwise excellent people, but on
poor, lowly, unknown, despised fishermen, and such people as everyone
takes for beggars or peasants. If only other people would do it, who
have a reputation and are to rule the world, or if they were first
properly consulted, accepted and approved, or (as they now say) decided
by a common council. But that these individual beggars, whom no one
knows where they come from, and no one has asked for them, should appear
without command and leave, and want to rule all the world, and make
innovations: who can suffer or approve of that?

\(84\) Now, here you hear that Christ says, \"The Holy Spirit shall
punish the world,\" and does so through these his messengers; and
therefore not they, but \"the Holy Spirit punishes,\" from which command
and office they preach. And if he did not do it, they would not do it.
For they would not (without it) have the sense to pronounce such
punishment and judgment on the whole world, nor would they have the
courage to stand up and attack the whole world without fear. For they
are not so mad and foolish that they should not see and feel what is in
store for them; as Christ also announced to them enough beforehand that
they must risk life and limb. That they would undoubtedly much rather
remain silent and let the world go unpunished, if it were up to them.
But such a ministry is laid upon them and commanded by the Holy Spirit
that they must do it, and God wills it so. And yet Christ gives them
defiance and consolation, because it is the ministry and work of the
Holy Spirit, so that he will also hold them to it, and with such
punishments he will prevail, and should not be punished by the world.

1\) Wittenbergers: ordered by God Himself and given to them.

The world will be subdued, even though they are already opposing it with
great force, and they are raging and raging, banishing and murdering. As
he also proved by deed, that the world had to let go of the Holy
Spirit\'s sermon, and those who wanted to destroy it, lost their heads
over it, and brought themselves down.

What then is this crying and rumbling against this preaching? as the
chief priests and rulers of Jerusalem, and now the great men of wisdom,
cry, Who shall hear these beggars and vagabonds, which provoke and
mislead the whole world, preaching against the law, against the holy
place, and against the holy people? 6, 13. and Cap. 21:28. Who commanded
them to come out publicly, and to introduce a new preaching? Or, as the
wisest among them now say, \"What is this, to attack the proper
authorities, and to give cause for contempt, disobedience and
indignation?

\(86\) Come now, as I have said, why speakest thou to me about this? It
is not our doing; speak of it to him who said here, \"The Holy Spirit
shall punish the world.\" But if he is to punish, he must not keep
silent, much less pretend and say what they like to hear. If they do not
want to suffer it, the Holy Spirit will not cease to punish them because
of their anger and pestering, but will continue to punish them until
they cease or perish.

If there is strife and indignation here, you say, \"What is the fault of
anyone who will not suffer or obey this preaching of the Holy Spirit?
Who is disobedient here? Those who preach and accept the sermon
according to God\'s command, or those who violently oppose God\'s
command, who want to have the right to do so, and who complain of
disobedience if one does not preach and do what they want? If they
accepted such preaching (as they are obligated to do by God\'s serious
command), as the others do, there would certainly be no strife, but
rather things would already be one, as Christians are among themselves.
But since they run against it with their mad heads, storming and raging,
we must let it happen that they cause strife and tumult, but want to see
who is the

650 Erl. so, SI-53. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SM-M. 651

It is the strongest and leads out its doings. So far, our tabernacles
have so often conspired together and decided to eradicate this doctrine,
or do not want to lay their heads gently. But I hope that they will not
so soon storm from heaven the Holy Spirit, which has hitherto sustained
Christianity and the gospel. If, however, they fail to do so, they will
be overthrown and laid in ashes, as happened before to Rome and
Jerusalem, they will have it.

Now what is it that the Holy Spirit is to punish? Christ counts three
things here, and says that he will punish them \"for sin,\" and \"for
righteousness,\" and \"for judgment,\" and explains himself what he
means. Now these are dark words, and wholly strange speech, to them that
understand not the Scriptures, nor are accustomed. But to those who know
the teaching of the gospel of Christ from the apostles\' Scriptures
(especially this evangelist John), they should not be so strange and
incomprehensible. But let us see them. The first piece shall be this:

**V. 9. because of the sin that they do not believe in me.**

89\. What is this? Is not sin punished and condemned without this in the
world? And who does not know that adultery, murder, stealing and robbing
2c. is wrong? Did not the Gentiles also forbid and punish such things?
What then may one of the Holy Spirit, who punishes sin? But what sin is
this, if he says, \"that they believe not on me\"? Does he know nothing
else to punish? Answer: Of course, he does not speak of the sins that
the world recognizes and punishes; which he sufficiently shows just with
these words, \"that they do not believe in me. For who has ever heard
that this is the sin which condemns all the world, not believing in this
Christ?

\(90\) Therefore, to speak of sins and to punish sins is much different
than the world understands and can speak. For since he shows that this
punishment of sin is to go over all the world in general and without
distinction, and that no one is to be exempt, whoever he may be: it
follows that the sins for which all men are punished by the Holy Spirit
are to be punished by the Holy Spirit.

The sins must be different from those that are public and recognized by
the world. For these cannot be punished, since there are many people who
live in such a way that no one can reproach or blame them, but all the
world must praise them as pious, honorable, even holy people who not
only avoid sin, but also practice fine honorable conduct and good works.
But if you ask, \"What sin do they have, or what is the punishment for
them?\" Christ answers, \"that they do not believe in me. There it is
briefly stated, which makes them all sinners and condemns them, and all
is summed up in one thing, that they are apart from the faith or
knowledge of Christ. This is decided briefly and roundly under sin, so
that one must not search long and ask which, or what kind of sin is to
be punished in each one, or how many and various sins there may be.
There thou hast it all in one word, that it is this one, which is
punished in all at the same time, and is the sin of all the world, that
they are apart from Christ, or have not faith.

91\. Therefore the opinion of these words is brief, that the Holy Spirit
shall judge all men, as they are found on earth, whether they be
Gentiles or Jews, blameworthy or blameless in the sight of the world,
and all their doings and conduct (even that which they think best and
most holy), that they are and must remain under God\'s wrath and
condemnation, and cannot be helped from it, unless they believe in
Christ. Now let them come and boast, whoever they can, of their own or
other people\'s piety, virtues, good works and holy lives, so you will
hear here that it is of no avail if the Holy Spirit blows and blows in
with His breath, that is, through this preaching ministry (as Isaiah,
Cap. 40, 7., says). For this punishment comes upon them all, so that all
their glory must fall, and all their doings and being cannot help them
before God.

92\) So he does through St. Paul soon in the beginning of the epistle to
the Romans, where he casts both Jews and Gentiles all under sin, and
says: the gospel was revealed from heaven for this reason, that all the
world must acknowledge itself guilty of sins. For here (saith he \[Cap.
3, 23.,\]) is no distinction; they are

[652 **Erl. so, \[s-ss. Sermon on John 16:8-11. W. VIII, 5W-S41.**
653]{.underline}

all sinners in particular, and lack the glory that God should have in
them. With the word is struck down the glory and hope of all men 2c.
They may have the glory that they are mighty, noble, learned, fine,
praiseworthy rulers, honest, pious people, and are also called holy
before the world, and, as St. Paul gives to the Jews, the glory and
advantage that they are God\'s people, children of the holy patriarchs,
have God\'s law and promise, and Christ should be born of them; but what
is all such glory if they do not have the glory they should have before
God? What do they have if they do not have GOD? That 1) it must be
eternally lost with them.

You speak like this: How can this be done? What is the fault of this, so
that it is not valid in the sight of God? Are all these things to be
condemned, that they are fine, honorable, pious people, govern well and
praiseworthily, do not steal, rob, commit adultery, 2c., but live
chastely, demurely, obediently, and do many good works according to the
law? are they not all fine gifts from God and praiseworthy virtues?
Answer: Yes, we say so, too, and teach that God has commanded and
ordained such things, so that one may live and be pious. Why then is it
punished here and made sins? Answer: Here is another judge, who judges
all men\'s lives and beings, and has much sharper eyes to see and punish
sin than we men understand or think. This one says that they are all
sinners and to punish sin. We should believe this, and let him be right
and true; for he also punishes us for this very blindness, that we
neither see nor recognize this (that we are sinners before God with all
our lives).

But you must know that he is not speaking here of the outward life and
nature of men, so that the world can judge and pass judgment, but reach
into the right ground, namely, into the heart of man, which is the
fountain and well, in which are the true capital sins, namely, false
worship, contempt of God, unbelief, disobedience, evil desire and
reluctance to resist.

1\) Erlanger: da.

God\'s commandment, and in short, St. Paul\'s Rom. 8, 7. is called
\"being carnally minded\", and gives it the title and glory that it \"is
enmity against God, and cannot be subject to the law of God\". This is
the stem and root of all other sins, and precisely the grievous
inherited damage of Adam from Paradise, that where this would not be
there, there would never be any theft, murder, adultery 2c. Now the
world sees such outward evil things well, yes, wonders and complains
about it that people are so evil, but does not know how it happens. It
sees the water flowing and the fruit and leaves of the evil tree
sprouting everywhere, but it does not know where the source comes from
or where the root is. She goes after it and wants to advise the matter,
control wickedness, and make the people righteous with laws and
punishments. But even if she resists for a long time, it will not help.
She may ward off the water, but the main source is not warded off; the
shoots may be cut off, but nothing is taken from the root.

Now it is lost, it does not do, if you fight, mend and heal on the
outside for a long time, and yet the trunk, root and source of evil
remain on the inside; first of all the source must be stopped and the
root taken from the tree, otherwise it breaks and tears out in ten
places, where you stop and fight in one. For this reason, it must be
healed, otherwise you may spread it forever and smear it with smoldering
2) and plaster, it will fester and fester 3) again and again, and will
only get worse. Summa, experience teaches, and the world must confess,
that it cannot prevent even the outward gross vices and evil deeds,
although it controls and punishes them with all diligence, as it should
do; much less can it take away the sin that is inwardly in nature and is
the right main sin (if it does not know it).

96 Therefore such sin remains in all the world, and this judgment goes
over everything that may be lived and done by all men, as they are born
from Adam, it is called evil or good, right or wrong before the world,

2\) \"Smolder\" perhaps ointment? The word reminds of the English suot.

3\) In the \"old\" editions: schwird.

654 Eri. so, SS-L7. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S4I-S44. 655

and here no one can disrobe or boast before another, but are all equal
before God, and must all confess themselves guilty and worthy of eternal
death and damnation, and would also have to remain eternally in the
same, and there would be no counsel or help for any creature against
this, where God would deal with us according to our merit and His right.

97\. But now, since he had mercy on this affliction out of causeless
goodness, he had to send Christ, his dear Son, from heaven to take our
sin and condemnation upon himself, and to pay for it by the sacrifice of
his body and blood, and to reconcile God against us. And he commanded
this to be proclaimed in all the world, and to present this Christ to
all people, so that they may keep their faith in him, if they want to
come from sin, God\'s wrath and eternal condemnation, to redemption and
reconciliation, and into God\'s kingdom. So this sermon does two things.
First, it reproves all the world that they are all under sin and wrath,
condemned by the law, and demands that we recognize this; second, it
shows how we may obtain redemption from it and grace with God, namely
through this one means, that we take hold of Christ with faith. 2c.

But when such a sermon is preached, then the real sin is found, which is
mentioned here and which constitutes it, namely, \"that they do not
believe in me. For the world does not want to hear such preaching, that
they should all be sinners before God, and that their sanctity is of no
value before Him, and that they must attain grace and salvation through
this crucified Christ alone. Such unbelief against Christ will lead to
sin, which will lead man to condemnation, so that he cannot be helped.

Otherwise, unbelief was the main sin in all people, also in Paradise it
was the beginning and the first, and it remains the last of all sins.
For since Adam and Eve had God\'s word to believe, and in it (as long as
they clung to it) they also had God and life, they were first challenged
with unbelief.

against the same word. Do you think (said the serpent to Eve \[Gen. 3,
1\]) that God should have said that you should not eat from all kinds of
trees in the garden? There he first of all overthrew her faith, that she
should let go of the word, and not regard it as God\'s word. For he was
not primarily concerned with the bite of the forbidden apple, but with
leading them from faith (in which they lived before God) into unbelief,
from which disobedience and all sin must follow as its fruit.

Here, not only the unbelief planted in human nature by Adam is
attracted, but clearly such unbelief that one does not believe in
Christ, namely, when the gospel of Christ is preached that we should
recognize our sin and seek and obtain grace through Christ. For after
Christ came, he took away the sin of Adam and the whole human race
(namely, the former unbelief and disobedience) before God by his
suffering and death, and built a new heaven of grace and forgiveness, so
that such sin as was inherent in us from Adam should not henceforth keep
us under God\'s wrath and condemnation, if we believe in this Savior.
And it shall henceforth be said: He who is condemned must not complain
about Adam and his inherent sin, for this seed of the woman (promised by
God to crush the head of the serpent) has now come and paid for such sin
and taken away the condemnation, but must cry out over his own neck that
he has not accepted this Christ, the devil\'s head crusher and sin
strangler, nor believed in him.

\(101\) Therefore, if a man is condemned, the burden is on his own
person, and it is his own fault; not because he is a sinner and worthy
of condemnation because of Adam and his former unbelief, but because he
does not want to accept this Savior, Christ, who cancels our sin and
condemnation (1). It is true that Adam condemned us all, when he put us
with him into sin and the devil\'s power.

1\) Wittenberger: \"aufhelt\", a printing error.

656 **Erl. so, 57-so. Sermon on John 16:8-11. W. VIII, S44-S47.** 657

But now Christ, the other Adam, has come, born without sin, and takes it
away, it no longer has to condemn me (if I believe in him), but \[I\]
shall be freed from it and saved through him. But if I do not believe,
the same sin and condemnation must remain, because he who is to redeem
me from it is not taken; indeed, it is only a twofold greater and more
grievous sin and condemnation that I do not believe in this dear Savior,
through whom I am to be saved, nor do I want to accept his redemption.

So now all our salvation and damnation, both of them, depends on whether
we believe in Christ or not, and the judgment has already finally been
passed, which closes heaven and denies it to all who do not have this
faith in Christ, nor want to accept it. For this unbelief retains all
sin, so that it cannot obtain forgiveness, just as faith cancels all
sin, and thus apart from such faith everything is and remains sin and
damnable, even in the best life and works that a man can do; which,
although they are praiseworthy in themselves and commanded by God, are
nevertheless corrupted by unbelief, so that for its sake they cannot
please God, just as in faith all the works and life of a Christian
please God. Summa, apart from Christ all things are condemned and lost,
in Christ all things are good and blessed, so that even sin (which still
remains in the flesh and blood of Adam) does not have to harm or
condemn.

\(103\) But this is not to be understood as giving leave to sin freely
and do evil. For since faith brings forgiveness of sins, and Christ has
come to take away and blot out sin, it is not possible that he should be
a Christian and believer who lives openly and unrepentantly, secure in
sins and according to his lusts. For where such a sinful life is, there
is no repentance; but where there is no repentance, there is no
forgiveness of sins, and therefore no faith to receive forgiveness of
sins. But he who has faith in such forgiveness resists sin and follows
its lusts.

1\) Erlanger: well.

but fights against it until he gets rid of them completely.

104\. although we cannot be rid of all sin in this life, and sin still
remains, even in the holy of holies, believers have the comfort that it
is covered by the forgiveness of Christ and is not counted as
condemnation, as long as they remain in the faith of Christ. And so, as
Paul says in Romans 8:1, \"There is nothing condemnable in those who are
in Christ, who do not walk according to the flesh,\" 2c., item Galatians
5:24, \"Those who belong to Christ crucify their flesh with their
lusts.\" Behold, to these it is said, that sin shall not hurt nor
condemn them; but to others, who are without faith and reprobate,
nothing is preached here.

**V. 10. For righteousness, that I go to the Father, and ye see me not
away.**

\(105\) These also are strange, strange sayings and incomprehensible
words in the ears of the world. \"Righteousness\" is called in the world
and according to all reason such a rule and being, if one lives
according to laws and commandments (so both, Moses or emperor, lords or
parents order and command); and \"righteous\" are called those who are
obedient to such commandments. Such justice and righteousness is not
rejected or abrogated here, for it is also commanded by God, and He
wants it to be upheld in the world (for without it the world\'s
government cannot exist), so that injustice and wrongdoing may be
punished, and again what is right and good may be defended, honored and
rewarded.

But how do these words rhyme with such righteousness, as Christ says
here, \"that I go to the Father, and ye see me not\"? Who has ever heard
that this is called righteousness? How does this help people to be pious
and obedient? Were there not also righteous men before, especially among
the Jews, and afterward also among the Gentiles, who ruled nobly and
well, protected and preserved justice, punished evil, 2c. before Christ
came or was made known? And what else does he do after he has gone to
heaven? He lets lords and princes rule as they themselves know and
consider good, and the people obey them.

658 Erl. so, 60-ss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S47-54S. 659

But these words sufficiently indicate that Christ does not speak here of
external, worldly righteousness, which is valid and necessary in this
life, and which Moses, or lawyers and philosophers teach in their books,
and men can do according to their ability. For just as above \[v. 9\] he
does not speak of such sins as the world calls sin and punishes, but of
all these, even of that which is good and rightly done in the sight of
the world, and brings all things into the one which is called not
believing in him: so also here he speaks of much 1) other righteousness
(which is to apply in the sight of God), for the world recognizes it,
and sets it far and high above all life that may be done on earth, and
also includes it in itself alone. So that both sin (which condemns the
world with all its essence) alone without and against Christ, through
unbelief, and righteousness before God alone in and on Christ, should
stand, and thus be called: \"That I go to the Father, and you see me no
more.\"

For enough has been said above \[§ 90 ff.\], how all men are cast under
sin and damnation, with all their lives, and so are called good and
praiseworthy in the sight of all the world, having done so according to
the ten commandments. If this is true, where is righteousness, or how
can it be attained? \[Christ answers here: 2) This is righteousness,
that I go to the Father 2c. There you must seek it and find it; not with
you, nor on earth with men, be they who and how they will. For
Christians should know no other righteousness, that they may stand
before God and be justified, obtain forgiveness of sins and eternal
life, than this going of Christ to the Father, which is nothing else (as
often said), but that he took our sin upon his neck, and for its sake
let himself be killed on the cross, buried and gone to hell; but did not
remain under sin nor death and hell, but passed through his resurrection
and ascension, and now reigns mightily at the right hand of the Father
over all creatures.

Now he did not make such a journey to the Father for his own sake,

1\) \"one\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) In the old editions: Answer allhie Christ.

nor for his person, for that would not help us and could not be called
our righteousness, but as he came down from heaven for our sake, and
became our blood and flesh, so also for our sake he went up again,
having completed the victory over sin, death and hell, and entered into
3) dominion, thereby redeeming us from all these, and giving forgiveness
of sin, power and victory against the devil and death; and reigns so
that his kingdom or regiment is called and is righteousness, that is, in
which sin and injustice before God must be put away, people must become
righteous before God and pleasing to him.

Now this righteousness is secret and hidden, not only from the world and
from reason, but also from the saints. For it is not a thought, word, or
work in ourselves (as the Sophists dreamed of grace, that it was an
infused thing in our hearts), but altogether apart from and above us,
namely, the going of Christ to the Father (that is, his passion and
resurrection or ascension). And the same is put out of our sight and
sight, so that we cannot see or feel it, but must only grasp it with
faith, the word that is preached about Him, that He Himself is our
righteousness, as St. Paul 1 Cor. 1:30 says, \"that He was given to us
by God for wisdom, 4) righteousness, and sanctification and
redemption,\" so that we may not boast about ourselves, but only about
this Lord before God.

\(110\) This is a strange righteousness, that we should be called
righteous, or have righteousness, which is not a work, or a thought, or
even anything in us, but is altogether apart from us in Christ, and yet
is truly ours by his grace and gift, and is as much our own as if it had
been obtained and acquired by ourselves. Of course, no reason could
understand this language to mean righteousness, since I do nothing, nor
suffer anything, nor think anything, nor feel anything, and there is
nothing in me to please God and make me blessed, but apart from me and
all men\'s thoughts,

3\) \"in\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

4\) The words: \"wisdom\" and \"and salvation\" are missing in the
Erlanger.

660 **Erl. so, W-S4. Sermon on Joh. 16, 8-11. W. VIII, S4S-SS2.** 661

I am not a man of works or fortune, but I cling to Christ, seated at the
right hand of God, whom I do not see.

\(111\) But faith must grasp these things and base itself on them, and
be comforted in temptation, when the devil and his own conscience argue
with him, \"Listen, what kind of Christian are you? Where is your
righteousness? Do you not see and feel that you are a sinner? How will
you stand before God? That he should base himself on this saying, and
say: I know very well that I, unfortunately, have sin, and that I have
no righteousness (which should be valid before God); I should not and
will not seek it nor know it in myself, because with it I would never be
able to come before God. But here I hear that Christ says that my
righteousness is that he has gone to the Father and ascended to heaven.
There it is placed, where the devil must let it remain, for he will not
make Christ a sinner, nor punish or reprove his righteousness. If I am a
sinner, and my life does not stand before God, and I find no
righteousness in myself, but I have another treasure, which is my
righteousness, in which I boast and glory. This is Christ\'s walk with
the Father, which He has given and bestowed upon me. What is lacking in
it, or what can you find fault with it? Yes, yet you see and feel
nothing of it. Answer: Yes, this is how he himself interprets and
describes righteousness, that I should not feel it, but grasp it by
faith in this word of Christ, when he says, \"That you should not see
me. What else could I do with faith, where I could see such things
presently, or feel and sense them in myself?

\(112\) Therefore learn this saying well, that thou mayest make a thin
distinction therefrom between the righteousness which is called
Christ\'s, and all other things that may be called righteousness. For
here thou hearest that the righteousness which Christ saith of is not
our work nor our doing, but his going or ascension. Now it is clear and
obvious that the two are far and distant from each other. Our work is
not Christ; so his going is not our doing nor our work. For what have I
or

1\) \"the\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

What has a man done to go to the Father, that is, to suffer and die and
rise again and sit at the right hand of God? It is not called my
obedience and good works, even done according to the ten commandments,
much less my own chosen worship and works of man, monasticism,
pilgrimage, my own devotion 2c. That even though someone does not
understand these words, which mean \"going to the Father,\" he hears and
understands this well, that it is not, nor can be, our work or doing,
but is given to Christ alone and is placed entirely in his person.

113\. From this you see how shamefully we have hitherto erred and been
deceived under the papacy, that we have neither known nor taught
anything of such righteousness, which is Christ with his going to the
Father, but have pointed the people of Christ straight to ourselves, and
have placed our comfort and trust in our own works, yes, to this end we
have made of Christ a terrible judge, whom we had to reconcile with our
works, Mary\'s and the saints\' intercession, and with our repentance or
satisfaction put away sin and acquire righteousness. We are all in such
blindness and misery that we have known nothing of Christ to comfort us,
but, like the heathen, have looked for everything in ourselves, and thus
said (as was also said to us on the preaching platform): \"May God grant
me my life, that I may atone for my sin. These are vain words of the
Turks, Jews and Papists, for there is nothing about Christ and His way,
but everything is drawn to ourselves, and taught about our correction.

\(114\) It is true that we should improve and live differently, do good
and leave evil behind, but such improvement and living does not achieve
and does not do what Christ\'s walk is supposed to do, namely, that we
might thereby become righteous and blessed before God; it is far too
weak and too little for that of all the saints\' lives and works and of
all men\'s abilities. For all is still no more than earthly, transient
being, which must end with us and remain here. And although our deeds
and works, done according to God\'s commandments (in those who have
faith), are pleasing to God, and He also wants to reward them, both
temporally and eternally, yet it is not possible for it to be

662 Erl. so, \"t-os. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SS2-SSS. 663

should bring us to God and be called such righteousness that helps us
from sins and death. There is no other consolation but this walk of
Christ, which is our chief good and inheritance, finite defiance and
eternal righteousness.

**V. 11. For the judgment that the prince of this world is judged.**

\(115\) Here also it is not said of a worldly court, as it judges in its
matters concerning body and goods, land and people, (2c) but is a
spiritual judgment, which concerns the souls and consciences.

This piece now follows from the next. For where justice goes, there must
also be judgment, since justice has two parts: Relief and punishment. By
help the innocent is saved and handled; by punishment injustice and evil
are resisted and controlled. Therefore, just as the world is punished
for righteousness (which is valid in the sight of God), because it
neither has it nor wants to accept it, but defends other righteousnesses
of its own, so it should also be punished for judgment, because it
subjects itself to punish and condemn in matters that it does not
understand, nor does it have the right and power to punish. For here it
stands out, when such things are preached and taught by the punitive
ministry of the Holy Spirit, that all men are under sin, and apart from
Christ there is no counsel nor help against it, and no righteousness
before God, except in Christ. This the world cannot and will not hear
nor suffer; it sets about to condemn this preaching and to persecute all
who hold to it and confess it, and wants to have such judgment, or
judgment and punishment, right and just, as if it were doing it for
God\'s sake; and for this purpose it uses the name of the Christian
church, as we have just said (\[§ 4 ff.\], where he says \[v. 2\],
\"they will put you under ban,\" and \"he who kills you will think he is
doing God service\").

For here the world wants to be the master, and Satan wants to be God
himself, and they are under the authority to speak and judge what is
right or wrong, to punish or to accept in divine matters. For it goes to
and condemns the apostles and the Gospel preaching, and all who are
attached to it, in the abyss of the

Hell, and does so by its supreme, ordinary power, right and authority,
given to it by God to punish the wicked, which it uses against God and
His Christians to destroy the preaching of the Gospel. So then the two
judgments run together here, that the Holy Spirit judges and punishes
the world by his preaching, as has been said; but the world sets itself
against it, will not hear it nor suffer it, presumes to judge, and says
that it is not God\'s but the devil\'s preaching and teaching, since it
not only has just cause not to accept it, but is also guilty of
condemning, resisting and exterminating on account of its judicial
office (that is, God\'s and righteousness\').

\(118\) Well then, we must let the two, God\'s and the world\'s,
together with their prince, the devil\'s, judgment, go against each
other and collide, and consider and wait for it, and suffer for the sake
of God and his word, that they condemn us, persecute us, and, where they
can, also execute and murder us, for the service of their God (2c). But
in this we have the consolation that the Lord Christ has provided and
equipped us beforehand, as we also need (otherwise it would be too
difficult for us to bear such judgment and condemnation), that Christ
promises not only that the Holy Spirit will punish the world through
us 1) for sin and righteousness, and also for judgment, but also that He
will preserve His own in this, and lead out such judgment or punitive
office, against their counter-judgment and condemnation, that it will
finally remain with His judgment.

119 This is when he says, \"the prince of this world is already judged.
First, we hear and are assured that we should know for certain that such
judgment and condemnation of the world is not God\'s or the church of
Christ\'s judgment and sentence, as the world claims and wants to have
held, but is called the devil\'s judgment and is already condemned by
God; and we should also consider it to be unjust and condemned, and not
turn anything against it, nor follow nor obey such judgment of the
world, but let ourselves be happily condemned, and let this judgment or
condemnation of the world be our own.

1\) Wittenberger: so.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

664 Erl. so, \"6-68. Sermon on John 16:8-11. W. VIII, \[ss-SS7. 665

nce again, Christ speaks to condemn the world with its prince.

I say this because now some bishops and priests, knowing nothing else,
and having to confess that our teaching is right and the Holy
Scriptures, nevertheless drool against it, and pretend that because it
has not yet been confirmed by concilio, and the authorities do not
accept it or do not want to keep it, it should not apply, because one
must be obedient to the authorities, and whoever opposes it, is
insubordinate 2c.

\(121\) Yes, they should be ordered to make the authorities and men
judges of God\'s word, and we should have freedom and be excused 1) from
accepting or confessing it if the authorities did not want it. Thus it
is said: Not the world, prince or emperor, but the Holy Spirit shall be
judge by the word; but the world shall be punished and judged, and
follow such judgment. But if they oppose it, and want to judge and
condemn God\'s word themselves, and command us to keep up with them, we
are to know that such judgment is condemned and of the devil, and we are
to resist it (as condemned by God), and say: Dear prince, emperor and
world, I am well under your power with body and goods, and as far as
your rule over 2) body and goods is concerned, I shall and will gladly
be obedient; but if you want to reach further into God\'s rule (since
you should not nor can be judge, but let yourself be judged, together
with me and all creatures, by his word), then I shall and will not
follow you, but do just the opposite (so that I may be obedient to him,
and stay with his word). For if I were to be obedient to you, I would
have condemned myself, along with you, by God\'s word, because Christ
concludes here, saying, \"Whatever the prince of the world judges about
God\'s word is already condemned, and whoever wants to condemn you above
it is also condemned and condemned by God. 2c.

122 On the other hand, he also gives us the comfort that the Holy
Spirit, with his judgment

1\) Wittenberger: innocent.

2\) The words: \"with body and goods, and what your regiment about\" are
missing in the Wittenberg: instead: \"and so much mine\".

We must be emphatic and penetrating against the world\'s judgment and
condemnation, so that we will not be terrified by the world and the
devil\'s power, and by their wrathful threat and terror. For Christ
speaks here very hopefully and defiantly. Not only, he says, shall
emperors, kings, princes, or others who storm against God\'s word be
condemned with their judgment, but the prince of the world himself, who
has more power and strength in the least little finger than all the
world put together. And the gospel shall not be the judge of flesh and
blood alone, nor of some of Satan\'s angels or devils alone, but of the
prince himself, who has the whole world mightily in his bands, and is
the most wise, the most powerful, and also the most wrathful enemy of
God and his Christians, that against him are nothing, all that is great,
mighty, and evil among men. Nor shall this word condemn not only the
world\'s highest understanding, wisdom and power, but also the wisdom
and power that the ruler of the world himself has and is able to have.

\(123\) Yes, he says, there must be no further judgment nor knowledge;
he is already condemned that the Christians, who have God\'s word and
judge according to it, should pass judgment against him and press on
until he is finally overthrown. For such judgment against him has
already been won and confirmed; indeed, he has long since been given
over to it, and is fastened and kept in the chains and bands of
damnation. And nothing more is needed than for such a judgment and
condemnation to be revealed and finally executed before all the world,
so that he, eternally cast into hell with all his members, can no longer
challenge God\'s word and Christianity. Therefore, we must not be afraid
of their judgment and condemnation, nor turn away from it, because we
have heard that it should not harm us, but is already powerless,
condemned by God\'s judgment, that they should neither create nor
accomplish anything against us, even though they rage most wrathfully
against us with their condemnation, persecution and murder, but in turn,
must finally and eternally remain under the condemnation, so that both,
by God and by us, who judge according to and by God\'s word, pass over
them.

666 Erl. so, \"8-70. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SS7-S60. 667

And yet Christianity shall retain the supreme court and remain before
them, as it has remained so far, both against the devil and the world.

**V. 12. I still have much to tell you, but you cannot bear it now.**

\(124\) He would gladly, the dear Lord, strengthen and prepare the
disciples for what will happen to them in the world after his departure,
and comfort them with what the Holy Spirit will accomplish through them.
But he sees that he cannot speak it into their hearts with words now,
until the Holy Spirit himself comes and puts them into office; then they
will learn and experience it well. Therefore he will break off now, and
what he cannot do with words now, he will command to the Holy Spirit,
who shall abundantly repay, and teach them all things well, which they
could not understand nor bear now, and keep them in the truth until the
end.

But this text has been forcefully dragged and tortured by the pope\'s
teachers to strengthen and confirm their lie. And although they
themselves are now beginning to be ashamed, and not so much as crying
out with it, we must also say something about it, so that we keep the
text pure, and the error remains in the day, so that one does not forget
how shamefully it has been perverted up to now by ours 1). They have
drawn these comforting words, as he speaks of the suffering and
consolation of his Christians, to their human commandments, so that
Christianity might be filled with them, so that everything they said
should have been taken for articles of faith and necessary for
salvation, which do not belong to the kingdom of Christ at all, and the
Holy Spirit has nothing to do with them. But that we may make this
clear, let us first see the opinion of the Lord Christ.

There are two kinds of human life on earth. One is a fine, gentle, quiet
and calm 2) life; the other is a sour, heavy and sorrowful life, full of
misery and heartache. This difference is well understood, and everyone
knows that a hungry and thirsty person is much different in mind and
life than one who is full and has enough.

1\) Wittenbergers: through our adversaries.

2\) In the old editions: rüglichem.

He who is rich and full speaks nothing but of vain great things; but he
who is hungry asks not much for kingdom or great things, is glad when he
gets a piece of bread. Now Christ alone speaks to those who suffer
hardship and adversity, who are oppressed in the world, 3) who are
troubled, persecuted, and afflicted. To these he says this for comfort,
as he knows and understands their mind and courage, and must direct and
judge his speech and words according to their mind, saying: \"I would
have much to say to you, because I must leave you behind me; but it is
not yet time, and you are still too weak to do so. 4) If I were to tell
you everything at length about how you are to be persecuted and what you
are to suffer because of the preaching that the Holy Spirit will do
through you, it would frighten you too much, especially because now my
suffering is about to begin, and you will see and have your greatest
sorrow in it. Therefore, I will refrain from saying more about it until
the Holy Spirit comes, who will strengthen you and give you such courage
that you will be able to bear it all. This is the right simple mind of
this text, that it speaks of the future suffering, which they should
have after his departure. Of this he says: I have much to say to you.
What much? Namely, much suffering, affliction, persecution, heartache
from the devil and the world.

Now the pope comes here with his sophists, and thus inverts this text: I
still have much to tell you. What much? Well, Christ has laid down too
few commandments for Christendom; therefore the Holy Spirit, through the
pope and bishops, has to command and lay down much more. Christ wants to
say: You will have to suffer much when the Holy Spirit will punish the
world through you, and more than I can tell you now, or you can bear.
Thus says the pope: You must have many more commandments laid upon you.

128 Truly, a fine gloss for such a master, for he sits there in peace
and good tranquility, wants to rule unhindered over all the world, that
as he does, so it must be done, and everyone must fear and honor him.
Dar-

3\) Erlanger: and.

4\) In the Wittenberg is inserted here: As if he should say.

668 **Erl. 50, 70-7S. Sermon On Joh. 16, 12. W. VIII, SS0-SS2.** 669

He thinks and speaks nothing else than what serves him for this purpose;
he turns Christ\'s words around, which are said to the poor, the
afflicted, the suffering, who need consolation, and he does not want to
burden them nor afflict them more than they already are and can bear.
The same words he uses as an anti-Christian to weigh down the
consciences with laws, commandments and supercommands, none of which
Christ has ever laid down, and even forbidden to interpret. So finely
can he interpret the Scriptures and rhyme them together that when Christ
says: I have much suffering to proclaim to you, 2c., this must mean: We
popes and bishops have power to command and forbid, to call, drive and
torture; and all this is supposed to have been done by the Holy Spirit.
And that only much, much, as if no measure were set for them, but what
and how much they themselves want, that should and must be kept, with
loss of blessedness.

But let us keep the text pure and stick to it, since Christ speaks of it
here. For in this whole sermon he has said nothing about laws and
commandments that are to be laid upon them, but has said everything
about their suffering, which they must have for his sake, and about the
comfort they are to have in suffering. How then would he come to say
that this \"much, if he had yet to say,\" and now does not want to say,
but commands the Holy Spirit, should mean what he has not commanded nor
ordered? It is just as if he had told them too little and not enough
about what serves the Christian life, since he says that he has 2) still
told them too little, both about suffering and consolation, of which he
has spoken much through these three chapters; but because they do not
yet understand it, and cannot grasp it, it is still little compared to
what the Holy Spirit himself is to teach them, when it now comes about
that they are to experience it. There they will be taught and
strengthened in such a way that no suffering will be too hard for them,
but they will be able to bear and overcome everything (for which they
were much too stupid and frightened now), and will not only go into a
dungeon, but through a hundred dungeons and death.

130 Behold, such clear words and certain understanding can and will our
pabstrotts.

1\) Wittenberger: \"denn das zu eim solchem\".

2\) Wittenberger: as if he spoke, he would have.

do not look at. For it is not a sermon for them, since one says of
suffering and spiritual comfort, but want to have peace, honor and power
on earth. Therefore this text must give them the very antithesis of what
Christ says to his Christians; not much of suffering and comfort (as he
says of), but only much making law, commanding and ordering that people
be kept in obedience to the church 2c. And have brought it to this, that
the pope could not set up, dream and pretend anything, also public
deception, as, with his indulgences, purgatory, pilgrimages, caps and
plates, saint service 2c., it all had to be from the Holy Spirit,
although they themselves have to say, it is not in the Gospel, and
Christ has not said anything about it 2c.

131 Now he speaks 3) here: I, I still have much to tell you. Who is the
I? It is not called the pope, but Christ and the pope are two different
things. The pope is not to be like Christ or his lord, so that he may
command, teach or order more than Christ, but so he is to say: He has
commanded me his word, this I am to preach, and no more; you are not to
believe me, nor I you, but this word of the Lord we are all to hear and
believe at the same time. Now he has 4) abundantly spoken all things
concerning doctrine and faith and Christian life, as he himself says
before in the 15th chapter, v. 15: \"All things whatsoever I have heard
of the Father, these have I 5) made known unto you\"; that also the Holy
Spirit cannot teach other things or new things, nor should he; as he
also says afterwards: \"He will transfigure me\". Item, above Cap. 14,
26: \"All that I have told you, He will remind you\" 2c.

132\) And is it not an impudent blasphemy, and dishonor of the Holy
Spirit, that they draw and interpret this beautiful text, which speaks
of vain spiritual things, which no human reason understands (nor did the
apostles themselves understand at that time), to vain outward things, of
eating, or fasting, or dressing, and whatsoever more of the foolish
things they ordain and set; which is to say, that they do not understand
it.

3\) \"yes\" is missing in the Jena.

4\) Wittenberger: \"Christ\" instead of: he.

5\) \"euch\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

6\) In the Wittenberg and in the Jena: \"verschampte\".

670 Erl. so, 73-75. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
see-sss. 671

What is the great and difficult thing that even the apostles could not
have borne, how to make law and order out of external ceremonies, which
were not set up until long after the apostles? What great and heavy
thing should this be, which even the apostles could not have endured,
how to make law and order from outward ceremonies, which were not
established until long after the apostles? Rather, what the apostles
could not have endured, we will much less endure, nor understand without
the Holy Spirit. Therefore it must be much other than our human
condition, which the pope and bishops ordain at their pleasure, and
charge every Christian to observe in his blessedness.

133 Therefore it is clear that this \"much,\" if he does not say it now
and commands the Holy Spirit, is not about new or different doctrines,
laws, worship, etc., but about how they are to fare in and above all
this, what they both suffer, and how they are to be comforted and
strengthened in it. The teaching is what they are to believe and suffer,
and how they are to be directed to it; but that these things may come to
pass, and that they may have patience and comfort in sufferings, these
things the Holy Spirit is to teach them further, and to show them in
present experience, and so to remind them of those things which he has
now only briefly shown them in words. This is the ministry of the Holy
Spirit, which is why he is called a comforter; not one who deals with
laws, territories, and hot affairs, but one who comforts and sustains
believing and suffering Christians, as we will hear further on.

**But when he, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all
truth.**

He calls the Holy Spirit a \"spirit of truth\", contrary to the spirit
of lies (as mentioned above in chapter 14, 297 ff.), who is to teach
them and show them that what Christ has told them is the truth. For it
is such a spirit that confirms the truth in the heart and makes it
certain, as 1 John 2:27 says: \"As the anointing teaches you all things,
they are true and not lies. Therefore he wants to say here: You would
never understand it through yourselves nor believe it, even though you
already know much about it.

hear that it must be and go as I have now told you, and that such is the
truth and right, which is to be preached by me through you; you would
also never have the courage to approach such preaching, or to stay with
it, if the Holy Spirit himself did not come and guide you in such truth,
and also keep you in it. For now it is far too hard for you, that you
cannot bear it; and when you shall see it come to pass with me, ye shall
all be offended at it, and fall from me.

For who would ever have thought or believed that the dear preaching of
the gospel would be like that which the apostles experienced and saw,
and which experience gives us even now in our time? Yes, who would have
begun to preach, if we had known beforehand that so much unhappiness,
redness, anger, blasphemy, ingratitude and wickedness would follow? But
now that we are in it, we must stand up and learn these things, and see
that it is not man\'s doing nor strength, but the Holy Spirit Himself
must do and sustain it; otherwise we would not be the people who could
bear and carry out such things. So St. Paul himself shows in 1 Cor. 4,
9. 13. that he also had to learn and experience this (after he had
preached long and much), that the apostles must not only be a mockery
and a spectacle before all the world, but a curse and a sacrifice of
sweepings, which are considered to be the most harmful pestilence and
plagues on earth. For this purpose, he must suffer that the devil,
through his hordes and false spirits, has cut apart his little group of
Christians and at once eradicated and destroyed 1) what he had planted
and built for a long time. Who would call this the truth (if one were to
ask reason about it and speak of it according to human wisdom), or the
2) Christian church and the Holy Spirit\'s rule, since it happens in
this way? But Christ says to him: Dear Paule, so you must learn what my
power is, 2 Cor. 12, 9. item, to Anania (whom he sent to Paulo), Apost.
9, 16, he speaks of Paulo: \"I will show him-.

1\) Wittenbergers: \"zertrenneten\", \"ausrotteten\" and \"zerstörten\".
Likewise the Erlangeners, but \"ausrotten\" instead of \"ausrotteten\".

2\) Wittenbergers: the.

672 **Erl. so, 7S-77. Sermon On Joh. 16, 13. W. VIII, SK5-SS8.** 673

how much he must suffer for my name\'s sake.\"

So the whole of Christendom is such a small group, which has to hold up
its back, suffer and bear more than all men, what the devil and the
world can do to them for heartache; who then will see or learn under
such appearance and feeling that they are righteous? Of course, no
reason, but the Holy Spirit must speak it, who is therefore called \"the
Spirit of truth\", that against such appearance and feeling (according
to which it seems as if this sermon is all nothing and lies) he
strengthens and maintains the hearts in faith. Otherwise, no one would
have believed for a long time, or still believe, that this Jesus Christ
is true God, eternally seated at the right hand of the Father, who is
thus shamefully, as an avenger, crucified by his own people. Or, how
could we conclude from ourselves that we (if we believe in this
crucified Christ) are condemned and cursed by all the world, and are
executed as enemies of God and the devil\'s own, should truly be God\'s
dear children and saints? which we ourselves do not feel, indeed, our
heart tells us much differently, because we are still full of weakness
and sin 1). But it is the work and power of the Holy Spirit that
confirms this in our hearts, so that we can believe it to be true, as
the Word tells us, and live and die by it.

137\. item, who could believe that we poor people, who will be judged
and die as the most miserable, wretched people on earth (1 Cor.
15:42).), thrown under the earth, eaten by maggots and worms, or made
alive into ashes and powder, shall all at once come forth out of the
stink, powder and dust, with whole, pure, bright bodies, more glorious
and luminous than all the heavens, sun and moon; more beautiful and
precious than all gold and precious stone, purer and more fragrant than
all balsam, gardens and paradise? Of course, no reason will ever rhyme
it together, because it is too far from each other, and is too badly
suited, such poor, miserable being, which is now before the eyes, to the
great thing, of which the scripture

1\) Erlanger: Sinners.

says that we are to be eternal heirs of God in heaven, alive and blessed
through faith and baptism alone, even though we still have sin and death
in us.

For this reason Christ says: \"You cannot bear it now,\" and \"the
Spirit of truth will guide you into all truth. Otherwise, reason and the
human heart would never be able to stand on such faith and confession,
but would either have to sink and perish under the temptation (which
they both have from the devil and their heart inwardly, and from the
world outwardly), or begin to blaspheme with the ungodly and say, \"Fie
on you! Shall these be called God\'s children, who are thus honored by
God, that He lets them be most shamefully and miserably condemned by all
men and thrown into the devil\'s jaws and death?

139\. The dear apostles experienced and proved it honestly with their
Lord Christ, how impossible (not only difficult) it is to keep the faith
in temptations, without the Holy Spirit, since they fell from him so
shamefully in his suffering and death, and the faith in their hearts was
even extinguished by such thoughts of the devil: Behold, where is now
your Christ? How finely he became a king, and redeemed Israel! How do
you now stand with all shame, and have allowed yourself to be so
miserably deceived!

Thus it has happened, and still happens to true Christians, that they
must well see and experience that this truth, that is, the faith which
is to hold fast the articles of Christ and His kingdom, cannot be held
by man\'s reason or powers, but the Holy Spirit Himself must work there;
and a sure sign is that the Holy Spirit with His power has been there,
where faith is kept in right struggle and contest, and keeps the field.
And what much shall I say? All experience and the work prove daily that
the Holy Spirit must do everything Himself in Christianity, which
concerns its actual government. For without it we would not long
baptize, nor preach, nor keep the name of Christ; the devil would have
taken it all away and destroyed it in an hour.

674 **Erl. so, 77-79.** interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 5S8-S70.** 675

So you see that this truth, which he says here, that the Holy Spirit
should later tell them and teach them (as they cannot bear it now), is
not such a doctrine and knowledge that reason itself can understand and
come to, as the circulators of this text are fiddling and hinting at.
For the Holy Spirit and the Christian church have nothing to do with
such things as are subject to reason and belong to this temporal life
and worldly rule, such as making laws about how one should eat and
drink, become a monk or a nun, have a wife and child or remain without
marriage, distinguish between laymen and priests, maintain and increase
spiritual goods, build and endow churches 2c., but deals with other
things, how to beget God\'s children, from sin and death to
righteousness and eternal life, how to build God\'s kingdom and destroy
the kingdom of hell, how to fight against the devil and win from him,
how to comfort, strengthen and preserve faith in the conscience, so that
man remains alive in the midst of death, and in the midst of feeling
sins may keep a good conscience and God\'s grace.

This is a different fight and war than the world, where one fights over
land and people, or one wins a bag full of guilders from the other; and
other business and things, for how to make order, of bishoprics,
foundations, caps and 1) plates 2c. Here it must be fought and wrestled
with the devil and sin, and is a matter of eternal life or eternal
death, that one may win from the same, or we remain eternally imprisoned
and lost under him. For we also have an enemy against us, who is not
concerned with the temporal parties we have here, but strives and
strives to keep our consciences entangled in sins and plague them with
eternal anguish and despair, and in short, to sink us with him from the
kingdom and all fellowship of God to eternal damnation and the fires of
hell. Such battles and victories cannot be fought nor preserved without
the Holy Spirit, through man and laws, or order of things, which pass
away with this life.

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

Therefore, let us stay with this truth, as the Holy Spirit teaches, how
we may maintain faith in Christ, trample underfoot the devil, sin and
death, bear and overcome the world\'s wrath and rage, build God\'s
kingdom, and fight for eternal life. 2c. These are other, greater and
more necessary things, which should be dealt with in the Christian
church, neither law nor order, from external, bodily things. Or, if one
should and will ever deal with such things, let us first fight and work
until we have these necessary pieces, preservation of pure doctrine,
faith and victory against sin, death, the devil 2c. Hell; item, love,
obedience of the commandments of God. When this has been arranged, we
will gladly speak and conclude about other things as well. But I think
that one should have so much to do and so long to work on these things
(if one were to take them seriously) that one would probably forget the
other.

Experience has also, unfortunately, proved that it is not so easy for
this truth to prevail and be preserved, since both popes, bishops, and
conciliators have done nothing else, but burdened Christendom with
innumerable laws, so that this truth, of the right spiritual things of
the faith or knowledge of Christ, of the consolation of consciences, of
the right Christian life, 2c., has completely disappeared; and yet all
this is called the rule of the Holy Spirit. Dear, what should the Holy
Spirit govern, since one so completely forgets such main points (which
alone are the right truth, so the Holy Spirit himself must teach)? yes,
so wrong, that one only praises the Holy Spirit\'s business and regiment
such outward children\'s work (from the Pope\'s and his Niclas bishops\'
juggler\'s bag), as one should consecrate churches, water, salt, wear
casels, plates and caps 2c. I say this so that this beautiful text may
be seen and understood correctly, that it speaks of other high things,
which are called the truth, which the Holy Spirit must teach us, since
reason can understand and order and teach it itself.

**V. 13. for he will not speak of himself, but what he will hear he will
speak.**

**\
**676 **Erl. so, 7S-8S. Sermon practiced Joh. 16, 13. W. VIII,
570-873.** 677

Here he makes the Holy Spirit a preacher, so that we do not look up to
him in the sky (as the fluttering spirits and enthusiasts do) and
separate from the oral word or preaching ministry, but know and learn
that he wants to be with and with the word, and by it guide us into all
truth, so that we may have faith in it, and fight with it, and be
preserved against all the lies and deceit of the devil, and overcome in
all temptations.

For there is no other way or means to feel the comfort and power of the
Holy Spirit, as I have often shown from Scripture and experienced
myself. For I am also a half-learned doctor, so that I do not boast too
highly about the high spirits, who have long since gone up into the
clouds above all Scripture, and sat down under the wings of the Holy
Spirit; but experience has taught me all too often that when the devil
seizes me apart from Scripture, as I begin to walk with my thoughts, and
also to flutter toward heaven, he makes me not know where God or I
remain. So he wants to have this truth (if he is to teach in the heart)
bound 1) that one puts reason and all own thoughts and feelings aside,
and clings to the word alone, and considers it to be the only truth; by
this alone he also rules the Christian church to the end.

147\. But herewith he paints the office of the Holy Spirit, and
indicates what he is to teach and of what he is to teach. Always look
askance at the false spirits and preachers, who pretend and boast that
they also have the Holy Spirit, as well as others, and that what they
pretend the Holy Spirit has done (as the pope has persuaded all the
world). So make a great distinction among the teachers, and give the
right rule according to which one should test the spirits. There are two
kinds of teachers (he says): some who speak from themselves, that is,
who preach from their own spirit or devotion and discretion. Such
preachers the Holy Spirit shall not be; for he shall not speak of
himself, neither shall his preaching be a man\'s dream and thought, as
of them that bring forth of themselves.

1\) Wittenberger: \"unbound\".

of such things, which they have neither seen nor experienced, \"and do
not themselves know what they say or what they say\", as St. Paul says 1
Tim. 1, 7. But these things he will preach, because there is something
behind them, certain and pure truth, namely, what he receives from the
Father and from me. And in this he is to be known, that he does not
speak of himself (like the lying spirit, the devil and his hordes), but
of that which he will hear, and so will preach of me alone and
transfigure me, so that people will believe in me.

So he sets a goal and measure of his preaching for the Holy Spirit
himself, that he should not preach anything new or different than what
Christ and his word are, so that we may have a sure sign and test to
judge the false spirits: that it is certainly not the Holy Spirit who
comes up with or thinks it good for someone to teach in Christianity
apart from or besides Christ, but the evil lying spirit, the devil, of
which Christ says John 8:44: \"When he speaks lies, he speaks of his
own. 8, 44. says: \"When he speaks lies, he speaks of his own,\" that
is, what he himself has devised. Such devilish lies are the whole of the
Pabst\'s doctrine, of his Pabbacy, Purgatory, Indulgences, Pilgrimages,
Monasticism, Masses, etc., since there is neither word nor thought of
Christ, and yet the same has so filled Christendom that we must also
believe what every unlearned monk dreams at night, which are gross,
tangible lies, and are not to be told nor suffered even by sensible men.
This is the bad, simple mind of this text about the ministry of the Holy
Spirit.

149\) But about this there is also to be said 2) about the person of the
Holy Spirit, as the same is distinguished from the person, both of the
Father and of the Son. For first, when he says of the Holy Spirit, \"But
when the Comforter comes,\" item: \"What he will hear, that will he
speak,\" and: \"He will take it from mine, and transfigure me,\" 2c., he
shows powerfully that the Holy Spirit is a true being in the Godhead,
and for himself a distinct person, who is neither the Father nor the
Son. For this

2\) Erlanger: allhie.

[678 **Erl. so, 8S-84.** Interpretations On John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, S73-S7V.** 679]{.underline}

are all words of a special person: \"The Comforter who is coming\";
item: \"What he will hear, he will speak\" 2c. If he is to come, or (as
he said above) be sent, or go forth; item, hear and speak, then he must
be something. Now he is not the Father, because the Father does not
come, nor is he sent; nor is he the Son, who has already come, and now
goes to the Father again, and of whom the Holy Spirit is to preach and
transfigure him 1).

\(150\) But more particularly he shows the difference of the person of
the Holy Ghost, or the same attribute, and also his divine nature with
and by the Father and the Son; in that he saith, \"What he shall hear,
that shall he speak.\" For here he says of a conversation held in the
Godhead (apart from all creatures), and sets up a preaching chair, there
being both he who speaks and he who listens. Makes the Father the
preacher, but the Holy Spirit the hearer. This is high and beyond the
understanding of men, but because we cannot reach it with human words or
understanding, we must believe it. Here faith must pass over all
creatures, and not cling to thoughts of bodily preaching and listening,
but take hold of an essential preaching, word and hearing.

151\) And here it belongs that the Scripture calls our Lord Christ
(according to His divine nature) a \"word\", Joh. 1, 1. which the Father
speaks with and in Himself; so that it is truly divine in nature from
the Father, yet does not fall out of the Father (as a bodily natural
word, spoken by a man, is a voice or breath, which does not remain in
Him, but comes and remains outside of Him 2)) but remains in Him
eternally. Now these are the two different persons: He that speaketh,
and \"the word\" which is spoken, that is, the Father and the Son. But
here now follows also the third, namely the hearer, both, of the speaker
and of the spoken word. For where there should be a speaker and a word,
there also belongs a listener. But all this,

1\) \"him\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) Taken by us from the old edition of Walch. Wittenberger and Jenaer:
\"jr\" i.e. \"ihr\". Erlanger: him.

Speaking, being spoken, and listening, all take place within the divine
nature, and also remain alone in the same, since no creature at all is
nor can be; but both, speaker, and word, and listener, must be God
Himself, all three equally eternal, and in unseparated, unified majesty.
For in the divine essence there is neither change nor inequality, and
neither beginning nor end, so that the hearer cannot be said to be
anything apart from God, or to have begun to become a hearer, but, just
as the Father is an eternal speaker, the Son is eternally spoken, so the
Holy Spirit is the hearer from eternity.

152\. but we have heard above \[Cap. 14, 26. Cap. 15, 26.\] that the
Holy Spirit is called sent or proceeding not only from the Father, but
at the same time also from the Son, and therefore this hearer must be
called both hearer of the Father and hearer of the Son; not of the
Father alone, nor of the Son alone, as He clearly said: \"The Comforter,
whom I will send unto you from the Father.\" For \"sending\" indicates
and interprets the very thing that the word \"going forth\" does. For he
that goeth forth is sent; and again, he that is sent proceedeth from him
that sends him; that therefore the Holy Ghost hath his divine nature not
from the Father alone, but also from the Son, as the following words
will further show.

153 Thus in these words it is confirmed and taught that in our faith we
confess in One Divine Being three distinct Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit, and are thus presented with parables or images of natural
things, that we may grasp them according to our weakness, and speak of
them, but neither search them out nor understand them, but by faith
alone hold to these words (as we hear that Christ Himself speaks of
them) and abide by them. How then Christendom, and especially the holy
fathers and bishops, who fought over this article, by believing and
confessing these and such sayings, won and preserved this article
against the heretics and lying spirits, who, above and beyond the
Scriptures in these high, unsearchable matters, took upon themselves to
ponder and reason.

680 **Erl. so, 84-8\". Sermon on Joh. 16, 13. W. VIII, sve-svs.** 681

**V. 13. And what is to come, he will proclaim to you.**

154 Not only shall the Holy Spirit tell and reveal what you shall
believe and know of me, but also make you prophets, that you may know
how things shall be in the future for you and for Christendom. But here
he speaks of the future things that are of special concern to
Christianity and which it should know. For there are two kinds of
prophecies. Some concern the worldly government and temporal things on
earth, and say how it will go for kings, princes and lords, countries
and people 2c. This prophecy is also given by God, and sometimes to the
wicked as well as to the pious. So the prophets prophesied among the
people of Israel, not only about their kings and people, but also about
foreign kingdoms, Assyria, Babylon, Egypt 2c. And there have always been
some prophecies before 1) the great change of the world, 2) but in the
Old Testament especially abundant and glorious, as can be seen in
Isaiah, Daniel, Jeremiah, Balaam 2c. As it should have been, that in
this people God wanted to show everything beforehand, how it should go
in the world, especially for the sake of the future of Christ, so that
one would know where and when to wait 2c. But in the New Testament such
prophecy is not so common, nor is it necessary, for it does not concern
the spiritual matters of Christianity 3). But whoever has it, may need
it, like other gifts of God; whoever does not have it, may well do
without it.

The other prophecy is the one spoken of here, which tells of Christ\'s
kingdom, how it should be, and how it should stand in it. Christ also
said something about this before, but cut it short because the apostles
(as he said) could not carry it. These are the prophecies of the Holy
Spirit, which alone are revealed to Christians; from which Spirit the
holy fathers also prophesied in the past, when they spoke of the New
Testament, as is said in 2 Petr. 1, 21. So the dear apostles (especially
St. Paul and Peter) prophesied after the ascension of Christ, after-

1\) \"before\" taken by us from Walch\'s old edition. In the old
editions: von.

2\) \"been\" i.e. preceded.

3\) Erlanger: Christians.

The book of Revelation of John, in which they receive the Holy Spirit,
speaks of the future, both the happiness and the misfortune of
Christianity, persecution and suffering, the mobs and heresy, the end of
Christ and all abominations, and, in sum, of the fall and rise of the
faith and the church. Such prophecy is also the book of the Revelation
of John, although with dark words and images; item, what else may be
said by other fathers of the first Christianity in such a way, and yet
is not written.

This spirit of prophecy still remains in Christianity, though not so
high as in the apostles, that we can also say and know such things
beforehand; but as far as we have taken it from them, and have it from
their books, and yet that the same is also weak. As we have hitherto
seen, that though we have had and read the Biblia, yet have we
understood nothing of it; and even now there are many who think
themselves masters of the Scriptures, and of the Holy Ghost in them know
no measure, and have been taught us all too high and low; but also let
it be seen and heard that they understand nothing of spiritual things
(as they ought to prove their art), though they hear and read of them,
yea, even want to preach and teach them to every man. We would gladly
wish them all to be much more learned than we are and to respect
themselves. As St. Paul also wishes his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 4, 8:
\"Would God that you reigned without us\"; as if he should also say: Oh,
that you were all so learned, spiritual and still of the spirit of
nations, as we apostles are, that you had no need of us. And Moses, 4th
book, cap. 11, 29: \"Alas, that all the people prophesied.\" For if this
were the case, they would preach and govern well, and everything would
go smoothly and rightly, as it should.

\(157\) But it is not so, alas; and they that have the Holy Ghost, and a
right understanding, are not so mean as are much to be thought; that,
though they have the Scriptures, and hear them, yet they see that the
revelation also of the Holy Ghost is necessary, which giveth light in
such reading and hearing, that it may be understood. Although it is true
that the Holy Spirit does not exist without preaching and teaching, he
wants to do special miracles, as he did with the apostles on the first
day.

682 Erl. so, 86-88. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S78-S8I. 683

Pentecost, and with Paulo, who should have the first revelations,
without means. But now the apostles have preached the word, and given
their writing, and there is nothing more to be revealed, because what
they have written, he 1) no special new revelation nor miracle. So we
have it by the apostles\' writing that we can tell what is to come in
the church, as they gave and told us before, especially about the last
reign of the end of Christ, namely the papacy, and how it must fall with
its abominations, masses, monasticism and false worship, and all other
kinds, so that Christianity should nevertheless remain until Christ
suddenly comes in his glorious future and finally redeems it from all
evil.

Since we now have this prophecy for certain, and it has come to pass
thus far (which is a sure sign of the right doctrine), there is no
longer any need to perform miracles to confirm this doctrine. For these
were first given, that by such subsequent signs (as St. Marcus says at
the last) the new preaching of the apostles might be confirmed. But we
have not made this preaching new, but have brought forth again the same
old confirmed doctrine of the apostles, just as we have not made any new
baptism, sacrament, Lord\'s Prayer, or faith, nor do we want to know or
have anything new in Christianity, but only argue and hold on to the old
(which Christ and the apostles left behind and gave to us). But this we
have done: Since we found all these things darkened by the pope and his
doctrine of men, even covered with thick dust and cobwebs and all kinds
of unclean things, thrown into muck and represented, we have, by God\'s
grace, pulled them out again, cleansed it of such filth, wiped off the
dust, swept it and brought it into the light, so that it shines pure
again, and everyone can see what the gospel, baptism, sacrament, key,
prayer and everything is that Christ has given us, and how one should
use it blessedly.

159\. to such a thing there must be no new signs nor wonders, because it
was confirmed at the beginning, but now shines again and seems that it
is

1\) Wittenberger: the Holy Spirit.

is the very same first teaching of the apostles. But it is not brought
forth again without the revelation of the Holy Spirit. For those who
were before us also had the same Scripture, baptism, and everything; but
it was so deeply obscured and so full of filth that no one was able to
recognize it. But now, that it might be brought forth again and
recognized, he himself must shine, that it \[the doctrine\] might be
rightly seen and understood; but so that now no miraculous sign is
needed, because the same doctrine and scripture are also accepted by the
pope and all sects, and now no other word or revelation is to be waited
for. At first, when it was still green and new, the young trees had to
be tied to a stick until they grew strong; but now that it has spread
throughout the world, there is no longer any need to confirm it.

160 But where a new doctrine is brought forth (as it was of Mahomet), it
shall be confirmed by signs and wonders (as Deut. 18:22 commanded). And
indeed the papacy and its monasticism are thus confirmed, but by the
devil, as St. Paul has previously prophesied of the Antichrist, 2 Thess.
2, 11.That God would send them strong errors, and such preachers, who
come with miracles and signs (which were lies of the devil); and as
Christ himself says, give such miracles and signs, so that even the
elect (if it were possible) would be deceived; as the 2) were, so that
the masses, purgatory, pilgrimages, and holy idolatry were confirmed.
This was a new doctrine (but against the gospel of Christ), therefore
the devil had to be strong here also with his signs to suppress the
gospel and to keep such his lies.

But against this, both Christ and the apostles have faithfully warned
us, and prophesied beforehand, that we should not allow ourselves to be
vexed by such things, and that we should neither believe nor accept any
miraculous signs against this teaching, even if an angel from heaven
were to visibly bring such teaching and miracles. So also in the Old
Testament, God has seriously forbidden that no prophet should be heard
or accepted.

2\) Wittenberger: \"dergleichen\" instead of: wie die.

3\) Erlanger: er.

684 **Erl. 50, 88-90. Sermon On Joh. 16, 13. W. VIII, S8I-SS4.** 685

against the teaching he gave them through Moses, Deut. 13:1-3: \"If a
prophet or a dreamer of dreams,\" he says, \"shall arise among you, and
give thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come, of which he
hath told thee, saying, Let us serve other gods; then thou shalt not
obey the words of such a prophet or dreamer; for God tempt you, that he
may know whether ye love him with all your heart. \"2c.

162 From this you see that it is not to be wondered at whether signs are
sometimes performed by the ungodly, and the devil deceives people with
them; as he has deceived the world until now with the pilgrimages in the
name of Mary and the deceased saints, item, with appearances and
rumblings of the dead. For here you hear that God is thus tempting
people, especially in these last times, of which it is said that the
devil shall rule powerfully in Christendom through the end-Christ. For
it is a bad art for him to perform signs and wonders (if God gives him
room), although they are truly not works of wonder, but deception; for
he can so captivate and charm people\'s eyes and senses that they must
swear that they are true signs. As one reads, he thus brought to life
some dead people, whom he kept under the water or otherwise for several
days, so that they had no breath, and after that they came to themselves
again.

The legend of St. Martin writes of one of his disciples who was
considered to talk to Christ daily (and did not know otherwise himself).
The same once brought a delicious skirt to his schoolboy, as if it had
been given to him by Christ. But the brothers, not knowing what to say
to it, told him to go to their bishop St. Martin. Oh no (he said),
Christ has forbidden me, I shall not come to him. Then they said: What
manner of Christ is this, that will shun his servant? and dragged him by
force. But before they came to him, the skirt disappeared from under
their eyes, and they saw that it was the devil\'s ghost. Similarly, one
reads of the same St. Martin, as having had special grace to know the
spirits, among many other examples, that also

There was a great running and running to the grave of a deceased man,
and even though he spoke against it, it increased, and so many miracles
happened there that his disciples also ran there, so that he finally had
to go there himself, and there he prayed before the altar, and implored
the deceased by the name of Christ to reveal who he was? Then he
confessed that he had been a murderer, and was publicly judged and
buried there.

With such ghosts and lies the spirit has also deceived many greater
people than St. Gregory and others. Shouldn\'t he rather have deceived
us sleeping and snoring, thus accepting for truth and worshipping
everything that he has pretended through any jack? Without that he now,
now the light shines again, and exposes such his lies and deception,
must be ashamed of such his lies and ghosts himself. But where again
seduction and darkness should begin by God\'s wrath and doom (as will
happen after us, if the world should stand longer), and the devil would
begin to do signs through a false saint, and perhaps heal a sick person,
then you should well see how the mob would fall with great force, that
no preaching nor defense would help against it. Yes, my dear, they would
say (as they have done so far with the dead saints), say what you will,
I have nevertheless seen and experienced that this one is helped who has
pledged himself to it or has accepted the preacher. For with such the
devil is said to be mighty and strong (says St. Paul \[2 Thess. 2, 10.
11.\]), who do not accept the love of the truth, so that they are
deceived by all kinds of deceit of the devil, and do not have to be so
wise as to be able to guard against it.

For this reason I have said that the Holy Spirit Himself must be present
with His revelation, that one should keep the word of Christ and His
prophecy, and judge all teachings and signs, life and deeds according to
it, so that if it goes against this main doctrine and article of Christ,
of which Christ says here that the Holy Spirit is to transfigure Him, it
should not be respected nor accepted, even though it is daily
accompanied by miraculous signs. For what goes against this doctrine

[686 Eri. so, W-9S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S84-58K. 687]{.underline}

This is certainly a lie, and has been brought about by the devil to
deceive souls. If you want to see and encounter miracles and signs, look
for them here; for this doctrine is confirmed with miracles from heaven
and all kinds of true, divine, truthful signs, and not a few have been
obtained so far against the devil and his 1) lying signs.

Let us therefore abide by this revelation or proclamation of the Holy
Spirit, who alone is to tell us what we are to know, and make us
prophets, and show us what is to come in Christendom, how Christ will
reign to the end, and preserve his Christendom, and finally destroy the
reign of the end-Christ and his master the devil. This prophecy is more
certain to us than all signs and wonders, for it shall stand, no matter
how hostilely the devil opposes it. He will not pull down our Christ,
but He shall and will overthrow Him, with all who cling to Him.

**V. 14. The same shall transfigure me: for of mine he shall take, and
shall declare it unto you.**

Then you hear what the Holy Spirit speaks about, and what the preaching
in Christianity, which is called the preaching of the Holy Spirit,
should be, namely, that it should be laid on the foundation, as St. Paul
says, which is Christ, and that everything should be directed to the
transfiguration (that is, recognition, belief, and praise) of Christ. He
is to be known to conduct all his preaching and revelation in such a way
that it is said to be taken from God and to go to Christ, not brought up
by Himself or taught by something else. For if the Holy Spirit is to
transfigure Christ, he must darken many other lights with his clarity.
Just as when the dear sun rises in the sky, all other fires, lights and
stars are darkened before its clarity, so that one does not pay
attention to them: so, where Christ shines through the preaching of the
Holy Spirit and is recognized that we have God\'s grace and eternal life
through him, then all side lights must go out from them, which in our
night and darkness show us the way to salvation.

1\) \"his\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) \"from sth. elsewhere\" - from somewhere else.

want to show. How then are all the doctrines of men, whether of Turks,
Jews, Popes, or monks, of our own works and lives, which, according to
the light of reason and understanding, teach us to do good, and thereby
to be saved.

The world has always been full of such lights, which it lights for
itself, thinking it will go to heaven. But they are not lights, but
rather vain wizards and ghosts, which lead people from the right path
and road to destruction; And they must remain in such dark night
forever, unless the Holy Spirit comes with His bright light, which
drives away all false lights and the night, 3) and brings a beautiful
bright day, so that we no longer go astray and flutter about with
various delusions and teachings, but remain on the right, certain road,
and know our turn with God, and where we should seek and find our
blessedness.

Now this is also said of the ministry of the Holy Spirit; but, as I have
said, that here he goes higher, and also shows how it stands in the
divine essence, since the Holy Spirit is truly God with him and the
Father, but so that he has his divine essence not from himself, but both
from the Father and Christ. For he takes his own (he says here), namely
the divine essence in eternity, not only from the Father, but also from
Christ, and thus remains the same eternal essence or divinity of the
Father, Son and Holy Spirit, only in distinct persons. As then the Holy
Spirit takes his divine, eternal being (if he has it in himself) from
Christ, so also his ministry or preaching must be nothing else, but that
he thus transfigures Christ as the eternal Son of the Father, born of
him in eternity, and sent into the world, that through him we may come
to the Father and have eternal life.

**V. 15. All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said he would take
it from mine and declare it to you.**

170 These are all high words, for here he speaks in his own way, not of
creatures, but of the high, inscrutable Being in the Godhead; but
herewith he includes in one another, and sums up everything, the Holy
Spirit.

3\) Jenaer: vbertreibeit (misprint).

688 **Erl. sv, \[s-95. Sermon on John 1k, 15-18. W. VIII, WK-58P.** 689

Spirit, himself and the Father. What the Father hath, saith he, that
have I also; and what I have, that have I not stolen, nor robbed, nor
bought, nor acquired, but am from everlasting mine own; and yet of my
Father, that as he is almighty and eternal God, so am I; and all the
glory and majesty which he hath, these have I also; not as a gift, nor
in fief, nor by grace, but by nature and from eternity, that it is all
mine own; without only that he is the Father, and I am the Son. He also
speaks in the same way in John 5, v. 26: \"As the Father has life in
Himself, so He has given the Son to have life in Himself\" 2c. That he
has it just as completely and totally, and in himself by nature or
birth, as the Father, and there is no difference without him being born
of the Father.

Thus he makes himself equal with the Father of all things, and
attributes to him the same majesty, authority, and power that cannot be
given to any creature, whether man or angel. For what we and all
creatures have, we cannot say that it is our own, or that we have it by
nature, but must confess that it is his grace and gift, given freely and
without our merit. But he taketh unto himself all that the Father hath,
and exalteth it as his own inheritance and possession. Which he would
not be allowed to say, nor would the Father suffer, if he were not truly
God.

Because he has said, \"All that the Father has is mine,\" he concludes
from this, and repeats what he said about the Holy Spirit: \"Therefore I
have said that he will take it from mine. This 1) is the circle, roundly
closed and drawn together all three, Father, Son and Holy Spirit, into
one divine being. For from the same Mine (he says), which is the
Father\'s (namely, that I am one God with him), from this also the Holy
Spirit takes, which he is and has, so that he is and has just that,
which both I and the Father are and have. For if he is to take and have
that which I have, he must be of the same nature and essence, since such
things as Christ has for himself and calls his own cannot be ascribed to
any creature.

1\) Erlanger: Da.

to be taken. Now this same \"taking from Mine\" is done in such a way
that it does not mean taking a piece or a part or cutting it off from
the Godhead, for the latter cannot be divided into pieces or parts at
all, but is all whole, complete and inseparable, so that where there is
a piece that is God Himself, there is certainly the whole Godhead.
Therefore, when he says: \"to take from Mine,\" this can be nothing else
than that the Holy Spirit Himself is also truly God, without any
distinction; without only that He has it both from the Father and from
Christ.

Behold, this is what he said, that the Holy Spirit should speak and
proclaim nothing else than what he hears, that is, in the eternal
Godhead, with Christ and the Father, since he alone sees and knows how
it is. But to you (he says) he shall proclaim it, first into your heart,
and then through 2) your mouth; so that it may be believed, until such
time as we also come to see it manifestly. For we have nothing more of
it in this life, without him lighting his light, than in the dark
cellar, that is, the word, to which we must adhere, and always continue
in faith, until such time as we come to it, when it shall be bright and
eternal. That is enough of these sayings. Further you may read about
them in St. Augustine and others who have diligently practiced such
sayings.

**V. 16, 17, 18: Over a little thing ye shall not see me; but over a
little thing ye shall see me: for I go unto the Father. Then said some
of his disciples one to another, What is this that he saith unto us,
Over a little thing ye shall not see me; and over a little thing ye
shall see me, and that I go unto the Father? Then they said: What is
this that he saith, Over a little one? We do not know what he says.**

This piece we hear every year at its time, as well as almost this entire
chapter, which is read on the Sundays between Pentecost and Easter;
therefore we want to run over the text recently. 3) He has now preached
from this,

2\) \"by\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

3\) This passage seems to prove to us that Luther did not write about
the sixteenth chapter of John in the time between

690 Eri. so, 9s-o?. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vni,
.-\"-.M. 691

which was to be after his departure, therefore he will herewith conclude
and give the last, and say: Farewell to good night, I must go away; now
you still see and hear me, but it is still to do by four or five hours,
then you will never see me. For the same night that he was taken, they
were all frightened and driven away from him, so that they lost sight of
him, and did not hope to see him again, because he was crucified and
buried. But yet, saith he, it shall not be finished therefore; but for a
little while, and ye shall see me again.

These are strange theidings to them, and even unrhymed speeches, for
they do not find it in their heads and minds what this should mean: Not
to see about a small thing, and yet to see him about a small thing,
therefore they make strange thoughts themselves, and began to ask one
another what it should be. For they cannot imagine that he should so
soon be taken from them and executed; much less can they believe that
after suffering and dying he should so soon rise again from death and
the grave and be seen alive by them. The modicum, about a little one, is
too strange to them and too far from their mind, that both should happen
so soon and suddenly, that he should be both dead and alive in the three
days.

And if he had spoken it clearly with such words (as he probably did
before) \"about a little thing,\" that is, after a few hours (while I am
still with you) you will not see me alive, but dead and buried, and yet
soon after that you will have me alive again and risen from death: they
would have understood it just as little, for it was both too impossible
in their minds. That is why St. John speaks so much about it, that it
seems to be vain and useless talk, but he wants to show that it is true.

Easter and Pentecost. The sermons on the third chapter of John continued
uninterruptedly in 1538 during the time just indicated, as can be seen
from the chronological overview according to the Jnbaltsverzeichniß in
the seventh volume of our edition. We find a larger gap only in the
Wednesday sermons, namely from September 25, 1538 to June 18, 1539.
Should these sermons on the 16th chapter of John not be placed in this
period?

They say that Christ wanted to impress upon them the great miraculous
work (both his death and resurrection), and thus gave cause to ask about
it, and thus spoke about it with dark words, which, even if they had
spoken clearly and dryly, they would have understood just as little. How
he then wants to say and interpret these things \"about a little thing\"
when he says, \"I go to the Father,\" which they understand much less,
and must confess that they do not know what he says, and so it remains a
dark word to them, that they must think about it, and wonder and ask all
the more, so that their faith after his resurrection remembers it, and
thereby becomes all the more certain and stronger.

177\. Now we have often heard what is meant by \"going to the Father;
This is not a common word that men use to speak and understand, but it
is the language of the Lord Christ and His Christians; that Christ
should go or be sent by the Father means nothing else than that He, the
true Son of God from eternity, became a true man and manifested Himself
on earth in human nature, being and form, letting Himself be seen, heard
and touched, eaten, drunk, slept, worked, suffered and died like another
man. Again, that he should go to the Father, that is, be transfigured by
his resurrection from death, that he should sit at the right hand of
God, and reign with him forever, as the eternal, almighty God. For by
the descent or going from the Father he revealed himself and proves to
be a true, natural man; but by the return to the Father he declares
himself to be true, eternal God, from God the Father, and thus both
remain in one person, God and man, and thus are to be recognized and
believed.

\(178\) This going from the Father to us, and from us to the Father,
that he descended from heaven unto death and hell, and ascended again,
and thereby took and filled all things mightily in heaven and earth, the
dear apostles could not yet understand in time, nor would we nor any man
understand unless the

1\) Erlanger: \"it nor\". Wittenberger: \"it neither jr\".

692 **Erl. so, 97-9S. Sermon on John 16:16-20. W. VIII, 5S2-SS4.** 693

Holy Spirit would come and reveal and transfigure these words. For they
are dark words, and will remain dark, that it still takes effort and
work to know and have Christ in his lowliness and ascension, so that all
things in heaven, on earth and under the earth may be given to him, as
St. Paul says.

**V. 19, 20 Then Jesus, noticing that they were about to ask him, said
to them: Of this ye question one another, that I said, Of a little thing
ye shall not see me; and of a little thing ye shall see me. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall
rejoice; but ye shall be sorrowful. But your sadness shall become joy.**

This is the gloss and interpretation of the previous words: \"Ueber ein
Kleines\" 2c. How does it rhyme. 1) That he says, \"You will weep and
wail,\" 2c., or how should they take it that weeping and wailing means
that he will be taken from them this night, crucified and buried, and
will rise again on the third day? But because he sees that they do not
understand it, even though he says it in such dry words, as he did
before, and now he says how he is going to the Father, so he will
transfigure and interpret it to them, so that they will feel both and it
will be in their hearts that they will have to understand what it means
not to see him over a little one, and to see him again over a little
one. This is the opinion, he says, and this is what shall happen to you:
\"You will have to weep and wail, but the world will rejoice\" 2c. The
same will teach you well what it is, about a little one not seeing me
2c. For it will be such a thing with 2) you that 3) you will be without
joy and consolation at all, in vain suffering and sadness; but with the
world the contradiction will be that it will laugh, jump and be in good
spirits just in your weeping and highest sadness. That is one thing. But
the other thing that I have said, this I will teach you, namely that
your

1\) Thus the Wittenbergers.\' Jenaer: itself. Erlanger: but themselves.

2\) \"with\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Wittmberger and Erlanger: da.

Sadness shall turn, and become joy again 2c.

This sadness, weeping and wailing, must be understood in the high
estate, namely of the apostles and Christians, not according to external
and worldly things; since it is nevertheless also 4) done in this way,
that this little thing (which is called sadness) must run along in all
estates, which are ordered by God, if one wants to live godly and do
right in them. So, whoever wants to be a pious householder in the
married state will certainly learn something of what this little thing
is; his servants, neighbors, summa, the devil will probably tell him
that he may not learn it otherwise. So also in worldly government and
rule, a prince, magistrate, mayor, if he wants to be pious and carry out
his office faithfully, the world should also teach him what sadness and
misfortune mean, what wickedness, disloyalty and treachery 6) is among
his own subjects. I say of the pious and godly, for the others, who do
not respect their status and do not ask anything of God, but live and do
as they please, they are of no concern to us, but in their time they
will find it otherwise.

And God has arranged it very well that he brings people into such
positions and offices before they know and become aware of it. He
hurries the young people together into the marriage state with pipes,
drums and dancing, so that they go there with joy, and think that it is
pure sugar. So also, he gives great honor and glory to princes and
lords, hangs gold and chains on their necks, sets them on cushions of
velvet, makes them bend their knees and call them graces, 7) gives them
great castles and great splendor, so that one thinks (who has not
experienced it) that it is vain joy and pleasure there. But so he must
bring them up, and throw the rope over the ox\'s horns. After that, when
they are inside, it turns out much differently, so that the thrill is
gone from them, and the joy and pleasure are salted away with
unhappiness and sadness.

182\. well, that\'s still low and children-

4\) \"also\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

5\) Wittebberger: will.

6\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

7\) This is how Walch correctly resolved the word \"gnaden\".

694 **Erl. so, 9S-I0I.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VHI, S81-S87.** 695

The things of which Christ speaks here are not the same, nor must they
be so, alternating one with another, evil and good, sadness and joy;
like summer and winter, sun and rain, and a good year and an evil year
around each other; now sad, then laughing again; soon sad again.
Therefore think and prepare yourself, that it must be so, to every one
in his state, that God has laid upon him a portion of the same sweat
that was laid upon Adam; whom, who shall bear it with patience, and not
become a knave because of it, it shall be sore and hard enough for him.

But much higher and more difficult is this matter, whereof we are called
Christians, in that one should confess Christ and help to preserve
Christianity; item, in that each one should preserve the faith in his
conscience. There is first the real suffering and the hard fight against
the devil and the world, and especially against the apostles, who must
attack all the world, kings, emperors, mighty men, wise men, scholars,
and all that is great, and so embitter them that they cry out against
them: You evil-doers are not worthy that the earth should bear you; and
whoever strangles and kills only such people has done the greatest
service to God, and all the world laughs and rejoices, and cries out: O,
this is right! Just as it happened to Christ on the cross, when they
bared their teeth at him and cried out: 1) \"Oh, how fine he is the Son
of God! Let him now come down from the cross, he has trusted in God, now
deliver him\" 2c. So bitter and wicked it must become that Christians in
their highest misery and torture are mocked and ridiculed, and God and
all that is good is denied them, 2) as they are to be held no
differently than the most pernicious, poisonous worms on earth, who
corrupt and destroy everything that is only called good; that all men
are guilty before all things to help that such are eradicated from the
world.

184\. it grieves a weak, inexperienced heart grievously when it comes to
court, and there must suffer violence and be condemned, and those who do
it wrong laugh and mock at it in its misery; but much

1\) Wittenberger: blecken and scream.

2\) Wittenberger: canceled. Erlanger: canceled.

more in these great divine things, since 3) not only the judge and the
world do such things, but also the devil confirms such things, so that
one\'s heart rebels, saying: \"It serves you right, why did you start
such things? Why do you dare to master all the world alone? You are a
sinful man yourself. It is still too little, and you cannot suffer
enough, you deserve more; do you not see by this that God is not with
you, but against you?

\(185\) These are the real murderous blows, and the real last drops of
gall and vinegar, which Christ felt on the cross, when he cried, \"I
thirst. How then the devil, as a master, can drive such poisonous, fiery
darts into the heart, especially when he gets a man alone, that he
brings to ruin and disgraces him all that he had and thought was right
and good; As he shook and tumbled the apostles (especially the three
days of Christ\'s suffering and death) as if in a sieve, so that they
had to lose all the kind, friendly thoughts they had of Christ, that God
had given them the dear, faithful Savior, who had done such great things
and had been so kind and comforting to them. Such things he snatches
from their hearts in a moment, and for that he vainly brings in such
heavy, sorrowful thoughts of death and hell: Where is now your Christ,
on whom you relied, and thought that if you had him, you would have a
gracious God and all blessedness? There he lies, executed and hanged as
an avenger and wicked man, cursed not only by men but by God; and you
who hung on him are also in the same condemnation, and you too shall be
justly condemned. Then they could not raise themselves to the thought
that God was with this Christ and would help them out of death, and for
his sake would also be merciful to them, who for his sake have such
sorrow and heartache, but they felt vain thoughts of unbelief and
despair: He has deceived us and country and people, and made all the
world our enemies; and it serves us right, why have we kept it up with
him?

Behold, this is the true bitter suffering which Christ proclaims here.
This comes

3\) Erlanger: and there.

696 **Erl. so, 10I-I0S. Sermon on Joh. 16, 19. 20. W. VIII, S87-SS9.**
697

not over the common estates, which rule house, city or country 2c. Who,
though they have opposition, misfortune and sorrow, are not \"as\" hated
and cursed, but still find some protection and comfort; but these must
be thrown into the devil\'s jaws; and those who should protect them, who
are called pious, God-fearing people, must eat them up and strangle
them, and so that they have the great honor and glory of having served
God to the highest degree and appeased his wrath by executing such
cursed people. This is not a sadness and heartache, as people in the
world may have, but even sunk into the abyss of hell.

It is also painful when a man must lose his wife and child, his father
and mother, or when his house and farm are taken from him by force, or
when a pious prince is innocently driven from his lands and people; but
whatever such sorrow may befall a man on earth over worldly and temporal
things, that is still to be overcome. For even though everything is
already gone, God and Christ are not taken away, so that the heart can
still have comfort; but this is too high and grievous, when God Himself
is taken away from the heart, that 1) it would gladly take comfort in
His grace, and therefore gladly let go of everything it would like to
have on earth, so that it would only keep Him and rejoice in Him. To
these the devil does this hellish torture and suffering, that he tears
Christ out of their hearts, or ever makes him a disgrace in their
hearts, as he cannot or will not help them (as he exemplifies him here
to the apostles, as he is cursed by God 2c.), and makes all their lives
and deeds, which they have put on him, vain sins and disgraces. What can
weak and inexperienced men do here but weep and wail, wriggle and
tremble most miserably? For they have not lost something temporal, wife,
child, goods, or life and limb, but God Himself. But whoever loses God
has certainly lost everything, can no longer have any comfort or joy,
and no greater sorrow, suffering and grief can befall him.

1\) Erlanger: da.

Behold, this is what Christ proclaims to His disciples in these words,
indicating what is the little thing in which they shall not see Him. A
sour and bitter word, and a heavy and sorrowful hour. For it will be,\"
he says, \"that you will weep and wail, and in addition you will have to
suffer, so that the world will be glad about it, and will revile and
blaspheme you in the most bitter and poisonous way because of your
suffering. Behold now, what have you done? How well do you stand with
your Christ, whom you praise for the Savior and Son of God? How right it
is for you! Why did you follow the rebel and blasphemer? This is the
gloss (if you want to know), which says: \"over a little one you will
not see me.\" The experience of the same hour will teach you this. And
therefore I tell you beforehand (even if you do not understand it now),
that you may remember it and recall it 2c.

But he also gives a consolation with the word modicum, a small one, that
such mourning and weeping should not remain forever nor last too long.
For if it should not cease, neither they nor any man would be able to
bear it, and would perish and perish under it. Therefore he says: \"Over
a little you will see me again\"; item: \"Your sadness shall become
joy\" 2c. As if he should say: When you will be in mourning and weeping,
then it will feel as if there is no more comfort or help to wait for,
and there must be an eternal weeping and wailing, which nevertheless is
not in worldly mourning and weeping. For there is no damage so great
that it can still be restored, or replaced with something else, or ever
forgotten; and even if all things were lost, it must still have an end.

But in the spiritual weeping it is so that one can neither see nor hope
for anything good anymore. For, when God is gone, everything is gone,
and no other God nor Savior can be hoped for. For God is one and
eternal; therefore this weeping must feel 2) as an eternal weeping, to
which there is never any counsel. For where one can still hope for an
end or

2\) Instead of: \"must feel\" the Wittenberg has: fühlet sich.

898 **Erl. so, I0S-I0Ü.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII. SM-MS.** 899

knows, that is already half won; and however long it lasts, one can
still have the consolation that it must end one day. But here it means
weeping and wailing, since there is no end to be understood or hoped
for, because Christ is lost and God Himself is gone; that in our
feelings and thoughts it is not a small or short, but an eternal,
never-ending suffering, since 1) it cannot hope or think that it should
get Christ again in eternity, but thinks that now everything is over and
eternally lost.

The dear Lord knows this well, as he himself has had to feel such
unspeakable weeping. Therefore he does not repeat these words \"over a
little one\" 2c. in vain (although they do not understand it), and sets
them against just such a feeling of weeping and crying, that it should
not be eternal, yes, not great and long, as it truly feels, but only a
little and small. For I will not, says he, remain from you, though I
must now depart from you for a little while, but \"I will come to you
again, and see you again,\" and so see again that your heart shall be
full of joy, and make that the time of mourning, which seemed to you
eternal and unchangeable, shall have been but a little, short hour; and
shall have joy in return, which shall be eternal, and no man shall take
it from you. For after I have departed and died, I will come again, that
I may die no more, nor be from you, but live forever at the right hand
of the Father, and be and reign in you.

192 He also shows this with the simile of a woman who, when she is to
give birth, the hour has come in which she must stop, and no one can say
whether she will recover or stay, and there is nothing more than fear
and distress, and no end to it. But it is about the moment when the
child comes into the world; then the fear is so soon forgotten by the
happy look of the newborn child. So also here, in this Christian being,
there is such a change that the sorrow should not remain eternal, but
should become joy; otherwise no one could be happy.

1\) Wittenberger: that.

2\) Wittenberg and Jena: gehets.

He did not help or advise man in this. But he advised him that it should
not be an eternal look of the devil with his horns and claws, but that
the heart should see Christ again and rejoice in him. So here on earth
there is an eternal change among Christians, that it is said, \"over a
little one, and over a little one\"; now dark and night, soon day again;
so that it does not have to be an eternal weeping, although it cannot be
seen and felt when one is in it. But though we cannot see or know the
end, he has already known it, and shows it to us beforehand, that we
(how wickedly and sourly the devil makes it) let such suffering pass
over us, though we do not see how it shall go out and have an end, yet
wait for him who says, \"I will make an end of it, and comfort and
gladden you again.

**V. 23. Verily, verily, I say unto you, if ye shall ask anything of the
Father in my name, he will give it you.**

He has now preached the sermon and told the disciples what they should
know. Now he wants to conclude, and finally gives an exhortation to
prayer. For although he told them long and much about the great
suffering, persecution, anguish and sorrow that would befall them in the
world for his sake, and although he shows both comfort and strength
against it, and also promises help to overcome it through the Holy
Spirit: But because he knows how great and difficult such a struggle is,
and how weak flesh and blood is against it, which cannot grasp comfort
in this way, nor feel help so strongly, but often feels the
contradiction, he gives them this advice here, that they should turn to
prayer, and begin to cry out to God, when they feel such weakness, that
they lack comfort, strength and power to bear and overcome suffering,
fear and sadness.

194 Now it is often said of prayer, both how necessary it is and what
power it has. For it is not enough, although we have the word, and know
and understand all that we ought to know, both the doctrine of faith,
and of consolation and overcoming in all troubles; there is still
another part to it, that is, the deed, that it may also be thus
produced.

[700 Erl. so, ioö-iW. Sermon on John 16:23. W. vm, sos-\"os.
701]{.underline}

go according to how the teaching and knowledge instructs and guides us.
For thus says the wisdom of God (that is, the Word of God), Proverbs
8:14: \"My is the teaching, and mine is the doing. If the teaching is to
be right, God must reveal and give it 1). And even though we already
have it, and know everything that should be taught and believed, and
need nothing more, the consequence is not yet there, and much still
needs to be done and done as we preach and exhort.

195\. This was also the case in the lives and beings of the apostles.
See St. Peter, John and Paul in the Acts of the Apostles, as they go
about their ministry, how they have to do and struggle with the Gospel
before they bring it to pass. For there the devil attaches himself with
all his might and power, and sets against it what he can, that he may
hinder and hinder it. In addition, he has the advantage in ourselves and
in our own hearts, the great piece of Adam, who is naturally lazy,
sluggish and bored for such a fight, and always pulls us back, so that
it is especially difficult and sour to continue and fight against so
much resistance and obstacle. The prophet Habakkuk also speaks of this
in his song (Cap. 4, 15): \"Your horses and chariots are called blessed
and have victory, but they walk in the deep sea and in the mud of many
waters. The Christian regiment is likened to such harness and wagonry,
since wagon and horse must go through the deepest of puddles, since it
is always blocked, hindered and stuck, 2) so that it cannot be taken
anywhere, and is eternal toil and labor; and must nevertheless pass
through, and, as the prophet says, be Hquadrigae salutis, such chariots
and horses, 3) which retain the victory.

196 Therefore Christ says, \"When the day comes that I will see you
again, and you will rejoice with eternal joy, and then you may ask
nothing more, except that you know all things that you ought to know and
have from me, yet the lack will remain, so that you will not know them.

1\) In the Wittenberg and in the Jena: the same.

2\) Wittenberger: sterckt.

3\) Wittenberg and Jena: are.

You will be able to do what you know and would like to do, not only for
the sake of the devil and the world, but also for the sake of your own
flesh. As St. Paul confesses and complains about himself in Rom. 7:18,
19: I find in myself that I would gladly do as I know and understand
what is good, and have pleasure and joy in it; but I feel another master
in my body and limbs, who draws me back, and makes me stubborn, so that
such doing will not follow. Item, Gal. 5:17: \"The flesh lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, that ye do not the things
that ye would.\" He would have liked it to be right everywhere, just as
we would like to see that we never have sadness, worry, impatience, or
evil thoughts, but can always take comfort and rejoice in the gospel,
and see the grace and power of the Spirit, so that all men would be
devout, love the gospel, and do as they are taught in it; asking,
admonishing, and pleading for it with all diligence and faithfulness,
and doing whatever we can. But it still goes on as it can; it always
blocks and resists, and probably the longer the more.

197 What shall we do in such deep mud, when we must wade and go, drift
and fear, and yet cannot come out? There is no other advice (says
Christ), but quickly lift up your eyes and heart to heaven, and begin to
pray to my heavenly Father. And so, if you have taught, admonished and
done all that your ministry demands, and yet will not and cannot do it,
that you seek help here and give it, and all help one another with cries
and shouts, lifting and pushing the wagon. For this is what God wants,
that you not only recognize the doctrine and what you already have as
given by Him, but also what you still need and lack, you must seek from
Him, and thus learn that nothing is within your ability, but everything,
both beginning and finishing, willing and doing, must be sought from Him
and given by Him; as St. Paul says \[Phil. 2, 13\].

But here the battle with the troublesome Satan begins, who, as he
allent-

702 Erl. so, 10S-110. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
688-610. 703

Since he resists Christ and would gladly prevent anyone from hearing or
believing the gospel or living and doing according to it, he also
prevents people from praying willingly and makes it very difficult for
them to do so. For he also knows well what power and force it has, that
there is no stronger defense and power of the Christians against all his
power. Now I do not speak of those who are not Christians, for they
cannot pray without purring and chattering the Psalter as geese eat
their straw; but Christians and believers (I say) find it exceedingly
difficult to pray aright. Therefore some of the ancient fathers said
that there is no work on earth so difficult as this, that one prays
rightly.

199\. For even though the ministry of preaching is difficult and
requires great effort and care, there is nevertheless this advantage,
that even though I am not skilled enough nor worthy enough to preach, it
makes me bold to take the book in my hand and tell my neighbor about
God: Dear friend, there it is, there you hear not my word, but God\'s;
it is not for me, but for your own salvation and blessedness; and if I
have said it, then I have done my part; let him answer for it, whether
he accepts it or not 2c. But if I am to speak and pray to God for
myself, there are soon a hundred thousand obstacles before I can do so.
The devil can throw all kinds of reasons in the way, and block and
hinder on all sides, so that I go and never think of it. Only try it,
who has not experienced it, and take it upon yourself to pray earnestly,
you 1) shall well see how many of your own thoughts will assail you and
pull you away, so that you cannot start right.

200 So that we now speak only of the greatest and noblest hindrances,
this is the first thing that hinders and stops us, that we think by the
devil\'s inspiration: You are not yet able to pray; wait another half
hour or day until you become more able, or until you have done this or
that beforehand. Meanwhile the devil is there, and leads you the

1\) \"you\" is missing in the Erlanger.

half an hour away, so that you do not think about it the whole day, and
thus from one day to the next you are hurried and hindered with other
business. This is also almost the meanest hindrance, and a rather wicked
trick and mischievousness of the devil (as he often proves to me and
others). In addition, he finds an advantage in our flesh and blood, that
without it, it is lazy and cold, so that we cannot pray as we would like
to; and even if we start something, we soon flutter away with strange,
useless thoughts, and lose prayer over it.

On the other hand, such thoughts naturally arise: How can you pray to
God and say Our Father? You are too unworthy and live daily in sins;
wait until you become more pious and have gone to confession and the
Sacrament, so that you may not only be cheerful and skillful, but also
fervent in prayer, and thus be able to have a firm confidence in God and
say Our Father from the heart. This is the real heavy obstacle, since
the heart must struggle and writhe until it brings the great stone from
it, and can begin, against such a feeling of its unworthiness, to stand
before God and cry out. Try it, each one, and tell me how easily it
comes to him to strike such thoughts away, and to say from the heart: My
dear Father in heaven 2c.

In the congregation and among the multitude it is somewhat easier, since
we all come together and say Our Father with one another. But there it
is not so easy, since we are alone, and each one must pray for himself,
since our heart tells us the opposite, and the devil blows up such
thoughts and drives them like an ember: \"You are a shameful man, and
not worthy that the earth should bear you; how then may you come before
God and call him Father? That is why it is a very difficult thing, and
an art above all arts, to pray rightly; not for the sake of words, or
the mouth, but so that the heart can close securely and firmly with
itself, and with complete confidence stand before God and speak: Our
Father. For whoever can grasp such confidence of grace a little, is
already over the great mountain, and

2\) Erlanger: me.

[704 Erl. so, iio-iis. Sermon on Joh. 16, 23. w. vin, sio-eis.
705]{.underline}

has laid the first stone for prayer, and goes about it as it should.

Thirdly, the devil comes with a push to make your prayer futile by such
thoughts: \"Dear, what are you praying for? See how quiet it is around
you; do you also think that God hears and respects your prayer? Leads
thee therefore into doubt, that thou shouldest despise thy prayer and
cast it to the winds, and thus never know what prayer is and is able to
do. I have experienced what lies in it, and have seen it in others,
especially in St. Bernard, who admonishes his own with great diligence
that they should not go to church to pray with such doubt and adventure
as to whether God respects and hears their prayer. For it is also,
truly, not to joke with God that you would come before Him and say: Dear
Father in Heaven, if you do not believe these things.

204\. Therefore (as I have said, and Christ himself testifies here) it
takes a struggle to resist all such devil\'s input and our own thoughts,
and must here forcibly break the heart and say: You wretched devil, if
you want to go there, let a rogue and a villain follow you; if I am not
skillful, funny or devout enough for this hour or day, I am much less
skillful for half an hour or for eight days; therefore, putting such
clumsiness behind, I will pray a Lord\'s Prayer in the meantime, before
I become even more clumsy. And get into the habit of falling into bed
daily in the evening with the Lord\'s Prayer and 1) falling asleep, and
getting up again in the morning with it; and if there is cause, place,
and time, before you do anything else, and so come forward, regardless
of how skillful you are or are not, before the devil overtakes you and
makes you wait (for it is better to pray now in half clumsiness than
afterwards in whole), and only begin to pray contrary to the devil and
annoyance, even if you find yourself praying in the most difficult and
clumsy way.

205 So also, when he challenges you and stops you, do so because of your
unworthiness, and wait until you are more pious and pure.

1\) Wittenberger: with it.

will be. For if you do not begin before you become worthy, you will
never have to pray. Therefore, begin quickly in the midst of such a
feeling, and only fresh through it, and leap over worthiness and
unworthiness, even though you are in the midst of sin. Yes, if you also
fell this hour, and came out of sin, what should you do? Would you
therefore always remain unprayed for until you come to absolution?
Certainly not; but rather kneel down in the midst of sin and pray with
all your heart: Oh, dear Father, forgive me and help me out; so that the
devil will not throw you deeper into it and keep you there forever: you
must pray even in the midst of death and all misfortune, and the
stronger the deeper you lie in it. And what would it be if you would not
begin before you felt salvation and help? So the prophet Jonah had to
pray and cry out in the midst of the fish of the sea, under the heavy,
unbearable conscience of his sin, and in the midst of the feeling of
death and hell, as he himself confesses Jonah 2, 2. ff. and David just
in the right 2) feeling and terror of his sin and unworthiness prayed
his Psalms, as the 6th, 51st and 130th Psalms.

\(206\) Likewise also against the third temptation, when the devil wants
to make you doubt whether your prayer will be heard, and makes you
believe that it is too high and too great, that you should boast of it
to the high Majesty, that he celebrates your father and you his dear
child, and that your prayer is heartily pleasing to him (2c). Then you
must confidently resist, and cast such your prayer into God\'s word and
promise, yes, into his own command and commandment, and say: Dear Lord,
you know that I do not come before you of my own accord, nor of my own
discretion, nor of my own worthiness; for if I were to consider this, I
should not lift up my eyes before you, and would not know how to begin
to pray; but I come to this, that you yourself have commanded and
earnestly require that we should call upon you, and have also promised,
and have sent your own Son, who has taught us what we should pray, and
has recited the words. Therefore I know that such

2\) Erlanger: in rechtem.

706 Eri. so, Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin, \"iz-sis.
707

Prayer pleases me; and my presumption that I may boast of being God\'s
child before you, however great it may seem, I must be obedient to you
who will have it so, lest I prove you false, and sin more grievously
against you through other sins, both despising your commandment, and
unbelieving your promise.

Behold, thou mayest repel the devil with all his false pretenses, if
thou dost base thyself upon the three things which are God\'s
commandment and promise, and the manner and words which Christ himself
taught, which the devil cannot deny nor overthrow, and thereupon
confidently begin to pray, and be sure that such prayer is right, and
not wanting. And what if you only try and begin such things, whether you
will not feel the power and fruit of them, that they will taste good to
you, and warm and strengthen your heart. But it is the hardest thing,
and (as they say) the greatest mountain, before one steps over the
threshold, and brings the first words, Our Father, (with right
earnestness 1) and faith) over the heart. Therefore, the best thing to
do is to approach quickly and say: It must be prayed for, the sooner the
better, God grant that I may be clumsy or unworthy, sorrowful, sad or
impatient, in anger or evil desire, or weighed down with other thoughts.

Let this be said as an admonition to prayer, that we get into the habit
of praying with all diligence and earnestness. For this is also the
highest and most noble work after the preaching of the Gospel (through
which God speaks to us and offers us all His grace and goods), that we
speak to Him again through prayer and receive from Him. So it is also of
great need to us, for we must do it all through prayer, so that we may
keep what we have and defend it from our enemies, the devil and the
world. And what we are to obtain, we must seek and find here, that it
may be both our comfort, strength and salvation for ourselves, and our
defense and victory against all enemies.

209 Now we come back to the text,

1\) Wittenberger: Consolation.

In it Christ shows us the resistance against these obstacles and
impulses of the devil and our flesh, which want to snatch us away, so
that we may resist them. \"Verily, verily, I say unto you, if ye shall
ask anything of the Father in my name, he will give it you\" 2c. Then
you first hear the commandment that he tells them to pray, and punishes
them for not having asked before: repeats and drives it with many words,
to show that he earnestly wants it, and demands such as the right
service of God and the proper work of Christians. Such a commandment
thou shalt well consider, and do to thyself, lest thou think it an
arbitrary work, as if it were no sin, whether thou prayest not, \[it\]
be enough that others pray, but know that it is earnestly commanded by
the highest disgrace and punishment, even as this, that thou 2) shalt
have no other gods, and shalt not blaspheme nor take God\'s name in
vain, but shalt confess and preach, praise and glorify; that whoever
does not do this shall know that he is not a Christian and does not
belong in God\'s kingdom. Do you then believe that God is justly angry
with idolaters, blasphemers and despisers of the Word, murderers and
thieves, and that for the sake of such sins terrible punishments are
inflicted on the world: why do you not also fear God\'s wrath here, if
you do not observe this commandment, and thus go safely as if you were
not guilty of praying?

First, you can refute and defeat the devil\'s accusation if he claims
that you are unskilled or unworthy 2c. Such pretenses do not apply: I am
unskilled to believe, to hear God\'s word, to love my neighbor 2c.,
therefore God\'s commandment shall be nothing. For it is not said here,
ask whether you are worthy or unworthy, but are guilty of being obedient
to God. Neither am I worthy to be baptized and called a Christian; yea,
I am not worthy of the daily bread which I eat: should I therefore deny
my Christ, or never be baptized, or not eat and drink? So say also here:
Whether I am unworthy or unskilful to pray, should I 3)

2\) \"you\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

3\) \"I\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

708 Eri. so, m-iis. Sermon on Joh. 16, 23. W. vm, 6is-\"is. 709

therefore not be obedient to God? So it is said: God\'s commandment
shall be kept above all things, and suffer no hindrance; but find
thyself ready every hour and moment, when it shall require thee.

211\. secondly, see also the promise, that he saith, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, if ye shall ask anything of the Father in my name, he will
give it you.\" Take hold of these words and press them into your heart.
For here you hear that he not only gives the promise, but also confirms
and affirms it with a twofold oath, and swears most highly: Only believe
me, as God lives, I will not lie to you.

Now anyone who wants to be a Christian should blush a little and be
ashamed of himself that he has heard these words and yet has never
prayed from the heart. Is it not an eternal shame before God and all the
world that Christ must swear to us so dear and high, and yet we do not
believe it nor allow ourselves to be moved to pray from the heart? What
will we say before God\'s court or against our own conscience when we
are asked? Have you ever prayed earnestly and with an undoubted heart
from the heavenly Father, that His name might be hallowed 2c.? Do you
not know how earnestly I have commanded this, and how dear I have sworn
to this end, that you should certainly be heard, if you only pray from
the heart? We should (I say) be ashamed of ourselves, and yet fear
God\'s terrible judgment, if we regard both His commandment and His
precious promise so lightly, and let ourselves be told in vain. For it
will not help you to excuse yourself: Yes, I did not know whether I was
worthy; item, I felt unfunny and unskilled, or had to arrange other
business.

Here you say: How is this promise always true, since he often does not
give what we have asked for? Did he not let David ask in vain for his
son\'s life, 2 Sam. 12:16 ff. Answer: I have often said how prayer
should be ordered and placed, so that one does not put him in what he
asks for.

1\) In the old editions: erteuret.

We do not ask for measure, purpose, way, place or person, but let these
things be commanded to him, as he knows that he is to give and is of use
to us. For this reason he himself has set the order and set three goals
in the Lord\'s Prayer, which must always take precedence, namely his
name sanctification, his kingdom and his will; then our daily bread,
salvation from temptation and all hardships 2c. The best part must be
called: Your name, your kingdom 2c. If this goes before, then surely
ours will follow. This is why St. John 1 Epistle 5:14 says: \"This is
the joy we have in him, that if we ask anything according to his will,
he hears us\"; and St. Paul Romans 8:26: \"We do not know what we should
pray for, but the Spirit represents us according to what pleases God.
Now this is certainly his will, which his word gives (as the ten
commandments and the Lord\'s Prayer), that he will deliver thee from all
evil, and not leave thee in temptation: item, to give thee thy daily
bread 2c. Otherwise, he would not have called you to pray it; therefore,
the last four pieces (concerning our temporal need of this life) are
certainly also his will. But the three that are actually called his go
before them. So you have his will completely, that he certainly thinks
of nothing else nor has anything else in his heart, but shows you the
Lord\'s Prayer; and if you therefore pray that it goes according to such
his will, it is certainly answered. But you must pray in such a way that
you do not break this order, nor do you go astray, nor do you pass over
the noblest parts.

214 Therefore, if you see that your request is not heard and given, it
is certainly what St. Paul says, that you do not know what you are
asking and how to ask 2c. For this art is too high for us, saith he,
that we should speak and agree what is for the sanctification of his
name, and the advancement of his kingdom, and the accomplishment of his
will. Item, how he shall give thee thy daily bread and other
necessities, take away sin and temptation, and deliver in trouble 2c. It
says what and how we are to ask, but the time, person, manner and
measure in which he is to give it, we cannot interpret or determine.
Therefore, where thou art in trouble and distress (of thyself or of
others), thou shalt

710 Eri. s\", iis-iis. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
sis-\"21. 711

You pray for salvation and help, but as the Lord\'s Prayer teaches you:
\"If it serves to sanctify his name and to please his will; if not, that
he may do with it as he knows and considers best. So you pray rightly:
Dear Father, give us our daily bread, good weather, health, protect us
from pestilence, war, evil time, etc.; but if you will try me for a
while and not give me so soon, let your will be done. If it is the time
and hour, deliver me from the evil; if not, give me strength and
patience 2c.

Since it is above and beyond our knowledge when or how he should help us
and give us the request, we are to put this in his hands and pray all
the same, and therefore not stop or doubt whether we have been heard,
for it is all for our good. Even if he consumes us or does not give us
what we have asked him for, it pleases him to pray that he will give us
much better in return than we understand, so that we may learn to know
his will and be obedient to it, increase in faith, be strengthened and
overcome in patience 2c. Just as a pious father does to his child, if he
does not give him what he has asked, but everything for his betterment,
so that he may learn to know his father\'s heart and will, and be
obedient to him. So God also lets us use his angry rod and punishment
(for which we cry out and ask, and yet he does not let go so soon) to
make us more pious, and then he shows us and gives us all the more
graces and good things; and gladly hears such crying and sighing, as an
indication of pious children who want to mend their ways and not run
away from him, but remain 1) children.

This is said of him who either does not give our request or does not
give it so soon. On the other hand, we also see that where the need is
so great and great, and cannot suffer delay, he does not remain outside
with his answer and help; as Ps. 9:10 says of him: Adjutor in
opportunitatibus, \"he helps in time of need. So everything is to be
done so that one only prays and cries out confidently and with firm
trust, and in the same to his counsel and divine wisdom.

1\) Thus the Wittenbergers and the Jenaers. Erlanger: his.

Home, when, how, where, by whom 2) he should help, and not doubt if we
do not understand how we should be helped.

The third part of this text, that he says \"in my name\", is the main
part and the ground on which prayer should stand and rest, and from
which it has its goodness and dignity, that it pleases God, and the
power and might that it must be heard. And hereby we are freed from all
heavy temptation and useless worry (which most hinders us from prayer
and makes us timid) from our worthiness, that we should not ask nor
worry about it, but both worthiness and unworthiness, put out of sight,
should put the prayer on him, and ask in his name.

218 What is it then, that thou long agonize with thine own thoughts, and
consent to dispute with the devil, or that thou wilt excuse thyself, and
shun to pray, because thou feelest cold and unskillful? Do you hear that
you should not pray for yourself, nor in your own name, nor in the name
of any man (how holy, worthy and full of the spirit he is), but in his
name he wants to pray, and hereby exhorts and entices you to pray (about
the commandment and promise). As if he should say: Dear, let it be about
you as it can; if you cannot ask through yourself and in your name (as
you should not), then pray in my name; if you are not worthy and holy
enough, then let it be me; only come upon me and in my name, and say:
Dear Lord, I shall and will pray according to thy commandment and
promise; if I cannot do it well, and it is not good nor valid in my
name, let it be valid and good in my Lord Christ\'s name. And only have
no doubt that such prayer is pleasing to God and certainly answered, as
certainly as Christ\'s name pleases his only dear Son, and everything
must be yes and granted what he asks.

219 So this word, \"In my name,\" demands faith in prayer, that we may
know that our own worthiness for prayer shall not promote us, nor obtain
an answer, nor shall our unworthiness hinder us; but

2\) Wittenberger: by what, to whom.

712 **Eri. so, IIS-ISI.\' Sermon On Joh. 16, 23. 24. W. vill, WI-62L.**
713

that we will certainly be heard for the sake of Christ alone, as our
only mediator and high priest before God, and thus the prayer will be
placed entirely in his hands. This is what all Christianity does when it
concludes and seals all its petitions and invocations with these words:
\"through Christ our Lord\", and thus sacrifices to God in faith.
Therefore do thou also so, that thou resist the grievous thoughts that
keep thee from prayer, and let not the devil deceive thee, when he blows
into thy mouth that thou art not worthy, but for this very reason fall
on thy knees, when thou feelest that thou art not worthy, neither canst
thou become worthy; and cling to Christ, and commit the prayer to him,
and so bring it before God that he may accept it and hear it for his
sake; and by all means do not put such prayer in doubt or in
uncertainty, but certainly believe that your prayer has come before God,
and has met, and is already yes, because it is made in the name of
Christ, and concluded with the Amen, so that he himself confirms his
word here.

For that would be one of the highest blasphemies (which God blasphemes
in His words), if you prayed both in the name of Christ, according to
His commandment and promise, and yet you would waver: Who knows whether
it is prayed and heard? Let no Christian ever take this into his heart.
\"If you want to serve God\" or pray \"beware that you do not tempt
God,\" but pray in such a way that you can be sure that God will hear;
otherwise it is not called praying, but mocking and blaspheming God. As
hitherto, and still the whole vermin of the pope, priests and monks have
done, so without ceasing day and night they chatter, sing and sound, and
everything is called prayed; and yet none of them has a thought of
faith. I have prayed (they say), but whether God will hear it, I leave
it to him to decide. They confess that they believe nothing, and that
their prayer remains unanswered, indeed, that it is nothing but sin and
blasphemy (as the 109th Psalm, v. 7, says). For what should God ask of
such prayer, which you yourself do with doubt and unbelief, and thus in
your own words, both of you, make yourself a liar, and also punish Him
with lies?

But a Christian must know that his prayer has been heard as surely as he
truly believes in God. For even if he is unworthy, he has not asked in
his name, nor does he want to be heard for his own sake, but in
Christ\'s name and his worthiness, and just as little must he doubt
this, so little should he doubt God\'s word when he preaches or hears
it, or baptism, sacrament and absolution; item, the ten commandments and
his status. Otherwise he would have to doubt in the end (if he were to
reckon according to his unworthiness) whether he was God\'s creature;
and with such doubt he would have denied God Himself, and it would be
better for him if he knew nothing of none.

222\. If, however, he must maintain his faith, and not doubt whether he
should be baptized, hear the gospel, or receive or yet receive the
sacrament, much less doubt whether he should keep God\'s commandment,
and whether his obedience is right in his state according to the ten
commandments, but so he should believe and say: I know that I have
God\'s word, and am in the state in which I am to obey God; but whether
I do not believe strongly enough, or do not act and live as I ought,
that is without harm to the word. So also here: Whether I am not worthy
of having my prayer heard, it is very much worthy of Christ (in whose
name I make such a prayer), and for His sake my unworthy and unskillful
prayer must also be pleasing and worthy before God. Therefore, St.
Bernard was a fine man and had Christian thoughts, so that he so
faithfully admonished his brothers when they wanted to pray, so that
they would not go away in doubt. For I tell you, as soon as we begin to
pray, the words are already counted and written in heaven.

**V. 24. Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full.**

How, have they asked nothing before? Did he soon from the beginning
often tell them and admonish them how they should pray; also put the way
and words, as they themselves asked him.

1\) Erlanger: um.

714 Erl. 60, ILI-I23. interpretations on John the Evangelist.\' W. VIII,
S2S-K26. 715

asked him to teach them to pray \[Luc. 11:1\], as John the Baptist and
the Pharisees taught their disciples. Why then does he say that they
have not yet prayed in his name, blaming them as if they had hitherto
walked idly, and had taken no notice of prayer anywhere? But we have
heard that he says of such prayer, which is called praying in his name.
For he wants to give the difference between the old and the new
testament, and between its forerunners and its future or present
regiment. The dear fathers and prophets also prayed before in the right
spirit and faith, but only to the future Christ; but now it is no longer
to be called praying to him as the future, but in the name of him who
has already come, fulfilled the Scriptures, and now reigns powerfully.

224\. such prayer shall now begin after his passion and ascension, when
the gospel of me shall be revealed and proclaimed to the whole world,
that I am come, and have fulfilled all that was prophesied of me, that I
have blotted out sin, strangled death, destroyed hell, and opened
heaven, and now by such new preaching I also establish a new worship, in
which all distinction of outward manner, place, donor, 2c. and
everything is drawn to me and directed to me, so that from now on no
other prayer or service will be valid, except what is done in faith in
me, or prayed and done in my name, who has now come and is revealed
through the gospel.

Therefore, after his ascension and the public preaching of the gospel,
the Jews have no excuse, and it does not help them to have their Moses
and worship, to suffer and do much, to pray and serve God on the false
delusion of the future Messiah, for it has been proclaimed publicly
enough to them and to all the world that he is coming; and in addition
their own Scriptures convict them of it, and their own experience should
teach them that they hope in vain for another. Their forefathers were
able to wait for his coming with good honor and right faith, and to pray
for such a future, and to keep their God\'s

They kept the service of the law, because the Scriptures could not yet
be fulfilled, and no new public preaching had gone out into the world.
But now they themselves must say that all the time, foretold and
determined by the prophets, has long since ended, and that the gospel of
the same Christ, promised by the prophets, has gone out into all the
world, and that the same Messiah has been accepted by all the Gentiles,
and yet they deny and blaspheme him out of pure unbelief and hatred of
this Christ (who is their blood and flesh), and so God in his word and
fulfillment must be their liar: Then they will finally be cast out with
all their faith and worship, so that they will never get a Savior
forever (if they do not turn to Him), and everything they pray for in
such a name will be lost, condemned, and an abomination in the sight of
God. And it must be fulfilled in them what the 109th Psalm, v. 7,
prophesies: \"Let his prayer become sin\", so that they only anger God
more, and make their condemnation more severe.

226 Therefore he says, \"You have not yet made your prayer in my name,
as you should, because you are not yet in the knowledge and faith of my
suffering and resurrection, by which I am to fulfill all things. But
when these things shall come to pass and be preached, then shall a new
prayer and service begin in all the world, that they may pray aright in
my name, and also shew forth the power thereof, and the fruit thereof;
that they may see such prayer mightily answered and fulfilled.

227\. Now if the Jews\' worship and prayer is condemned and lost because
they direct it to God, not in this Christ (who has come), but in a
future name: What will God say to the prayer that has been done so much
and often, and is still being done in all the papacy and Mahomet\'s
faith, without all Christ, and neither in the future nor present
name, 1) but they themselves come before God without means in their own
name, and think that if they have done so much and prayed so much, then
God should look at it, and for the sake of such works

1\) Here we have deleted \"the same\" because it is too much.

716 **Erl. so, I2S-ILS. Sermon on John 16:24. W. VIII, 626-629.** 717

and merits? They do not even think that they are allowed to call this
Christ (even if they call him), but badly base and build the prayer on
their work, as if they were the people whom God had to look at. To them
it is rightly said: What are you doing with your prayer and worship? You
have never prayed in my name; yes, you have never prayed a word (which
is called praying before God), but your praying is vain work, yes, in
addition to 1) sin and blasphemy against God.

228\. So then, everything that is to be called rightly prayed and served
to please God is included in the one word: \"In my name,\" and separated
from all other worship, even (as I have said) of the Old Testament,
which the holy fathers kept; and all things are made new in this Christ,
even the prayer of those dear fathers (because they called upon the same
Christ, and now he is come, and hath fulfilled the things which they
believed and waited for), and now the Scriptures and Psalms sound in our
mouths (if we believe in Christ) as new, as when David sang them at the
first. And in short, he will henceforth have abolished all diversity and
difference, and brought everything into unity, so that now there will be
no more than, as St. Paul says. One God, one church, one faith \[Eph. 4,
4. 5. 6.\], one prayer and worship, one Christ, yesterday and today, and
forever 2c. \[Hebr. 13, 8.\] And God in short does not want to hear nor
know anything else 2)(for what goes in the name).

**Ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full.**

229 The commandment is written there that he not only wants to exhort
and strengthen us to prayer, but also to lay the commandment upon us and
require of us that we pray to God for obedience. And as that promise and
assurance should make us joyful and willing, so this commandment should
compel and drive us, that it should and must be prayed, if I want to
love Christ and be obedient, no matter how unworthy I may be, as above
\[§200 ff\].

1\) Wittenberg and Jena: the sin.

2\) Wittenberger: \"anders Gebot\".

Enough has been said about this. But he also repeats the promise: \"Ask
confidently; there will be no lack of hearing, for you will surely
receive it. What more shall he do, or how shall he exhort and provoke
us?

But what is this, that he concludes, saying, \"That your joy may be
complete\"? What is he doing here, ordering and directing our prayer as
if nothing more were to be sought in it but that we might have perfect
joy? He teaches in the Lord\'s Prayer that we should pray first of all
for the sanctification of his name and the strengthening of his kingdom;
how then does he begin at the back, from the fulfillment of our joy? 2c.
Is it not said thus (as the high spirits speak of it): If heaven were
open before one, man should not wish for it, unless it were God\'s will.
For we are not to ask anything else than what God\'s will is. Answer to
the most simple: He speaks here with his Christians (because the others
should not and cannot pray), who desire nothing higher than God\'s name,
kingdom and will, and have no greater joy than where this happens. But
all is said against the false worshippers, who turn back and seek only
their own, and themselves want to be and obtain everything before God,
and certainly have the name of Christians; but there is no heart nor
desire and love for Christ and His kingdom. This is called a false
desire and false love.

Our scholastic theologians, who have seen this from afar, have also
spoken of this, and call two kinds of love: Amorem concupiscentiae, and
amicitiae; and St. Augustine calls it Uti et frui. Some (he says) love
God out of good will; but some for the sake of their benefit. This is
amor concupiscentiae, and is called in German, a harlot love, which
loves another for the sake of her superstition. But this (amor
amicitiae) is a righteous love, as the right conjugal love, or the
natural love between parents and children, since one grants the best to
the other, and has his pleasure and joy in it, if it is good for him. So
there are also two kinds of lovers here: Some who think that if they
could only escape punishment and chastisement, then

718 Erl. 50, 125-127. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
629-631. 719

they ask nothing of it, let God\'s name and his kingdom remain where it
will. This is a love of a thief, like a thief who is afraid of the
gallows, loves the judge and the executioner, and goes to such, as the
proverb says: He who is afraid of hell must go in. Such know nothing of
the joy of which Christ speaks here.

232 But Christians (of which he says here) who love Christ with a true
heart are so minded that they desire and seek nothing so highly as that
God\'s kingdom be furthered, His name and glory be known and praised,
and everyone do His will. And when this happens, they are well helped.
And for this very reason they pray for daily bread and all other needs
on earth. Therefore pray with confidence,\" he says, \"and you will have
such abundant joy as your heart desires, and everything that is good and
useful will be given to you. For where the order is to seek first the
kingdom of God (as he says in Matt. 6:33), that his word may be preached
and believed, the rest is all right, that we also ask for the temporal,
that he may feed us and help us out of trouble.

233 But these words, \"That your joy may be full,\" are actually based
on what he said above \[v. 20.Not only this hour, when he should be
taken from them, and leave them alone in anguish and sorrow, without
help and comfort, forsaken of all the world, and with a heavy and sinful
conscience, but also that they should be persecuted and condemned by the
world for their preaching ministry, and be troubled and crushed by the
devil, and so be called, as he said: \"Ye shall weep and wail, but the
world shall rejoice\" 2c.

Although he promised them that they would rejoice again and that no one
would take their joy away from them, he also knows that such joy is
still weak and mixed with sadness, so that sadness is felt much more and
stronger than joy. Therefore, he tells them to pray and ask that their
joy will always be stronger and stronger. For where joy is so

If they would soon be fully satisfied, and there would be no sadness,
they would not be allowed to pray. But now it must be salted in this
life, so that fear and sadness drive them to pray and to cry out, so
that the comfort tastes all the better to them, and they become all the
more greedy for joy. So he makes the promise that their joy will be
complete, that they will overcome and forget all fear, sorrow and
heartache. And that these things might come to pass, he directs them to
prayer, that they may obtain and receive them.

And as I have said, this fullness of joy is primarily directed toward
the high things concerning God\'s name and kingdom; these must go where
joy is to be, otherwise you will never have joy as a Christian in your
heart. For this is precisely the greatest part of the heartache and
sorrow that Christians have, that they must see that God\'s name in His
Gospel is everywhere so shamefully profaned and blasphemed, God\'s
kingdom persecuted, and His will despised and trampled underfoot. And
they must also feel this in themselves, that the devil is fighting
against them in their hearts with his infernal thoughts of unbelief,
blasphemy, despair, etc.; in addition, their own flesh is resistant to
the spirit of these joys. This is their real hell, torment and sorrowful
suffering; otherwise they could well bear and overcome all persecution,
suffering and torment, yes, even accept them with joy, as the dear holy
martyrs did.

Now, what shall we do? Joy cannot become perfect (as Christ says here)
until we see God\'s name fully sanctified, all false doctrine and sects
eradicated, all tyrants and persecutors of His kingdom subdued; item,
all ungodly and the devil\'s will and pretensions controlled, and His
will alone done; item, that no more bellyache or hunger and thirst
afflicts us, no more sin oppresses us, no more temptation weakens the
heart, no more death holds us captive. But this does not happen before,
because in that life, when it will be called, we will feel perfect joy,
and not a drop of sorrow anymore 2c. But in this life it goes (as St.
Paul says \[1 Cor. 13, 9.\]) only piecemeal, and have only a little bit
of joy.

720 Erl. 50, IS7-I30. Sermon on Joh. 16, 24. 25. w. vm, 631-634. 721

a droplet of it in faith, which is the beginning or foretaste and
credence, which grasps the consolation that Christ redeems us, and
through him we have come into God\'s kingdom 2c. But it is weak in its
power and consequence; it will not follow, and cannot be so pure, both
with faith and life; for we always fall again into the mire, and are
weighed down with sadness and a heavy conscience, so that the joy cannot
be pure, or ever becomes so small that even such joy as has begun can
hardly be felt.

237 Therefore this part must also be added, which is called praying for
help and strength, so that one day there may be complete and perfect
joy. You must not seek it in yourself, nor in this world, for its joy is
unclean, which death takes away in the end; but there you must seek it
(says Christ), that you may pray in my name that these things may come
to pass, for which I have come, and have called you and set you, that
God\'s name, kingdom and will may go forth in all things, and that what
the devil, the world and the flesh drives against it without ceasing,
may one day come to an end.

238\) See, this is what he wants here 1) with these words, when he says
that your joy will be complete. This testifies that they should have joy
in him (as he says at the end), but that they should always need to pray
that such joy may remain with them and become stronger, even complete.
For it is not so that those who have tasted the firstfruits and
refreshments of this joy can be full and satisfied of it as soon as they
have tasted it, but only hunger and thirst for it more and more, the
more they have tasted its consolation and sweetness. For they also
suffer the devil to throw vinegar and gall under them, and become more
full of bitterness and sorrow than of joy (if they have tasted a
little). Therefore he admonishes them that they only continue to pray
confidently for such joy, which may become perfect, as it will be
forever after this life.

**V. 25. These things have I spoken unto you by proverbs: but the time
cometh, that I will not**

1\) \"hie\" is missing in the Erlanger.

**I will no longer speak to you by proverbs, but will freely proclaim to
you about my Father.**

It can be seen that the dear Lord liked to talk to the disciples in the
last hour, and did not like to leave them in sadness over his departure.
That is why he speaks so many words, ends them as if he had finished
speaking, and yet begins again; as such people do who love one another
and must part, when they have said good night to one another, and yet
continue to speak, and say good night again and again. So he speaks: I
have told you many things, both of you, how you should have sorrow and
joy again, as a woman over childbirth 2c., but these are vain sayings
and proverbs to you, which now you do not understand. For you think that
I will travel some miles from you, and afterward come again; do not
understand that I speak of such a passage, which is called, passed out
of this life into death. Therefore also this comfort will soon be over
in your heart, when you will see me delivered to death, shamefully hung
on the cross and laid in the grave, until I will show myself alive again
to you. Then what I say now will no longer be a proverb and dark speech,
but will make it clear so that you will understand it very well and see
what it is, as I have always said to you about my father. This is what
happened, because soon after his resurrection he clearly proclaimed to
them, and by the same work of the resurrection he showed that this was
the will and mind of the Father, and that it had to happen as it was
written of him, that he would go through suffering and death into his
glory and take the kingdom at the right hand of the Father, and through
the gospel preach repentance and forgiveness of sins to all the world,
as he said in Luc. 24:47.

240 This is the simple opinion of these words. For we do not want to
take these words into the high mind, as some of the fathers have
interpreted them (although it is right), that he wanted to proclaim to
them through the Holy Spirit, how he is truly God with the Father
together with the Holy Spirit. For the Holy Spirit (as he himself said
above v. 14) was to transfigure him, and (as St. Paul said) to make him
a true God.

[722 Erl. so, ISO-IW. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
KS4-LL7. 723]{.underline}

Rom. 1, 4) that he is the Son of God for eternity 2c. Such an
interpretation is good, but I remain here, that he speaks of the counsel
and will of the Father, namely, what he means by sending Christ from
heaven, and thus lets him go through the cross and death.

241\. For this is the mystery of the kingdom of heaven (as Christ calls
it) and the Christian revelation and preaching, that he is sent by the
Father\'s command to preach to the world and to do wonders, so that
people will believe in him; and after that, to take on his neck all the
sin of the world, and to blot it out in his own person, and by his death
to overcome death, and after that to sit at his right hand, and to have
him preach publicly, so that all who believe in him may also have such
victory (which he conquers). I will proclaim and preach to you very
clearly and powerfully the counsel of the Father. This is what happened,
as evidenced by the apostles\' writings and sermons, which remain in
this article alone, and which they diligently pursued day and night;
when St. Paul also took his leave of Mileto, Acts 20:27. 20, 27, and
said: You know that I have been with you three years, and have done
nothing to you, but have declared to you all the counsel of God. 2c. So
also Peter Apost. 2, 22. 23.: \"JEsum of Nazareth, after he was devoted
to you out of well-considered counsel and providence of God, you took
and hanged him\" 1) 2c.

242 In the Gospel, Christ also refers to the Father\'s will and counsel
in all his words and works, so that everything may be known and believed
by the Father\'s command, flowing from him. Just as his divine nature is
also from eternity from the Father, so he shows that he also did not
take his ministry from himself, nor did he conceive it, but it comes
from the Father\'s premeditated, determined counsel. And for this reason
(as has been said many times above) he draws us to the Father, so that
we may not seek or think of any other God besides Christ, nor be afraid
of him, as if the Father and Christ were not one, but believe and know
as Christ does.

1\) Erlanger: pinned.

is merciful, and willingly dies for us, that the Father, as he has so
willed and commanded, is also so graciously disposed toward us. For he
is to be called and be the reconciler and mediator between us and God.
For this reason he also faithfully carries out this office, and always
exemplifies to us poor sinners the great heartfelt love of the Father
toward us, so that what we see and hear in him, we recognize and accept
everything as flowing from the Father\'s heart, and if we provide
ourselves with all love, goodness, help and comfort, as he has proven
with his words and works, life and limb, we should also provide the same
and nothing else toward the Father.

Now this is the common preaching of the Gospel, and is no longer called
by proverbs, because it is preached so publicly, clearly and abundantly,
that it is now considered little, and almost childish preaching, and
many mock us for it, saying: we know nothing to preach but faith, faith
2c. But would God it were so little and light a doctrine and art as they
esteem it. But they may see to it that it is not too dark and heavy for
them, when some calamity falls upon their necks, and then they do not
understand one letter of it, when they should be able to do it best. It
has been preached abundantly and clearly by the apostles, masterfully
and powerfully written out, and is now everywhere spoken, written, sung,
and painted by mouth and pen, but no one believes it, how difficult it
is to preserve in times of need.

For no one thinks how we poor people are so weak, frail and despondent
against the devil and his temptations, when God wants to tempt us and
kick us a little behind the wall (as Song of Songs chap. 2:9 says), that
we have suddenly and in a moment forgotten this comfort, and are not so
powerful that we could receive this article against the devil, even
though we have all the books and our own mouths full of it, where God
does not preserve us mightily in it. I have seen many of them myself,
who have had it so fine and have preached of it, and yet have fallen
away from it, and have become

2\) Erlanger: all love.

724 **Erl. so, ISS-1S4. Sermon On John 16:25-27. W. VIII, 637-Wg.** 725

have been. And what can I say about myself, who has preached and written
about this as much as anyone else, and who has also thought about it
myself; it is still so sour and difficult for me to keep this article in
my heart that I do not want to, nor can I, hold it in such contempt and
low esteem.

What led the Anabaptists into error and lamentation, but that they
thought they were full of it, when they had never really tasted it?
Therefore I say not in vain: If the apostles could not have grasped it,
since Christ told them much about it, that he must tell it to them more
clearly only after the resurrection through the Holy Spirit, whom he
alone sent to transfigure this article, we should not be ashamed to
learn from it, nor should we soon boast of this art master. For it is
and remains a dark speech or saying (even if someone hears it abundantly
and preaches it himself), if the Holy Spirit himself does not also
transfigure and preserve it in the heart.

**V. 26. On that day you will ask in my name.**

When you have the clear revelation and proclamation (which is now spoken
of) and grasp it in faith, then this piece will also be found, which is
called praying in my name. For these two things are promised to
Christianity, Joel 3, 1. and Zach. 12, 10. that after the resurrection
of Christ God will pour out on all flesh His Spirit, which is to be
called the Spirit of grace and prayer. Therefore, just as you will have
the Spirit of grace to teach you what the Father\'s will is, and what he
has directed and given you through me, so you will also have the Spirit
of prayer, so that you will be able to call on him from your heart in my
name.

Hereby he shows that no prayer can be made without the knowledge and
faith of this article of Christ (now spoken of), although the other
articles would also be completely present. And so these two articles are
linked to each other, so that no one can pray rightly unless it is in
the spirit of grace, which assures the heart that it has a gracious God
through Christ, and that it can joyfully pray to him.

call his father. For it is not a spirit (says St. Paul Rom. 8, 15. 16.)
that frightens the hearts with sin and God\'s wrath through the law, but
that restores such frightened hearts that feel their sin and God\'s
disgrace (and therefore are not allowed nor able to come before God and
call upon Him, but only continue to flee from Him) through the comfort
and promise of eternal grace and mercy.

If you believe this, then you can open your mouth and pray to God as you
wish, with the confidence that He will surely hear you. For you do not
depend on your own name, work or merit, but on the fact that through the
Holy Spirit it is declared to you what God\'s will and command is, which
he has accomplished through Christ, that through him he wants to accept
you in grace and be your dear Father.

249\. Therefore it is impossible that the pope with all his multitude
(if he still had a thousand times as many churches, monasteries and
convents, and the same were full of chattering and sounding day and
night without ceasing) had done a single right prayer, or could still do
so (I will keep silent about Turks, Jews and pagans, because they do not
have this article of Christ, which the Spirit of grace preaches, indeed,
neither want to hear nor suffer, but rage against it, and publicly
condemn and blaspheme this preaching of the Father\'s will and counsel.
They can do nothing but scream and slander against it 2): One should do
good works (against this preaching of Christ), as the blind, who do not
know what good works are, nor what the Father\'s will is, although it is
clear and easy to grasp that without this knowledge no good works can be
done, and what is done against this will of God in Christ is not good
nor godly, but condemned by God; and is not called a spirit of grace or
prayer, but of disgrace and blasphemy against God.

**V. 26. 27. And I do not tell you that I will ask the Father for you.
For he himself, the Father, asked you dearly, that you might love me,
and believe that I came forth from God.**

1\) \"will\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) \"dawider\" is missing in the Erlanger.

726 Eri. so, IS4-IS7. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
\"38-642. 727

After the valete and good night (about which he makes many words, as
good friends are used to let each other go), this is almost a strong new
beginning. For he cannot refrain from the great love he has for the
disciples, he must also hang this up. I do not say (he says) that I will
pray for you, but you yourselves will pray; for he himself, the Father,
loves you 2c. How would this be? We have always heard that we cannot
come before God and do no prayer without this mediator, who is sent by
the Father for this purpose, and that our prayer must go through his
person and in his mime alone, where it is to please God; how then does
he say here that he will not pray for them? Just as if they were not
allowed to be anything, and this honor, right and power were even given
to us. As the Turks, Jews, priests and monks have taught and still
believe, and have sold their own prayers and good works to the people as
a sign; and they would like to have a remedy from this, and say: Christ
himself has confirmed this, when he says that it is not necessary for
him to pray for them, but that they should pray themselves.

251\. Answer: Yes, but there is one thing written with it; you must also
take this, and pull both together; do not piece and stump the text,
plucking out one and leaving the other. For thus he saith, The Father
himself loveth you, because ye believe on me\" 2c. For he will not thus
be put out of the way, that they should pray without him, or apart from
him. But if we have this mediator in our hearts, and believe that he
comes from God, and is the Father\'s command to take away our sin and
death, 2c., then we can also pray ourselves, and such prayer is pleasing
to God, for the sake of this man who stands in the middle between the
Father and us. For we already have his prayer, by which he has forbidden
us against the Father, which he once did, but still endures forever, and
makes our prayer also pleasing to him and answered.

In this faith such an opinion is right that I can say: I know that my
heavenly Father is very glad to hear what I pray, yes, as far as I have
this Savior Christ in my heart, who has asked for me.

and so my prayer is pleasing through his; so that we weave our prayer
into his, and he is the mediator forever and with all men, through whom
we come to God, and our prayer and what we do is implanted in him and
clothed in him. As St. Paul says \[Rom. 13, 14\] that we should put on
Christ, and everything should be done in Him \[1 Cor. 10, 31\], so it
should be pleasing in the sight of God.

All this is said to Christians, that they should boldly and confidently
consider this man, and pray with all confidence, because we hear that he
thus unites himself with us, and almost makes us like him, and mixes our
prayer into his, and his into ours. This is a great, great glory of
Christians. For if our prayer is united with his, he then says from Ps.
22:23, \"I will proclaim your name to my brothers,\" 2c. and Rom. 8:16,
17, \"The Holy Spirit testifies that we are children through Christ. But
if we are children, we are also heirs of God and joint heirs with
Christ.\"

254 What greater thing could be said of us than that through the faith
of Christ we are set on high honor, that we are called his brethren and
joint heirs, and that our prayer should be like his. That almost no
difference remains, without it coming from him, and going through him,
that our prayer may be acceptable, and he bring us to inheritance and
glory; otherwise he makes us in all things like himself, and his prayer
and ours must be One Cake, even as his body is our body, and our members
are his members, as Paul saith Eph. 5:30. \"We are members of his body,
of his flesh, and of his bones.\" This glory he must, for more comfort,
remind them of just in the last words. But so, and therefore, if they
believe that he was sent by God\'s counsel and will, that they may
confidently pray on him, and do all that Christians ought to do. For
this piece must not be omitted nor forgotten, otherwise nothing but a
Turkish or pagan prayer and worship would come of it.

**V. 28. I came forth from the Father, and come into the world; again I
leave the world, and come to the Father.**

**\
**728 **Eri. so, IS7-ISS. Sermon On John 16:28-30. W. VIII, K42-S4S.**
729

This is exactly the same opinion as in the previous words. For I do not
want to go here into the high article of the Holy Trinity, as he
proceeds from eternity in the divine essence from the Father, of which
is said above \[§151 ff.\], but remain here in the common understanding,
of his office, which concerns Christianity, that he is sent from the
Father to us men, to carry out the work of our redemption. Thus he comes
from God, even though he has come forth from eternity in the divine
essence.

Again he says: Now that I have accomplished what I was sent to do, I am
going again to the Father. And that he expresses what such \"going to
the Father\" means, he says: I am leaving the world; so that the
disciples themselves realize that he now speaks somewhat more clearly
than before. For that he has hitherto said that he would go, he now
means that he is leaving the world; that is, that he no longer wants to
be on earth among people with outward life and being, eating and
drinking, walking and standing. This I will leave,\" he says, \"and I
will take out of the eyes, ears, senses, and all this bodily life in
which you and I still live, and enter into another heavenly life, where
the world will not see me. In the same way he speaks of this after the
resurrection, Luc. 24, 44. saying, \"These are the words that I spoke to
you while I was still with you,\" even though he is still with them, but
in such a way that he is no longer subject to natural nature and bodily
life, and may no longer walk and stand, sleep and watch, eat and drink,
and use the world as a man on earth, but has already taken on another
life, in which he is free from all things, except the eyes of the world,
and is seated at the right hand of the Father. These words the dear
disciples begin to understand to some extent. Therefore they looked at
him and said:

**V. 29, 30 His disciples said to him, \"See, now you speak freely and
do not say a proverb. Now we know that you know all things and do not
need anyone to ask you. Therefore we believe that you came from God.**

These are simple words, both of the disciples and of Christ Himself,
that they could not be spoken more simply. For they, out of all
confidence and good opinion, go on like this, saying, \"This has been
said clearly and without a word, so that we may understand what you mean
by going out from God and returning to the Father, and now they know
that you know all things, and that there is no need for us to ask you.
For before we begin to ask, you have already answered. Therefore we also
believe that it is true, as you said, that you went out from God.

258\. This is (I say) all spoken out of pure simplicity. For they also
want to speak something to the point, so that he does not think that
they are so rough that they do not understand anything about it. For he
has spoken high and heavy things before; but this is the heaviest, when
he says, \"I came forth from the Father, and again I leave the world,\"
2c. which they also understand least of all. For if they had understood
it, they would have fled from him immediately, as they did soon after.
As he also answers them to these words v. 32: \"The hour cometh, and is
already come, that ye should be scattered, and leave me alone\" 2c. As
if to say, \"If the Father were not with me, I would stand on your side
in evil and naked.

259 Now here is shown the kindly manner and loving company of the Lord
Christ with his disciples, how he behaved toward them, that they were
very well pleased with him, 1) and he gladly heard them speak with him,
and could well suffer, and also give credit for everything, as to his
dear disciples, who also loved him, and did all good to him, that he
also spoke so simple and childlike with them, as he saw them speak.

\(260\) As he is painted everywhere in the Gospel, that he speaks and
gives his testimony as he has people before him. Where he is supposed to
be sharp and pointed, he can be over-sharp; and again, where he is
supposed to be simple and wants to be simple, as with his poor
simple-minded disciples and children, he also talks about the people
before him.

1\) \"to be on good terms with someone\" - to be on good terms with
someone.

730 Erl. so, I3S-I4V Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
645-\"47. 731.

Childish in all measures. 1) When the Pharisees want to master him and
ask: Why does he do this or that? as that he lets his disciples pluck
the ears on the Sabbath? or why they eat with unwashed hands? item, when
they ask him with the pointed question: whether one should give the
interest to Caesar? then he also meets them with such a pointed answer
that they become disgraced because of it. Again, when he talks to
simple-minded, silly people, he talks and acts more simple-minded than
anyone else. As when he had the little children brought to him, he
embraced them and kissed them, and talked with them in such a childlike
manner that the disciples also led those who brought them to him, but he
again rebuked the disciples: \"Unless you turn and become like such
children, you cannot enter the kingdom of heaven \[Matth. 18, 3\].
Summa, the art he alone can do before all. To the wise and prudent he is
all too wise and prudent; and again, with the children and foolish he is
so childish, as if he did not know any better.

He does the same here. Since he does not have to deal with the
poisonous, sharp serpents, which are really looking for him, and Judas
the betrayer is also gone, and sits there with his dear disciples, as
simple, unintelligent children, who therefore stammer, babble and
tackle, as they understand it: he also babbles and babbles with them.
Just as a father and mother of their little child pretend to be pleased
with him, and point to the best and say, \"Yes, dear son, you have
spoken right. Or, like a pious schoolmaster, when a young boy has to
recite the ABC to him, he can very well have patience, that he only
starts a little, even if he cannot do it completely, and has to help him
in it, and always preach to him that he keeps him at it and brings him
away, and says: Yes, that\'s right, my dear child, so learn it 2c. So
Christ is also pleased with this simple-mindedness and childish answer
of his disciples, and says: \"Yes, my dear disciples, you say right, for
you are my disciples, and believe in me 2c. So confirm it, let it all be
right and good, call it believed and well spoken (although still quite
weak), so that

1\) Wittenberger: That.

So he keeps them with him until they become stronger and more
understanding, because he thinks about what they should still become and
what he wants to make of them. And it is a great, excellent humility and
love that the high majesty lets himself down so completely, and makes
all things equal and even to the poor, weak and unintelligent, is not
afraid to lisp and slur with them in a childlike way.

But for our consolation we are shown that we learn to know and believe
in our dear Lord, how he so loves his own (who are attached to him),
that he is well able to bear their infancy and weakness, infirmities and
lack of understanding, so that through such motherly gentleness and
patience he keeps them with him and makes them stronger and stronger.
\"For he will not break the broken reed, nor quench the smoldering
wick,\" says the prophet Isaias, \"but will kindle a fire out of the
little budding spark, and strengthen and uplift the weak faith. But
again, he can also be sharp and sharp against the devil and his pointed
dragon heads, and exaggerate and over-devil them, as he calls them evil
serpents, viper-breds and children of hell everywhere in the Gospel 2c.

For he shall be called, in short, the man who is all things, and what he
speaks, does, and makes, that all these things may be right and well
done. That it may be known that God is certainly so minded toward us, as
we see and hear Christ manifesting Himself toward us in words,
offerings, and signs, and comforting us that, if God has given us the
grace to gladly hear, love, and value this man, it shall also be love in
Him, as He has now said, \"The Father loves you, because you love me.
And all that we still lack and are lacking must be a loud child\'s
babbling and stammering.

Therefore, everything depends on our learning to cling to Christ as sent
and given to us by the Father, whoever wants to have God\'s grace and be
blessed, or else, in short, everything will be lost. And even if it were
still so excellent, high and delicious a thing with the highly learned
masters, holy Pharisees and all wise and prudent men on earth, still
nothing shall be good nor valid without this alone,

732\. ed.**\", 141-1, 3. sermon on John 16:29-32. W. VIII, 647-sso.**
733

If we believe in him and let him be our master, our Lord, and
everything, he will again accept our words and deeds, even if they are
weak and imperfect, even if they are childish and foolish.

**V. 31. 32. Jesus answered them: Now believe. Behold, the hour cometh,
and is already come, that ye should be scattered every man to his own,
and leave me alone. But I am not alone, for the Father is with me.**

He does not want to punish them, nor does he want to reproach them when
they are still weak and without understanding, but he answers them in
the most friendly way. As if to say: \"You are good, pious children, let
yourselves think that you understand and believe. And it is true that
you now believe, as they heartily confess that he came forth from God
(which is ever the right faith); but you do not know how it will go, and
how your faith is so weak. For you believe now, but about an hour after
my suffering begins, these words and thoughts of mine will fall from
your hearts, and you will all run away from me and forsake me (yes, even
deny me), as if you did not know me. That is no longer believed (as they
now confess and he gives them testimony), without only that they
nevertheless remain his dear children, and yet their heart still clings
to him a little; that this must not harm them, but still remain in his
hands, even if they fall from weakness. But yet (he says) I must warn
you of this, and say beforehand that it is not done as you now think,
and have it well in mind, but that you learn how little and weakly you
understand and believe it. But it shall not hurt you. For you are my
disciples, and not my enemies, like Judas, Caiphas, Herod, who betray
and condemn me. And even though you are scattered from me and leave me
alone, I am not forsaken. For the Father is still with me. And because
he abideth, I also will abide.

And herewith he gives to understand on what he has always put his
consolation. He has even a small group with him in this last hour, and
is now at the point that death will

He already sees the ropes and chains bound on him, and all armed and in
armor who will attack him, and that he will also be abandoned by these
few, his disciples. He still consoles himself: \"Even though the whole
world is against me, and even this small group is leaving me, I will not
perish because of this, for I still have the Father with me.

These are excellent, high words, which also befit this person of Christ.
But who is there among Christians who could repeat them after him? How
it should be that every man should be so sure of himself, and could say,
\"Well, though all men fall away from me, yet the Father is still with
me. But where such a word is spoken without gulping, sighing and
weeping, I am surprised, because Christ himself was so miserable that he
had to be abandoned by the whole world, even by his dearest friends.

268 For it naturally hurt him, as a true man, that he should see all his
own shying away from him and running, and that no one should stand or
stay with him, as he laments very much in the Psalter, as Psalm
31:12.\"Whoever sees me in the street flees from me\"; and Psalm 38:12:
\"All my friends and acquaintances flee far from me\"; item in the 22nd
Psalm, v. 21, 22: \"Save my lonely soul, among vain cruel unicorns.\"
For he also felt such misery much more deeply than we do, what it is to
be so alone or forsaken, that it undoubtedly pressed out heavy sighs and
hot tears from him. Yes, whoever should try it and thus stand alone,
abandoned by all people, even by those who were attached to him, would
like to know something about it. As if I were to say of myself, as a
small example, that 1) it would come about that everything that is still
with me would fall away from me, although they would not stand against
me, but would stand in fear or doubt, so that I would not know whether
they were for me or against me, and could no longer provide myself with
anyone\'s support.

269: St. John Hus was burned at Constance (we like him with honor).

1\) Jenaer and Erlanger: and.

734 Erl. so, I4Z-I45, Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SS0-W2. 735

1\) because he does not deserve as much as we do, so that I am often
very surprised how he was able to stand so firmly alone against all the
world, pope, emperor and the whole council, since not one man stood with
him, but was condemned and cursed by everyone. Do you not think that the
dungeon has often been too narrow for him? He still had to comfort
himself, and overcome such fear, with this very saying, that Christ
himself might comfort himself: \"I am alone, and yet I am not alone; for
the Father is with me.\" For it grieves, and makes a foolish heart, that
a man should suddenly lose all his friends and company, to whom he has
given himself all good things. How could the apostles have been too
brave if Christ had thus departed from them and left them in distress
for an hour? If I myself (since God is for me) began to fall away from
my own, or stood alone as if I were no longer with them, what separation
and tearing would there be?

Therefore he does not speak this word in vain and without cause. For no
doubt it came from a great shock of the heart, and it became hard and
sour for him to throw himself around and tear himself away from all men,
saying, \"Well, I must give you credit and pity that you are leaving me
all alone; but my own friends and apostles and all the world are falling
away, so I am not alone, for I have a Father who will not leave me; for
I am suffering and dying because of the word and command he has given
me.

271 There was also a great and grievous case and distress among his
Jews, when they saw him so lonely and forsaken that they had to say,
\"Where are they now who have kept company with him and praised and
shouted so highly of him? If he had taught good things and rightly, they
would probably be standing with him now. Now they stand with him in all
shame.

1\) We have closed the parenthesis here, while in the editions it is
closed only after: \"as we\". The words: \"because he also does not
deserve as much as we do\", we put it this way: although Hus did not
deserve to be burned by the pope as a heretic as much as we do. Cf. ? 28
of the next interpretation of the 17th chapter of John.

There is no one who wants to be seen or heard by him. Yes, he must also
hear the judgment and cries that they deny him God Himself, as if he
were condemned and cursed by Him. He still stands firm against all this
and says: \"Yet I am not alone, for the Father is with me, I know that.
And make him such help and company as is greater than heaven and earth.
For if the Father is with him, then all the angels and saints must be
with him (although it does not seem so), and everything must return to
him, as he also says John 12:32: \"If I am lifted up from the earth, I
will draw all things to myself.\"

This is set as an example for us, whether such a thing should happen to
us over his word and confession, so that we learn to keep this comfort,
whether all men forsake us, so that we are not forsaken, but say with
the 27. 2) Psalm, v. 10: \"Father and mother forsake me, but the Lord
accepts me. And with Christ, \"I am not alone, for the Father is with
me.\"

**V. 33. These things have I spoken unto you, that in me ye might have
peace. In the world you are afraid. But be of good cheer, I have
overcome the world.**

This is the last given, and struck in the hand for good night. But he
concludes very powerfully with what he has done the whole sermon. This
is the sum of all that I have said, and there it all goes, that in me
you may have peace and comfort, if in the world you have trouble and
fear. What I have spoken to you, that I will keep; only think and accept
it, so that you keep it again. For he knoweth well what he layeth upon
their necks, and what shall befall them; as he hath said enough of this.
Therefore he exhorts them to keep his word, and to remember it, when
they shall know it, 4) and then to comfort and strengthen themselves
with it.

2\) Erlanger: \"28th \[22nd\] Psalm\". \"22\" is reprinted from Walch.

3\) Erlanger: Last.

4\) \"So go,\" that is, so it goes.

[736 **Erl. so, 145-147. Sermon On Joh. 16, 33. \' W. VIII, 6SS-WS.**
737]{.underline}

For this is the nature of our flesh and blood, that we can be bold and
cheerful as long as suffering and affliction are not there; as also
Proverbs says, \"I am not afraid of their ten when I am alone. But when
the weather turns, and temptation and trouble come, and press us, we
have lost the good promises, and the comforting thoughts fade away, as
if Christ had never made no promise, or left no comfort at all behind
him. That is why he so often and diligently reminded you, saying,
\"These things I have spoken to you, that you forget them not, for I
tell you plainly beforehand, that you shall surely be in anguish and
distress. You must consider this, and be prepared for it, so that you do
not lose heart and lose your comfort, but only be confident and
undaunted. For I tell you, the game is already won; do not worry that I
will send you there, where you would have to dare to adventure, and
stand in danger whether you would lose or win. It is not to be said of
this, as if one should first attack and make an encounter, but the
victory is already there, and everything is conquered; only that you
hold on to it undaunted and firmly.

275\. So he will always draw their thoughts far beyond and lift them
above everything that may come under their eyes, so that they do not see
how the old dragon and lion (the devil and the world) angrily shuts its
mouth, bares its teeth and sharpens its claws, but think far beyond that
it is now already won, and such fierce baring of the mouth and teeth,
tearing and choking comes much too slowly; And they take such thoughts,
just in that, and then, when they feel fear and distress, lie on the bed
of death, or are condemned to the fire or sword, as God demands, and
thus may keep the victory against the devil and death.

276 For these words a Christian shall sound, and make greater than
heaven and earth, when he saith, These things have I spoken unto you,
and I have overcome the world. As if he wanted to say: Dear, write the
\"I\" only with very large letters, so that you can grasp it in your
eyes and heart. For the \"you\" and \"your\" (when he speaks \"to you

and \"You will be afraid,\") that is a very small word, and yes as 1)
small, as \[a\] single little stick in the sun. But it does not hurt; if
you are small and weak, I am the greater and stronger. I have made the
whole world out of one little stick, yes, out of much less than one
little stick (which is called nothing). So even if you are even smaller,
I can and will make you big enough. For it is I who speak these things.
Do not say, \"This is what the Roman or Turkish emperor says, which is
great and glorious in the eyes of the world. Neither saith he, All the
holy angels from heaven, and all the creature, say this; but: [I, I say
it]{.underline}; which shall be immeasurably and incomprehensibly more
and greater. Therefore only think of my saying, and keep to it, and look
at the person who speaks these things; not you who hear it, nor what is
apart from me, so that you are challenged 2c. For if ye will look upon
yourselves against the great, your enemies, pope, emperor, kings, the
world, yea, the devil and death, they shall become too strong and great
for you, that ye must despair against them.

I have devoured and eaten so much (says the death and the devil) now
almost six thousand years, yes, many thousand often in one day; what do
I care about a man? If I can eat a whole lamb at once (said the wolf),
should I not also be able to devour a mosquito? The world and the devil
regard us as such little gnats, so that they do not notice it in their
mouths when they devour us. But we should not look at ourselves so
small, nor at them so great and cruel, as it seems: small and little are
we in comparison with death and the devil\'s power; but if we cling to
him who says, \"I\", \"I have overcome the world\", let us see if all
the world, the devil and death have such wide mouths that they devour
us. But if they devour us, let a leg come into their throats, so that
they may be strangled by it. For as little as they have eaten up Christ
and devoured him, so little shall they devour us.

1\) \"so\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

738 Erl. so, 147-ISO. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
WS-W8. 739

With this, Christ would like to persuade us to learn to defy him and
rely on him. For he considers and sees that we are very weak for
ourselves, and (if we measure ourselves by ourselves) are too terrified
and frightened by the great giants, death, the devil and the world. I
know this very well,\" he says, \"therefore I will cling to you, and in
turn I will cling to you, so that you may cast your comfort and defiance
on me, who have already overcome the world; And so great and small, rich
and poor, shall come together, and be man enough for the great,
monstrous behemoth, that if he will swallow you up and devour you as a
gnat, I will become a great camel in his jaws, and tear through his
belly, that he shall burst, and give you up whole, without his thanks.
For it is I who say these things to you. But turn away your eyes both
from yourselves and from them, and see who I am, that you may say, \"If
you hear death, devil, pope, emperor and the world, if you truly make
yourself great, baring your long, sharp teeth and opening your mouth
wide, then I am a poor little worm compared to you, that is true. But
what do you fear for him who says, \"I am he,\" and \"I have overcome
the world,\" and says this to me, and calls me to trust in it?

279 Yes, they say, we do not see this me; but we already have you in our
claws and in our teeth, and must hold us well without your thanks. But
again it is said: If you do not see him now, and think that you have
therefore gained in me, there is nothing in it; yes, that shall do you
harm. For ye shall see him hereafter, when he shall come forth before ye
know it, who shall say, I have spoken it, and mine are called bold and
confident; and they also have dared to come upon me, but ye have slain
and eaten them. Well then, I will come and devour in one heap, not only
emperors, Turks and Tatters, the Pope and all the world, but also death,
the devil and hell.

280 Therefore, Christians must have other thoughts and faces, that they
may live under the

1\) Wittenberger: \"und\" instead of: der da.

The dreadful sight and the flesh of death, the devil, and the power of
all the world, the sword, the spear and the gun, can see him who sits
above and says, \"It is I who have spoken to you. And if it is to
change, I would much rather have him who says these things to me, than
if all the emperors and the world stood by me. For these cannot help me
if death wants to devour me and I am to jump from this life to that, and
be left abandoned and helpless by all creatures. Who then shall or can
help and save? No one but \"I,\" says Christ, who have overcome the
world and all things.

For this reason he is a sweet and comforting Lord, who so kindly and
sincerely exhorts his own to hold fast to him, and to take comfort in
him against the world, and against all that displeases and terrifies it;
he shows us and gives us the right way to have comfort and peace. For
therefore have I spoken these things, saith he, that ye might have
peace, not in the world, but in me.

This is a strange speech, that there should be peace, when there is fear
and strife. Now it follows clearly from this text that there will be no
other peace than the word of Christ, when he says: \"These things I have
spoken to you. 2)\" My words go forth,\" he says, \"to the end that you
may be at peace and of good cheer. Do not say, I will give you peace
from the emperor, the pope, and the world, but my word shall give it to
you; in the word you have had peace, or never more. For even if we were
stronger than the pope and the whole world (which I would not like), and
if fist should be against fist, spear against spear, I would not want
peace, if fist and sword would give peace, against him who gives this
word, who says: \"These things I speak to you\" 2c. For what can such a
speech of his do or leave? This it can do, he says, that if you have
strife and fear, yet in it you may have peace.

Of course, no other power or authority on earth can do this. Therefore,
we, who are Christians and of a spiritual nature (because

2\) \"with you\" is missing in the Erlanger.

740 Erl. so, iso-iss. Sermon on John 16, 33. W. vm, \"ss-kso. 741

Let us leave the world to do its thing, as they do among themselves),
draw and grasp this comfort: My peace and tranquility are nowhere to be
found except in what my Lord Christ says, and with David we say Psalm
119:165: Pax multa diligentibus legem tuam, \"Great peace have they
which love thy word\"; that only the word may be in the heart, God
granting that there may be danger or harm to body, life, goods or blood.
They must let us have this peace; they may rage and rage as they please.
As we have seen 1) and still see the same power at work, that many
devout people constantly and with good courage leave their goods, blood,
body and life for the sake of the gospel, and do not look at the fierce
dragon\'s teeth and lion\'s claws.

284 This is the first thing he teaches us, that a Christian should make
peace and quietness of heart from the word of Christ, so that his heart
may be attached to it, and be completely immersed in it, and so have
this robe taken off, that is, flesh and bone, skin and hair. For if he
only keeps this word and takes it with him, this robe will be given to
him again on the last day, more beautiful and glorious than it is now;
this word will have such power.

And it is a strange text that they should find no other peace than in
that which he speaks to them. But it is 2) truly true. For there are
also two kinds of conversation: one in which we talk with God, and the
other in which he talks with us. Talking with him, that is, praying, of
which we said above 194 ff\]. which is also a great glory, that the high
majesty in heaven lets himself down to us poor little worms in such a
way that we may open our mouths to him, and he listens to us. But this
is much more glorious and delicious, that he speaks to us and we listen
to him. Both are good and great benefits of God, as the Scripture calls
these two: \"The spirit of grace and the spirit of prayer\" \[Zach. 12,
10.\]. For He does both, lets us speak to Him through prayer, and also
speaks to us through the Spirit of grace, so that we hear Him. But his

1\) Wittenberger: see.

2\) Erlanger: \"And is\" instead of: But it is.

His speech is much more comforting than ours. For his speech is such a
speech, which makes peace, and a calm and joyful heart, which no speech,
nor power on earth, with all its art, teaching and wisdom, does, even
Moses himself, who, though he speaks because of God, yet he does not
speak peace into the heart. But the man must do it, who 3) is God
himself; as the 85th Psalm, v. 9, says: 4) Audiam quid loquatur in me
Deus etc., \"ah! that I may hear what God the Lord has spoken; for he
will promise peace to his people and to his saints.\"

Therefore he speaks here: Let my words be commanded unto you: for to
this end have I spoken them, that ye might have peace in me. How so, or
where is such peace? In the world 5) or with men? No, he says, do not
think about it, for nothing will come of it. Although no tyrant or man
persecutes you, yet the devil will be behind you, tormenting and
torturing your heart, so that it will be as hard for you, yes, much
harder, than if the sword and weapons of the whole world were pointed at
you, as those who have experienced it well know. Therefore one thing
must be theirs (he means to say), that you must have fear and temptation
either in your body or in your heart. Therefore, when I speak these
things to you, how you should have peace, understand it to mean that you
will have to be afraid in the world; that peace means in German, fear in
the world. This is my language: peace means unpeace; happiness means
unhappiness; joy means fear; life means death in the world. And again,
what in the world is called unpeace, fear, death, I call peace, comfort
and life. Life it is, joy and consolation it is, but not in the world,
but in me you will find these things, that your heart by my word shall
become a demant against all the world, devil and hell. If there were
many thousand times more of them, and if they were much more angry, they
should not make it so wicked with their anger and raging that they can
take me from you; for I am so high set before them that I can well
remain before them.

3\) Wittenberger: \"das\" instead of: der.

4\) \"says\" is missing in the Erlanger.

5\) they words: \"or where\... world\" are missing in the Wittenberg.

742 Eri. so, ISS-IS4. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
M0-W?\" 743

Therefore, to have peace in him is nothing other than this: He who has
his word in his heart becomes so bold and fearless that he can despise
the world and the devil\'s anger and raging, and offer defiance against
it. As has been proved in the holy martyrs, yes, even in young maidens,
as St. Agatha and Agnes, who went to the torture as cheerfully as if
they were going to the dance, and mocked their angry tyrants. Is this
not annoying of a young maiden, that she so despises the devil\'s wrath,
sword and death, and considers them nothing, that she calls it nothing
else but going to the dance? Dear, where does she get such defiance? The
dear word of Christ gives her such. Where this goes into the heart, it
makes such courage, as this holy virgin. This must annoy the devil
beyond all measure, and cause him great sorrow, that his fierce dragon
and lion\'s wrath, which devours the whole world, should be ridiculed
and mocked.

He can accomplish this with one word, which says: 1) I have spoken this
to you, and so you have heard from me, that you should be confident and
undaunted, and that I have overcome the world and the devil, and that
you should be a mighty lord over them, 2) and that you should tread
under your feet, even though they execute you and strangle you. What
were the dear martyrs, and especially such young virgins, different from
us and other people? What is the difference that they had such courage
and joy that others do not have? Certainly nothing else, but this word
in their heart. Therefore only remember that I have told you, and do not
let yourselves be troubled, but confidently beat those who want to
afflict and torture you; for their afflictions, torments and anguish are
to be your joy and delight and rose garden.

The cause of all this, why he makes them so defiant, and speaks so
comfortingly into the heart, is this, saith he, The game is already won:
\"I, I have overcome the world.\" Yea, saith thou, thou hast well said,
that thou hast overcome, and others, as Peter, Paul; but where remain I?
Ever, he answers, I speak this to you, not for my own sake.

1\) Erlanger: the.

2\) Wittenbergers: about them.

Do you not hear, it applies to you, you should know it and comfort
yourselves, that I have overcome the world, not for myself; for I did
not need to descend from heaven because I was Lord of all creatures
before, that the devil and the world must still leave me satisfied for
my person. But for your sakes I have done it; for your sakes I speak it
also, and I am for your comfort, defiance and peace. Therefore also take
it to heart, and remember that I, Jesus Christ, have conquered and won
the victory. It is won, he says, there is no more danger or worry; we
must not struggle and fight, everything is already done, the world, the
devil and death is defeated and lies, heaven, righteousness and life has
the victory.

290\) No more, but only this brought into the world, and the Epinicion
or little song of victory, and a joyful \"Christ is risen\" sung; he has
set it all up, given vain victory to all who hear and believe it. Only
that we preach, confess and boast of these things before all the world,
and defy where they attack us, saying, \"What will you do, tyrant, world
and devil? Will you take away my goods, my honor and my life? what then?
It is won, won; for here is Christ who lives and conquers. Rather, let
him be taken from me, or try him again, if you can.

So let a Christian be accustomed to the thought of Christ\'s victory, in
which all things have already been accomplished, and we have all that we
ought to have, and henceforth live only to spread these things, and also
to bring other people by exhortation and encouragement (by word and
example) to the victory which Christ has purchased and given us. For
this victorious man has arranged it all, that we may not do anything to
it, neither to eradicate sin, nor to beat the devil, nor to overcome
death; everything is already in ruins. What we still suffer and fight is
not a real fight, but only a price or a piece of the glory of this
victory. For our suffering, yes, of all martyrs and saints suffering and
blood would not win us the victory. It is not our purpose to beat sin,
death and hell and to trample them under our feet, like the Pabst\'s
crowd, for the sake of our victory.

744 **Erl. so, ISL-I5S. Sermon on John 16:33. W. VIII, SW-6W.** 745

Disgrace and blasphemy of Christ, 1) leuget. I come here 2) too slowly
with my fight; it must be won first and the victory must be there, if I
am to have comfort and peace otherwise. I, says Christ, have already
done it; only, you accept it, and need the victory, so that you sing
about it, boast and flaunt, and only be confident people.

Behold, this is the friendly farewell and consoling last word, which
Christ leaves for His own, and would gladly speak into the heart.
Although the apostles did not understand it this time, and we do not
understand it yet either, because we are out of temptation, yet we have
not understood it.

1\) Wittenberger: \"lesterlich leuget\".

2\) Erlanger: Hiezu.

By God\'s grace, we have seen that the Holy Spirit reminds many hearts
of the words when they come to the meeting, and strengthens them with
them, that they have suffered everything in victory, and have departed.
May God also help us, and give us the sense to keep this in mind when we
are in trouble and when we die; even if we cannot now understand and
grasp these words so completely and powerfully (as they are spoken and
meant), that we then remember: \"My Lord and Savior has spoken this into
my heart, that in Him I have a victor over the world, death and the
devil, however small and weak I may be. Amen.

3\) \"so\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

**L. D. Martin Luther\'s Interpretation of the Seventeenth Chapter of
St. John the Evangelist, on the Prayer of Christ, \*)**

Preached in 1528 and 152S; printed in 1530.

**Preface.**

This sermon of mine on the prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ, John 17, I
have not only gladly seen go out in print, but have also asked my dear
friend, Magister Caspar Creutzigern, who is well versed in such things,
to compose it and put it into a clear fine form (because I myself have
not had the time to do this, nor am I so well versed in it), and so let
others have it. For I know that the right pious Christians, for whom

For those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, these morsels and
this drink of cold water will be pleasant and useful, and we alone will
serve them with this. The weary, satiated, mad saints have more than
enough without our help and service; we do not want to serve them with
this, unless they have something new to master and blaspheme. Command
such preaching to all dear faithful members of Christ, and me also in
their prayers. May God\'s grace be with us. Amen.

\*The title of the first single edition of this interpretation in
sermons is: \"Das Siebenzehend Capitel Johannis, von dem gebete Christi.
Preached and interpreted by D. Mar. Luther Wittemberg. D. M. XXX.\"
(them!) At the end: \"Printed at Wittemberg by Hans Weis. Anno. 2c. M.
D. XXX.\" These sermons were preached for Bugenhagen in 1528 and 1529,
when he was in Brunswick and in Hamburg to order the church system
there, but did not appear in print until 1530. Only in this first
edition is Luther\'s \"Vorrhede\" on the back of the title, which is
missing in the later individual editions, including the German
Wittenberg and Jena collections. From this preface of Luther\'s we see
that LI. Caspar Cruciger edited these sermons at Luther\'s request. In
Latin, the marginal gloss of the preface reads: Gasparus Cruciger
collector harum home- liarum. A second edition was published in 1534 by
Hans Weiß in Wittenberg, which contains the following information on the
title: \"Gepredigt und ausgelegt durch D. Mart. Luth. Wittemberg 1. 5.
34.\" The Jena edition probably gives a reprint of this edition and
therefore places our interpretation in the year 1534. Furthermore, this
writing was printed in 1538 by Joseph Klug at Wittenberg and in 1540 by
Hans Frischmut at Wittenberg. Also in this edition we find on the title:
\"Gepredigt und ausgelegt durch D. Mart. Luth. Wittemberg. M. D. XI\>.\"
In the collections: in the Wittenberg (1553), vol. IV, p. 275 (with the
wrong year 1539); in the Jena (1568), vol. VI, p. 169; in the Altenburg,
vol. VI, p. 219; in the Leipzig, vol. X, p. 198; and in the Erlangen,
vol. 50,

746 Eri. so, iss-ioo. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
\"is-mo. 747

**V. 1. These things spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and
said.**

\(1\) Among the first works of our Lord Christ, we should especially
desire to hear how he stood when he prayed and talked with his dear
Father, because otherwise it is much written how he preached and
performed miraculous signs, but little how he prayed. Now it is written
here before our eyes with many words, which he spake before his
disciples, and left them for last: and yet no man hearkeneth unto it. If
it were not written, we would run after it to the end of the world.

\(2\) And truly is a fierce, heartfelt prayer, in which he opens the
abyss of his heart, both toward us and toward his Father, and pours it
out completely. But such words, when they are heard without the spirit,
sound in our ears like mere childish things, which have neither strength
nor sap, and are not worth speaking. For reason and human wisdom hold
nothing of that, if one does not pretend with splendid, high-sounding
words and put on that everyone must open eyes and ears.

\(3\) If we could see and understand who the man is who asks, and who is
asked, and how great the thing is for which he asks, we would not
consider it so unimportant and small, but would perceive and feel what
an overwhelming power and comfort these simple words have and give. For
here he himself keeps the rule he gave us and taught us \[Matth. 6, 5.
7.\], that if one wants to pray rightly, one must not make many long,
delicious words, but only badly and rightly the best. 1) Therefore we
should not keep this 2) prayer so low, nor go beyond it.

1\) In Latin, the meaning of this sentence is correctly rendered as
\"simple words that come from the heart are the best\".

2\) Thus the Erlangen and the Latin. Wittenberg and Jena: the.

as if they were useless words of men, as each one lets himself think
that he wants to do it much better. But if someone were to start and
try, he would soon lose his art, word and way.

4 Now this is the sum and cause of this chapter. A good prayer belongs
to a good sermon, that is: When one has given the word of himself, one
should start to sigh and desire that it also has power and produces
fruit. For since the Lord Christ had given and completed all his
teaching and ministry, and had blessed his disciples with the beautiful
long sermon of comfort, he also had to make a last request, both for
them and for all Christians, so that he might even fulfill his ministry
as our high priest, so that nothing would be left behind to strengthen
and preserve them, because he wanted to leave them alone behind him in
the world.

For this reason I have always said how necessary Christian prayer is,
that without it faith cannot exist or remain. For those who preach
God\'s word, hear it and know it, and do not also pray, make it known
that they are still presumptuous and sure, as if they had no need of
God\'s grace everywhere, do not see their need and danger, and make
themselves believe that they are now firmly established and already have
what they may desire; so the devil is behind them, overpowering and
overthrowing them, so that they never realize it. For this reason Christ
teaches us by his own example not to forget the preaching of prayer,
lest the word go forth and be acted upon without fruit.

\(6\) But what power, quality and virtue this prayer has in itself, we
will not, I am afraid, be able to sufficiently describe. For as bad and
simple as it sounds, it is so deep, rich and wide that no one can fathom
it.

7\. to the first, when the evangelist speaks:

In the latter two editions (as well as Walch\'s), the preface is printed
from the Hallische Theile, p. 345. Vincentius Obsopoeus translated this
interpretation into Latin and published it in 1536 under the title:
Mart. Lutheri Enarrat.\'in Johan. Evangel. Gap. XVII. Wittebergae 1536.
This translation is found in the Latin Wittenberg edition, low. V, col.
184d. We give the text according to the Jena edition, comparing the
Wittenberg and Erlangen editions, also the Latin. In this writing, the
use of the Latin translation is of particular importance for the textual
form, because it is prepared according to the first edition, which we
can see from the fact that it also contains the preface. In the Erlangen
edition, the proof of the Latin Wittenberg edition is missing. We did
not consider it necessary to preface the interpretation with the text of
the 17th chapter of St. John, because the interpretation is always
linked to the individual verses.

[748 **Erl. so, IS0-1SS. Sermon On John 17:1. W. VIII, \"70-K73.**
749]{.underline}

\"These things spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes toward heaven,\" 2c.
He left glory and honor to prayer, that it also leadeth his outward
giving, to come before the foolish saints, and to shut them up, who
pretend that such an outward thing is not valid. For here you see that
he not only asks verbally so that the disciples hear, but also uses the
manner and gesture that one is accustomed to use; as, some kneel, some
fall on their faces, some stand and look up to heaven; which three ways
are all indicated in the Scriptures. As King David fell to the ground
when he prayed for his child for seven days, 2 Sam. 12, 16, and Christ
both knelt and fell down when he prayed in the garden \[Luc. 22, 41.
Matth. 26, 39.\], item, Peter Luc. 5, 8, along with many others, fell at
the feet of the Lord. He also says about standing Marc. 11, 25: \"When
you stand and pray\" 2c.

\(8\) Now there is no great power in standing, kneeling, or falling
down, for these are bodily ways, neither commanded nor forbidden, as
necessary; as also others more, lifting up the head and eyes to heaven,
folding the hands, beating the breast; only that they be not despised,
because they praise the Scripture and Christ Himself. Therefore also St.
Paul Eph. 3, 14. speaks of his prayer: \"For this reason I bow my knees
to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ\"; item 1 Tim. 2, 8.: \"So then I
want men to pray and lift up holy hands\" 2c. Although it is not evil
for a man to pray with his heart alone when he is tying sheaves in the
field or lying on his bed.

\(9\) But this is true if it is a mere outward gesture, grumbling or
bawling, as one has stood in church all day, counted the grains on the
rosary, turned over the leaves, cried and shouted in the choir, that is,
of course, not praying. For it is done without heart and soul, and there
is no one who seriously thinks of asking or obtaining something from
God. But where such prayers, singing, speaking or reading are done in
the belief that they will kindle the heart and awaken the desire and
devotion to pray, they are very useful and good. For that is why the
Psalter has been used in Christianity from time immemorial.

to sing and read daily, so that through God\'s Word, bodily heard and
acted upon, one may devote oneself to crying out and sighing. We also
have many examples of such prayer and external stimulation in Scripture.
For example, the prophet Elisha, 2 Kings 3:15, told how his manner was,
when he did not feel devout or merry enough, to send for a harpist,
which awakened him and enlightened him to prophesy. King David therefore
ordered that all kinds of strings be played daily in the temple, so that
the people would be awakened and cheerful in their prayers \[1 Chron.
16:16\].

\(10\) I know not how strong others are in the spirit; but I cannot
become so holy, if I were still so learned and full of the spirit, as
some make themselves believe. It still happens to me all the time, when
I am without the word, when I do not think about it or deal with it,
then there is no Christ at home, yes, also no desire and 1) spirit; but
as soon as I take a psalm or a saying of the Scriptures before me, it
shines and burns 2) in the heart, so that I gain courage and sense for
others. I also know that everyone should experience this daily in
himself.

The reason is this, as we all find in ourselves, that our senses and
thoughts are so uncertain, slippery and inactive, that even if we want
to begin to ask something serious or to think of God, without word and
scripture, it certainly happens that before we look around, we travel a
hundred miles from the first thought. Try it, whoever wants to, and tell
me again how long he can stay on one thought. Or take an hour and vow to
tell me all your thoughts: What does it matter, you will have to be
ashamed of yourself, and fear that if you were to speak what came into
your head, you would be bound and chained for a foolish dog; it will
happen to me if I worry about serious and very best thoughts right away.
The heart of man is so miserably torn; it walks, weaves and wavers, that
neither wind nor water is so agile and unstable.

12\. that I have to say an example, so you can

1\) Jenaer: still.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) \"it\" is missing in the Jena.

750 Erl. so, IS2-IS4. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
K73-67S. 751

I read about St. Bernard, who had tried this, and at one time complained
to a good friend that it was so difficult for him to pray properly, and
that he could not pray the Lord\'s Prayer without strange coincidences.
This surprised him very much and he thought that it was not an art or
work at all. St. Bernard bet with him, he should try it, and should
apply a good stallion, only that he told him alike. 1) He presumed to do
it without any effort, started and prayed: Our Father 2c., but before he
gets over the first request, it occurs to him, if he won the horse,
whether saddle and bridle were also due to him. In short, he comes so
far with thoughts that he had to let go so soon, and give St. Bernard
won. Summa, if you can say an Our Father without some other thoughts, I
will consider you a master; I cannot; indeed, I am glad when thoughts
occur to me that they fall again as they came.

\(13\) I say this, therefore, so that one does not hurry over such texts
as the raw spirits do, but learn what such external words and ways are
useful and necessary for, namely, to keep the heart together with them,
so that it is not scattered, and to hold on to the letters with the
thoughts, as one must hold on to a tree or wall with the fist, so that
we do not slip, or flutter too far and go astray with our own thoughts.

14 This is what our enthusiasts lack, that they think that when they go
into their high spiritual thoughts, they have it all wrong, and do not
see how they are going astray without a word, letting themselves be led
astray by vain idiots. Therefore be warned against such flying thoughts,
and beware only of dealing with God apart from the oral word and prayer.
But that you keep a right distinction, so that there is no mere outward
prayer, since one seeks nothing more than the work, and thinks that if
so much is read or spoken, then one has done something, 2) when the
heart does not even experience what the mouth speaks, or thinks what it
does; but so that the heart starts, after which outward mouth and body,
word and offering

1\) i.e. the certain truth said, \"gleichzu\" straight from. In the
editions wrong: \"gleichzusagte\". Latin: esrtum ipsi rsuunoist.

2\) verthan \-\-- everything aligned to the best.

go with. Summa, if it goes from the heart to ask with desire and
earnestness, then it is all praiseworthy and good, how one stands to it.

**Father, the hour is here for you to transfigure your Son.**

\(15\) Here we shall see what virtue this prayer has. For first of all,
there are three special pieces in it, and especially that which serves
prayer exceedingly well. First, 3) to thank God, to praise Him, and to
recount the benefits previously received from Him, as He here indicates
what the Father has given and bestowed upon Him. Just as we should now
do so: Dear Father, you have given us your precious, gracious, holy
gospel, and showered it with unspeakable, great graces 2c. Then, the
prayer and the need: Dear Father, help us to keep the same, and to
remain in it. And thirdly, that one may go out, reach out, and desire
that everyone may be helped. These three pieces 4) he also performs here
one after the other.

16 And so let every prayer be made, even for temporal needs, with such
thanksgiving and confession that God\'s gifts and goods are what we
have, and ask that He may protect, promote and increase them in us and
in others. This is called starting prayer rightly and well, and making a
good entrance, so that God may be accepted, that He may hear us gladly.
In the same way, you will find elsewhere how he gloriously praises the
Father, and at the same time makes a beautiful, delicious sermon in the
middle of the prayer, as Matth. 11 at the end.

\(17\) Therefore he saith, Father, the hour is here, that thou shouldest
glorify thy Son, that thy Son also should glorify thee. These are such
small, simple words that they do not seem worth a penny in the eyes of
the world. But who can sufficiently fathom how great a thing and how
great an earnest they are? But so much has been prayed recently: Dear
Father, I ask you to transfigure me, but not just that, but that I may
transfigure you. But to transfigure means nothing else than to praise
and to exalt, to glorify and to call. 5)

3\) \"Erstlich\" is missing in the Erlanger and in the Latin.

4\) Pieces\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

5\) appointed\--famous. Latin: tsrniMrubiUs.

752 **Erl. so, 164-166. Sermon On Joh. 17, 1. W. VIII, \"7S-678.** 753

so that all the world will know how to sing and say about it.

\(18\) And with the word he shows how it is for him, and what the need
is that drives him to such prayer. He says, \"I am about to suffer and
die the most shameful death, so that all my clarity, light, name and
honor will be darkened and extinguished. Now he has done great things,
preached and worked gloriously, his power and might proves that all the
world should have praised, honored and worshipped him most gloriously;
Then the contradiction happens to him, that for all honor and praise due
to him, he is showered with vain shame and disgrace, and must hang on
the cross between two murderers, and die as the worst, most desperate
knave that the earth has borne, that no murderer ever acted so
shamefully and blasphemously.

19 For the world is usually so pious when the worst offenders are put to
death that everyone takes pity on them, laments their misery and shows
mercy; but this one Christ, the Savior of the world, had to be so that
everyone was glad of his death, and they, the Jews, no matter how much
they cooled their heels at him, were still not satisfied with it. Summa,
there was no one who thought otherwise, because the greatest service
would have been done to God, and the world would have recovered, if this
man had been executed from the earth. For they considered him to be the
most harmful worm that ever came on earth, so that one would rather
suffer and bear all kinds of plagues.

20 This means that the noble, excellent man has been cast into darkness.
Thus the dear Christ, the light and salvation of all the world, must be
received and honored by her, so that he may be cursed and banished from
the world as the worst devil. Just as the Jews still live up to their
fathers\' standards, and would much rather suffer all devils and
misfortune than hear Christ and his mother called Mariam. It is the same
with the dear Gospel, that the papal mob, together with all distant
enemies, are not so hostile to any devil or misfortune as they are to
our doctrine; they must be condemned, cursed and banished, so that no
evil cry goes up on earth except about this Christ and his word.

21\) Behold, this is Christ\'s hour coming or present: for he prays with
such meaning and earnestness as if he were now hanging 1) on the cross.
As if he should say: \"Now I am in the midst of shame and death, and lie
in deepest darkness; now it is time for you to pull me out, lift me up,
and shout me to glory, because my light is so completely extinguished,
and the world tramples me underfoot, everyone shuns me and shuns me, so
that there is neither counsel nor help, except that you yourself do it.
For that I come out of the jaws of death and the devil (who is a prince
of darkness \[Eph. 6:12\]), there belongs an eternal, almighty, divine
power.

22 How then did this transfiguration take place? Not otherwise than that
the Father raised him from the dead, threw the devil under his feet, and
made him King and Lord over all creatures, and let this be proclaimed
publicly through the gospel, that it might be known in all the world.
For as it was once done on Easter Day, so it must 2) always be preached
and known from child to child until the end of the world.

**That your son may also transfigure you.**

\(23\) Soon a little bit of thanks is given in the word \"your Son\",
that he confesses and boasts that he is the Son of God, and has
everything from the Father, as he continues to say soon after. From
eternity he is his Son, in one majesty, power and honor; but now, in the
world, in misery, weakness, shame and death, as abandoned by the Father
and everyone. The world puts all its power and might, the devil all his
art and wit, to bring him to naught, that he may never be remembered, as
they say in the Psalter: \"When shall he die, and his name perish?\" Ps.
41:6, they also think that they have now brought it about, because he
hangs on the cross and dies.

24 Therefore he asks: \"Father, you know that I have been sent by you
and that I have come to earth, therefore you will not let your Son be in
such darkness. Therefore

1\) \"now\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena. Latin: jam.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Erlanger.

754 Erl. 50, 166-169. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
678-681. 755

You want to transfigure me, not so that I will tickle myself with it,
but for the sake of your honor and transfiguration. For he was sent to
praise and glorify the Father\'s praise and glory, and is the only man
by whom the Father must be known and honored. If he had not been
transfigured, the Father\'s honor and glory would have been obscured and
extinguished, and would have remained in dishonor and shame with him
(for what the Son suffers, the Father must also take upon himself and
suffer), so that the world and everyone would have blasphemed: \"Behold,
where is now his God and Father, of whom he boasted so gloriously? How
finely he has helped him 2c. So that this does not happen, the Father
must prove his power and authority over him, and set him in such honor
that all the world with its shame must fall at his feet and worship him.
Through this the Father is transfigured, that is, recognized and
preached, how he can help in weakness, shame and death, and make life,
honor and power out of it. Which began when Christ came out of death
into his glory, and ascended into heaven, and gave the Holy Spirit, and
is still preaching as far as the earth is, even unto the last day. For
this is the office and work of the Holy Spirit, to reveal through the
gospel how great and glorious a thing God has done for us through
Christ, namely, to redeem us from sin, death and the power of the devil,
to take us into His grace and protection, and to give Himself completely
to us.

\(25\) Such a transfiguration of the Father is still as necessary as
that of the Lord Christ himself. For when we look upon him, he lies as
deep in darkness before the world for his name and glory, as Christ on
the cross for his body and life. For how did the world stand at that
time? Everything was full of abominable idolatry, so that even the sun
and the moon, fish and birds, were worshipped, and the holy name of the
high Majesty had to suffer, so that it was assigned to all creatures
except Him. Yes, even they, the Jews themselves, who were called God\'s
own people, practiced their own idolatry under his name, with confidence
in their works and their righteousness. So it still goes on today, that
everyone follows him according to his thoughts.

The world is full of the abominable blasphemy of God, without any other
public, public blasphemy. Therefore, it was necessary to ask that the
Father be transfigured, that is, known through the gospel, as he should
and will be kept and honored, so that all false doctrine or worship and
humanity may cease, and only his light of grace may shine and shine.

26 Therefore you see how the heart of the Lord Christ burns and how he
prays earnestly from the bottom of his heart. For it grieves him that
God\'s name is so deeply in darkness, so horribly desecrated and
blasphemed, and the whole world lies in blindness and unbelief, that he
would gladly die soon, and suffer all shame and disgrace, so that only
the Father may come into the light, and his glory rise. Now the Father
(as has been said) cannot be transfigured unless Christ is first
transfigured, that is, unless the Holy Spirit comes and preaches the
gospel, without which no one recognizes the Father. For before this he
was neither preached nor held otherwise than as a hired servant, who
must look upon our holiness and spiritual life. Which is not to praise
the Father, but ourselves and our merit, when Christ Himself will not be
praised otherwise than by the Father, and thereby praise Him again, that
men may fall from themselves, and boast of His grace and goodness alone.

\(27\) Now the Lord Christ speaks all these words for our sake, to
strengthen our faith against the great trouble that the dear gospel is
encountering in the world, and to the great sorrow of the devout
Christians, that they must hear and see that God\'s name is everywhere
profaned and blasphemed, because he allows his Christians to be
persecuted and oppressed, and acts as if he could not or would not help
them, so that the world defies them and cries out for victory. Christ
saw and felt this, that his multitude in the world would always be as he
himself was. Therefore he does not ask for his own person alone, but to
be transfigured in and through all those who believe in him, and to save
the world.

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Erlanger.

756 **Erl. 50, 169-171. Sermon on Joh. 17, 1. 2. W. VIII, 681-683..,**
757

Father, who also through this prayer still demonstrates the same power
in Christians that he demonstrated in Christ, so that he, as he was
transfigured through him, may also be transfigured through us; so that,
although we now suffer and die for the sake of his word, through such
shame, disgrace and death we shall come to eternal glory and honor.
Again, our enemies, though they now gloriously ride and soar above, must
at last be overthrown, and come to eternal shame 1); as also is
abundantly fulfilled, and experience testifies, from the apostles\'
time, by the dear martyrs and others.

28 John Hus was also most shamefully condemned and killed: nor has he
come to such honor that his word, which he preached, has burst forth and
shines in all the world, condemning and disgracing the papacy with all
its glory. So will it be with our angry enemies, who want to suppress
the gospel and exterminate the Christians, whom they have already burned
and murdered many times. For more proud kings and lords have fallen and
failed over the gospel, compared with whom the present princes and lords
are mere beggars. How often has the Roman Empire been horribly and
miserably destroyed, torn apart, and fallen into ruin? Since it was
thought to be the highest and most powerful, and had proven itself
honestly with blasphemy, raging, persecution and bloodshed against the
Christians, that these same tyrants and persecutors 2) perish
shamefully, and their name stinks and is despised in all the world, but
the martyr\'s name shines and is honored. For this prayer is heard, and
presses on, goes and runs in full swing, against all the raging and
violence on earth. And summa, as the transfiguration began, so it still
continues in Christendom, in the power and might of this prayer.

29 In this text it is also to be noted how Christ ascribes to him that
he alone is the man through whom the Father must be transfigured. For
with this he also wants to show his people, the

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: Damage. Latin: Ü6Ü66U8.

2\) Here the Wittenbergers and the Jenaers have in the margin: \"as
Decius, Diocletianus 2c.\"

Jews, who had the law and glorious worship, put their glory in holiness,
that none of them had the power to transfigure the Father, or to bring
to the knowledge of righteousness before God. For if God\'s glory and
knowledge could have been revealed through the law, Christ should not
have come, preached, suffered and died to transfigure the Father.

\(30\) This is also to help us learn how to seek and grasp God properly,
or how to deal with Him. For, \"to transfigure the Father\" is nothing
else (as said), than that one recognizes him, and knows who he is, what
he has in mind, and how we are to deal with him. No man can come to such
knowledge except through Christ. For he has not revealed himself
anywhere, but in and through him, so that his heart and will may be
seen. Now nothing can be seen in Christ but only heartfelt, unfathomable
love and grace; again, apart from him nothing but wrath and disgrace.
Summa, whoever seeks God or wants to serve Him other than in Christ,
does not find and serve the right God.

Therefore, I have often said and warned that everyone who wants to
travel safely should beware of all high thoughts and speculations, where
one seeks God without means in the Majesty, and wants to find out His
work, will and counsel, secret and special revelations, as they not only
lack and deceive, but also lead and fall into the abyss. And recently
all doctrine and faith on earth, of the Jews, Turks, monks, false
saints, or enthusiasts, and whoever they are, who want to serve God,
obtain grace, and put away sin by other means than the Lord Christ, than
by their works, holiness, great devotion, spiritual thoughts, are hereby
condemned 2c. For it is decided that he will not be known or found apart
from the one Mediator, that where Christ is not, there is no true God
nor worship. But more about that hereafter.

**V. 2 Just as you gave him authority over all flesh, that he might give
eternal life to all whom you have given him.**

3\) Wittenberg: \"and holiness\". Latin: sanetitatis.

758 Eri. SS, I7I-17S. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
KW-K8\". 759

32 Then he continues, both the other and the third part, in the prayer
as indicated above \[§ 15\], that he gives thanks and displays what the
Father has given him, and rushes out with it into the whole world. For
here you hear that he does not ask for his own sake, but to keep the
clarity with him, but that it may be useful and serve us to have eternal
life. And for this reason he boasts how he has such power from the
Father over all that is great and mighty on earth, and is now going
forth in the highest honors, that he can and will bring his poor little
ones who cling to him to such honors that they shall live forever. And I
will say this much: I have all kings, princes, and what lives in flesh
and blood in my hand, that I can help my dear Christians from sin,
death, and all misfortune; without it not being evident now, because I
go along in such weakness and dishonor. Therefore I pray that you may
transfigure me, that I may make these things manifest and prove them.

33\) There now stands 1) our consolation and defiance against all our
enemies, that we, who believe in Christ and cling to his word, are
precisely those who have been given to him as his own by God the Father,
and he wants to take care of us, protect and preserve us; that however
high the world rises against us, and hovers, it should nevertheless
remain under the Lord Christ, so that it does not harm us; but, however
low it oppresses us, it must only promote us more to eternal life.
Therefore, we should lift up our hands without ceasing, praise God and
give thanks that He counts us among the number who belong to Him and are
His own, because we know that we have His word and are persecuted for
it, and have the world for an enemy. For he that is sure and certain of
these things shall have no doubt that he is of that company which shall
have eternal life.

34 And from this you can further conclude: Because this is Christ\'s
work and gift, that we may have eternal life, that the whole world may
be put to shame in us, with all its wisdom, power and glory, making our
weakness and lack of strength a glory.

1\) \"nun\" is missing in the Jena.

As our Lord Christ proved enough in his enemies, when he came out of the
deepest shame to the highest glory, and made all their glory and honor
of righteousness and holy life, which they insisted on and persecuted
him for, eternal shame. For since he alone is the Lord of eternal life,
the world that persecutes him and his Christians cannot attain to
eternal life, though it strives for it and fails to acquire it with its
own strength. But where Christ gives eternal life, there must be eternal
clarity and glory; and again, where such is not, there must also follow
eternal shame and misfortune. Knowing this, let our enemies rape and
blaspheme as long as they can; it will soon come to an end. For what are
thirty, forty, or sixty years compared with eternal life, but a moment,
yea, but nothing at all compared with this our whole life?

But notice how St. John uses these words, how his manner is before other
evangelists, to confirm the article that Christ is truly God with the
Father. For these words, \"As thou hast given him power over all flesh,
that he should give eternal life,\" 2c., do not imply that he is a true
man. For such power over all living things and to give eternal life does
not belong to any creature; it may well take and receive it, but to give
life is God\'s work and power alone. For even the angels, though they
live eternally, cannot communicate it to anyone. Since he then confesses
that he has the power to give eternal life to his own, and yet receives
such power from the Father, he clearly shows that he has one divine
being and power with the Father, and yet are two different persons. And
that he may make it still clearer, he continues:

**V. 3. But this is life eternal, that they may know thee, that thou
alone art true God, and that thou hast sent Jesus Christ.**

In these words he expresses what and how eternal life is. For since he
said that he had the power to give eternal life, someone might now ask:
In what then does eternal life stand, or

760 Eri. so, I7S-I7S. Sermon on John 17:3. W. vin, \[ss-E 761

How is it that we receive it? To this he will answer, saying, \"This is
how it is, and by this or in this way they will receive it, so that they
will know you alone, the true God, and whom you have sent, Jesus Christ.

\(37\) The dear fathers have now strongly led this saying and driven it
against the Arian heresy, which denied the Lord Christ\'s divinity. As
it is a beautiful, mighty text, and every Christian should take care
that he understands and grasps St. John\'s Gospel well, and arm himself
with such sayings for the sake of future heresy. How then both Jews,
Turks and heretics have always blasphemed against this article; and now
still in many 1) the same devil can be seen, and (since God is for)
where he would get space and air, he would soon tear down by force. For
this is our highest, most excellent article, yes, the foundation and
rock on which all other articles of faith must stand. Therefore, the
devil does not leave it unchallenged, but uses all his art and
mischievousness, arouses all kinds of annoyance and ridicule, so that he
can tear it down or destroy it; yes, here he is master over all masters.
For he can make such beautiful thoughts, and blow them out with such
illusion, that all reason, wisdom and art must give in.

\(38\) Let him who wishes to be safe beware of all that reason and the
thoughts of men have mastered in this article, and know that there is no
way to stand against the devil\'s seduction, except by clinging to the
plain words of Scripture and not thinking or speculating further, but by
closing one\'s eyes and saying, \"What Christ says should and must be
true, even though I and no man can understand and comprehend it or know
how it can be true: He knoweth well what he is, and what or how he shall
speak of himself. He who does not do this must run and err, 2) and fall.
For it is not possible to comprehend even the smallest article of faith
through human reason and senses, so that no man on earth, without God\'s
word, can ever have a

1\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: etlichen. Latin: in rruütis.

2\) \"and err\" is missing in the Erlanger.

The one who has the right thought and certain knowledge of God may meet
and grasp; to which also the Gentiles themselves must bear witness.

39 For thus they write of a learned poet, Simonides, that he was asked
for a time, and was to say what God was, or what he thought and believed
about God. He was given a respite and three days to answer. When these
were up, and he was to answer, he asked for another three days, so that
he might think about it better; and after these three days he thought
about it again, until at last he could not go on, nor did he want to,
and said, \"What shall I say? The longer I think about it, the less I
know about it. This shows that human reason, the higher it goes to
investigate and fathom God\'s nature, work, will and counsel, the
further it gets away from it, and finally falls to thinking that God is
nothing and believing nothing everywhere, just as now there are many
such people among the great clever ones. Thus it must happen to all who
go without the mere word, and who first consult reason in the articles
of faith, and see how it rhymes with it; as has happened to our
erroneous spirits about the sacrament, baptism, and other things.

40 Because we have here such a beautiful, powerful text, let us hold
fast to it, and let no blind grasp of reason master it or darken it, or
tear it apart and interpret it differently. For there are the bright,
dry words that everyone can hear and grasp: Christ gives eternal life to
everyone who believes. But since no one can give eternal life without
God alone, it must follow irrefutably that Christ is the true, natural
God. Item, because he bases eternal life on the fact that he is known
together with the Father, so that without his knowledge no one can
attain eternal life, so that there is one knowledge, so that he and the
Father are known, he must also be of one essence and nature with the
Father, that is, the same true God, but a different person from the
Father.

41 These things, I say, are so clear and powerful from this text that
even reason cannot contradict them. But this is the error, that

3\) Jenaer: allenden.

762 Erl. so, 175-177. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
688-691. 763

She does not stay with the words, but, having put them out of her sight
and out of the way, drives on above and beside them; does not merely
want to believe that the words are true, but also wants to fathom and
understand how it happens or is possible; and because she cannot
understand it, she falls away from it and makes up her own thoughts, and
then twists the words and interprets them as she has thought them up.

For this reason, the Arians have also twisted this text for themselves
and insisted on the word \"alone\", that it says: \"That you alone are
true God\"; as if he had thereby excluded himself and ascribed the deity
to the Father alone. But this is not proved, but the Scripture falsely
acted, a word tweaked out, and fluttered over the text, so that one does
not see what the words, closed into one another, compel. For this we
also say, that it is true and rightly taught, that there is no other
God, but he alone. But they do not want to see that it depends on how
Christ makes Himself equal to the Father of all things, and speaks as if
He were also the same true God, because He (as I said) places eternal
life in His knowledge and the Father\'s knowledge at the same time, and
makes the two into one knowledge.

43\) The reason he uses the words: \"That you alone are the true God\"
is that he always wants to give glory to the Father, that he has
everything from him, and thus leads and draws us to the Father through
himself, as can be seen everywhere in the Gospel of John. But he mixes
and weaves into this some divine being, power and strength, because he
wants to be known with the Father as the one who gives eternal life,
which knowledge belongs to no one but the true God.

\(44\) Yes, these words are spoken most violently against the Arians and
all heretics, Jews and unbelievers, 1) who say and boast: They believe
in only one God, who created heaven and earth; and for the sake of this
article they condemn us Christians, as if we had put forward another
God. For he wants to indicate that they do not believe the right true-

1\) Wittenberger: \"Unchristen und Türken\". The words \"and Turks\" are
missing in the other German editions, also in the Latin.

They do not know the true God, whether they mean it or boast of it; for
they do not know who he is, nor how he should be known, namely, that he
is the one true God who sent Jesus Christ. 2c. This is what is said:
Whoever wants to meet the true, unified God must seek Him in the Lord
Christ alone, for otherwise there is truly no God without who has sent
Christ. He who does not have Christ must also lack the right true God,
even though he knows and believes that there is only one true God. For
he does not believe in Him who sent Christ and through Him gives eternal
life.

Therefore the power lies in the little word \"Thee\", \"that they may
know Thee, that Thou alone art the true God\". Which \"Thee\"? The one
who sent Jesus Christ. As if he should say: The Jews and others also
have only one God, as they think; but they do not know you, who alone
are the true God, because they do not know Jesus Christ, sent by you,
and in the meantime paint them a God according to their thoughts, who
truly is no God, but nothing at all. So you see how the word \"alone\"
is not used to mean that he separates himself from the Father for the
sake of the divine essence (because this is sufficiently prevented by
the other words), but for the very reason that he binds both the Father
and himself together, yes, he binds the Father to himself, against all
those who paint a different God or seek him elsewhere than in the Lord
Christ.

46 That is enough to say about how the evangelist establishes the
article about the divinity of Christ. Now we must also speak a little
further about the knowledge in which eternal life stands, what it is and
what it is able to do, so that we may learn to understand this text well
and thoroughly, as one of the most noble main sayings in the New
Testament. It is true that our old teachers saved this and similar
sayings until that life, just as if it did not concern us here on earth.
But we should remain here to learn such sayings as are written for the
teaching of faith, and most of them belong to this life. For it must
truly begin here and be recognized and grasped through faith what we are
to acquire and possess eternally there.

764 **Erl. so, 177-179. Sermon on Joh. 17, 3. W. vm, 691-694.** 765

47 This knowledge is nothing else than knowing what to think of Christ
and the Father, of which St. Peter, 2 Epistle 3:18, exhorts, saying,
\"Grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. As if to
say: \"Think and let this be your only study and all your thoughts and
worries, that you may learn to know the man well, and that no one may
seek anything else or better. For this alone is our wisdom and art,
which is called a Christian art or doctrine; whatsoever else may be
taught besides or apart from this, let it not be thought a Christian
art. And if any man ask, What can Christians do, or teach? let him
answer nothing else, that it is but to know Christ sent from the Father.
He who cannot do this, nor teach it, nor practice it, let him boast of
no Christian art. For even if someone knew everything that is under the
sun, how God created heaven and earth, and all the works and miracles
that he has ever done; even if he could and did the ten commandments,
and in sum, if he knew and was able to do as much as the angels, none of
this makes him a Christian: So that all that can be preached or known,
called or done, of all good doctrine and life, is here purely peeled off
and excluded, and nothing remains or is valid that can make a Christian,
without him saying here, \"That they may know thee, and him whom thou
hast sent, Jesus Christ.

\(48\) The prophets also spoke gloriously of this knowledge and its
power, and prophesied clearly; as Isaiah Cap. 53, 11: \"By his knowledge
he, my servant the righteous, will make many righteous or righteous\";
that is, he will redeem them from sins and snatch them out of the
devil\'s mouth, just by knowing him and knowing 1) who he is. Likewise
also Jeremiah Cap. 9, 23. 24. says: \"Let no one boast of his wisdom,
nor of his strength, nor of his riches\"; in short, let no one boast of
anything at all: \"But if anyone wants to boast, let him boast that he
knows and knows me, that I am the Lord who practices mercy, justice and
righteousness on earth.\"

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: \"so man ihn kennet und weiß.\" Latin: ut
ix\>86 eoKuoseatur 6t seiatur.

\(49\) Behold, this text also saith, If thou wilt have eternal life,
thou hast no other way, manner, or means thereof, but to know the Father
only, the true God, through Christ his Son, whom he hath sent. Whoever
puts anything else before you will surely deceive you. Therefore they
have done violence and injustice to the noble, beautiful text, yes, they
have taken away all its power and sap, so that they have torn it away
from doctrine and faith, and held it as a prophecy of that future life.
This makes it clear that they have not understood what Christ\'s
knowledge means, for they have come no higher, nor taught any further,
than that one should live in such a way and be pious, so as to gain
eternal life; and have 2) thus founded us on our work and deeds, by
which we have completely lost Christ and lacked the way to eternal life.
For you must make a clear and real distinction between this knowledge
and what can be called apart from it. In short, what is not called the
knowledge of Christ does not bring eternal life, nor does it help from
sin and death. For as it is true that through his knowledge alone he
gives eternal life, so it must also be true that what is not this
knowledge must remain in death and damnation.

50 What does it mean to know the Father and Christ? Or, how does such
knowledge come about? Answer: It is written in the words, \"Whom thou
hast sent. He who understands this and believes without doubt certainly
has eternal life. But what does \"whom thou hast sent\" mean? Count it
for yourself, and see what Christ came to do, and what he did here on
earth. He came from heaven and became man to do the work that the Father
commanded him to do (as he will soon say himself), namely, to take upon
himself the sin of the world and die for it, to make atonement for the
Father\'s wrath, and through himself in his own person to overcome death
and the devil, and to bring us to himself. For since he himself is sent
by God, it cannot be a badly futile thing, but brings with it an
excellent command and business, so necessary and great that no angel nor
saint, but the only Son, 3)

2\) \"us\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

3\) Wittenberger: ohn den uneinen Sohn.

766 Erl. so, I7S-IM. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SS4-6W. 767

has been able to accomplish. For what such a person himself is to
accomplish must certainly concern and create something eternal between
God and us. Therefore, the treasure lies in the little word \"to be
sent\". For it reveals and shows us God the Father\'s mind, heart and
will toward us, and includes everything that Christ has done, preached,
suffered, accomplished and brought or given to us. It also clearly
proves that this saying does not refer to the life to come, because to
recognize Christ as sent by the Father means nothing else than to
believe and know how he came to earth, died for our sins, rose from the
dead, acquired and gave us forgiveness of sin; all of which belongs to
this life.

51 We should now do this with all diligence, and train our hearts to
awaken and strengthen our faith; not, as before, put it out of the way,
or lay it under the bench 1) for a while. For there truly is our
salvation and comfort in all troubles, that we may know that there is no
other counsel in heaven and earth against sin and all temptation, but
this knowledge or faith. Think for yourself what such faith can and does
accomplish. It must ever follow, when I know that Christ was sent by the
Father for my sake and given to me, that I may freely and cheerfully
conclude that he is my gracious, kind Father, and know no more of any
wrath. For by such a work as this, that he sends his Son, he has (as now
said) opened to us all his heart and will, that nothing is seen but his
exceeding, unfathomable love and mercy. But if I now have the Father\'s
heart, I have him even with all his divine power and authority. For what
then should I fear or be afraid? If sin, death, the world and the devil
attack me and want to take away my heart and drive me to despair, I know
that I have a gracious, almighty Father through Christ, and they both
stand by me and fight for me, so that I may cheerfully and confidently
defy the devil with all his power, yes, drive out my mockery and
laughter from him.

1\) \"a while\" is only in the Jena.

52 Behold now what a mighty and almighty power faith is against all
power that oppresses us. And try and do this, and you will know what a
great and difficult art there is in this knowledge of Christ. For here
every one will feel how little faith he has, and how weak it is in life,
and how nothing of this is known to either the works preachers, who hold
faith in such low esteem, or the untimely, sated clever ones, who have
learned it as soon as they can, and think they can go much higher.

When one enters this school, one learns that it is a matter of struggle
and encounter, how nothing can be done by works or human ability to
stand and win against sin, death and other temptations. That is why the
devil, because he feels and knows this, rages so hard against this
teaching, and awakens all his mobs, papists and heretics, who, even if
they hear a lot about the faith, or say and preach it themselves, still
never understand or experience anything about it, know and learn nothing
more than from their own piety of the works they understand and are able
to do.

Now it is true, as I have always taught, that God wants to have pious
people, in a fine outward life and walk, holy and blameless before the
world; but it shall not and cannot make a Christian before God, that is,
create nor bring eternal life. To these honors we let no human life nor
holiness come, but it shall soar high and far above all works and
beautiful, glorious life. Let our works and lives remain in this
regiment on earth, and be called earthly godliness, and enjoy this life
(as the Scripture says, \"He that doeth these things shall live
therein\") and cease from the same; 2) but this, of which we speak here,
is a heavenly and divine godliness, which creates an eternal life. For
it is not based on human ability and perishable works, but has another,
eternal reason, with which it must also remain forever.

55 Therefore I am in favor of this saying that

2\) So the Jena and the Latin. Wittenberg and Erlangen: \"are called,
which God also requires of us, and lets it please Him, if it goes in
faith and wants to reward both, here and there\".

[768 **Erl. so, I8S-184. Sermon on Joh. 17, 3. W. VIII, ess-sss.**
769]{.underline}

He excludes and leaves all works so pure and barren, by setting up mere
knowledge. For what kind of work is knowledge? It is neither fasting,
watchfulness, mortification, nor anything that can be done or suffered
with the body, but it lies within, in the deepest depths of the heart;
in sum, knowledge is not a work, but precedes all works. 1) For after
and from knowledge follow works; item, works is that which we do, but
knowledge is that which we receive and take. Thus, by this 2) little
word \"to know,\" as by a mighty thunderclap, all doctrine that is based
on the works of men, spiritual orders, and worship of God is struck
down, as if one could thereby be freed from sins, reconcile God, and
acquire grace.

But notice and do not forget that I have indicated above \[§ 43\] how
Christ in this saying intertwines and binds his knowledge and the
Father\'s knowledge, so that only through and in Christ does one know
the Father. For this I have often said, and still say, that even when I
am now dead, remember this, and beware of all teachers, as those whom
the devil rides and leads, who begin to teach and preach of God in the
highest place, bare and apart from Christ; as one has hitherto
speculated and played in high schools, with his works up in heaven, what
he is, think and do in himself 2c., But if you want to be sure and meet
or take hold of God in the right way, so that you will find grace and
help in him, do not let yourself be persuaded to seek him elsewhere than
in the Lord Christ, nor to be concerned with other thoughts, or to ask
for another work than the one he sent Christ for. In Christ your art and
study should abide and stick: and where your own thoughts and reason, or
anyone else, leads and directs you, just close your eyes and say: I
should not and will not know of any other God but in my Lord Christ.

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: \"Knowledge is not of our work, but of that
which Christ has done, and goes before all our works.\" The Latin agrees
with the reading we have given.

2\) Erlanger: the.

Here behold him under your eyes, as he shows himself to you in the most
clear and lovely way, in this word of Christ: \"That they may know you
and the one you have sent, Jesus Christ,\" so that he may completely
draw the Father to himself, so that no one can grasp the true God
without the one word that he speaks; for how else should he come to you
or you to him, so that you could see him and grasp him? You must ever
fix all your senses on the mouth where he directs you, and see how he
leads you through the word, and works everything in you.

\(58\) No one believes this to be a necessary and great art, which is
also lacking in many high and excellent people, and is still hidden from
all scholars, because they do not know how to bind their minds and
thoughts to the man Christ, so that they look only to him, what he says
and does, rather than to God\'s word and work above in heaven. This
means that they do not pay attention to the word: \"Whom you have sent.
If they really saw and believed this, they would turn their ears, eyes
and heart to it and say, \"Behold, if he has been sent by the Father, he
must truly do something and have something to say to us out of the
Father\'s will and command, so that we should hear him as the Majesty
himself. Now we hear no other word than that he is to help the world and
make the Father our friend; nor do we see any other work than that he
goes and does these things, preaches, suffers and finally dies on the
cross. Behold, the Father\'s heart, will, and work are open to me, and I
know him; which no one else can ever see or meet, how high he rises and
speculates with his own clever and pointed thoughts.

59 From this understanding it is easy to judge what a miserable pity,
even a cursed abomination, the teaching of the pope and the monks is,
who insolently slander that Christ has not taught and spoken everything,
nor done and directed everything, but has left much behind him to teach,
command, order, and do; straight against this saying. As if to say: You
must not only look to him as sent by God, but also to us, who are given
and commanded to do and teach much more than he has commanded. Christ
says: Eternal life is in his inheritance.

770 Erl. so, is-iso. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
ess-roe. 771

They say that it is not enough, much more is needed, one must listen to
the Concilia, follow the holy fathers\' teaching, life and example 2c.

It is high time for all devout Christians to speak up and say: Dear
sirs, we will indeed gladly listen and watch what you say and call or
do; but do not hold it higher than when the maid sweeps the house or the
cow gives milk. We let the work go and remain in its dignity; but that
it should accomplish so much as Christ\'s word, that if I heard it and
lived by it, I would be saved by it, we say no to that. The text does
not say here, \"This is eternal life, if you live and do, conclude or
establish this way,\" but that Christ, sent by the Father, should be
recognized. He does not want us to look at Moses or John the Baptist or
others, who were also sent, had great command, and did and accomplished
much, but no one was sent to bring and give eternal life through his
knowledge, except Christ alone.

\(61\) Behold, this is the quarrel we have with the pope\'s doctrine,
that he takes such things from us, and will not leave the knowledge pure
and bare; otherwise I would never have attacked him with a word. For we
gladly let it happen that they conclude, set and command, and say it is
well done, and also gladly help ourselves; but that they leave us one
thing free, that it should not be considered as if such a thing should
serve and promote eternal life; for that would be too close to Christ\'s
honor 1) and his word denied and trampled underfoot.

But this saying shows much more brightly how hopeless, desperate boys
these are, who praise and proclaim their orders and spiritual state as
states and works of perfection, much higher and better than other common
Christian life and state, which is not of a man, but of the wretched
Satan of hell\'s word and teaching, and one of blasphemy, therefore all
monasteries are to be fled and cursed as the devil\'s infernal dragon.
How would we come to this, that your self-chosen life and work should be
more perfect?

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: \"that is Christo\". In Latin: Oüristi
Nonori.

and more blessed than the life and work of Christ, the Son of God? He
will certainly remain with his holiness over all Carthusians, yes, over
all saints\' works, if they fasted their life days on water and bread,
did not sleep for more than one hour a night, yes, if they raised ten
dead people every hour. Summa, what you can praise or boast and obtain
for holy life, it is not enough for the common Christian life, yes, it
is not worthy to be the footcloth of the Lord Christ.

For this reason, the old doctrine and thought, by which such
distinctions have been made in Christendom, and by which it has been
divided into so many different ranks and works, must be pulled out and
trampled underfoot. In the world and the earthly regime, it must be
unequal, one estate and work higher, nobler and better than others. But
the Christian\'s life and position soar high and far above all these
things, so that everything remains below them, as deep as the ground
under heaven, and no thing on earth is equal to it. For the treasure is
too great and too high to be grasped through the man, Christ, God the
Father and eternal life, so that no man\'s heart can grasp it enough.

That is why it is so difficult to grasp, and all the world resists it,
and everyone falls on other things that reason can grasp and attain. For
it always remains strange and hidden to it, that it cannot regard it as
great, nor hold it to be true, and can only consider it, because it does
not feel it and 2) gropes, always wants to have something and set it as
a basis, which it can find in itself, or can set up for its own, and
say: I have done and worked so much, 2c., and yet hope that it will also
be valid.

As it is also read by old holy fathers, when St. Hilarion said to the
hermit, who, when he was about to die, began to say a bad word: My dear
soul (he said), why are you afraid of the exit? Have you served the Lord
for seventy years, and now you are afraid of death? If he died of such
an opinion, as these words are, he is not well.

2\) \"and\" is missing in the Erlanger.

772 **Eri.so/186-iss. Sermon on Joh. 17, 3. 4. W. VIII, 702-704.** 773

For this means to be based, not on Christ as sent by the Father. For
this means to base oneself, not on Christ as sent by the Father, through
whom he brought and gave us eternal life, but on his own work and great
service to God. This is nature\'s wickedness, that all good lives and
works, which would otherwise be pleasing and acceptable to God, should
be polluted with such filth, and thereby lose Christ and eternal life.

I say this so that no one will be misled by such examples, even though
St. Jerome (who himself was deeply immersed in the mischief) makes them
excellent and great, and does not know how to lift them up enough. As
they also seem so excellent that it is difficult for the highly
enlightened Christians to keep themselves pure from them. Nevertheless,
I hope from the same old father that a different light and view of faith
has appeared to him in his last moments. On this word I must not and
will not die, nor go with him. For if one should have asked him: Dear
father, why do you 1) eat roots and herbs in the forest for so many
years, and lie on the bare hard earth? Do you also think that God should
give you eternal life and a special crown in heaven for this? then he
could not deny it, and would have to say: \"Yes, I hope he will not let
it be done in vain; otherwise why would I want to lie in the desert with
hard, sour work all my life?

67 Meanwhile, where is Christ with his work and merit? So I hear that it
must count for nothing, but that, as if it were all useless, which he
had put into acquiring eternal life and giving it to us, he must first
make it serve him anew through our work. Therefore such legends and
examples of the fathers are vain shearing knives, yes, the most harmful
poison on earth, against faith and Christ\'s knowledge, because
otherwise everyone is afflicted by nature with the foulness, which
cannot leave, it must hang itself on it. All the world has fallen for
it, and has worked for it to the utmost, so that even many people have
come to despair who would not or could not have done so.

1\) Erlanger: you do.

2\) \"most harmful\" taken by us from the old edition of Walch. Latin:
psrnioiosissima. The other German editions offer: \"schändlichste\".

\(68\) Therefore, you see how necessary it is to practice and to keep
this saying well, as the right principal and foundation of our doctrine,
how to become one of Christ, and to meet eternal life rightly, and not
to lack it. For it is (I still say) a high, strange mind, and
excellently difficult to keep such knowledge pure, and to base and
consider oneself entirely on it. We have it, praise God, in word and
doctrine, but still little and weak in heart; the others, papists and
enthusiasts, have, unfortunately, also lost the word and the
understanding, and meanwhile the heartache of leading themselves and
others away from it with their own thoughts. So you have this rich,
golden saying, how it establishes the article of Jesus Christ, true Son
of God, and teaches and shows the fruit and benefit of it, that one may
know what we have in him, and through him meet God rightly, and learn to
come to him, to trust in him cheerfully and with all confidence, which
no other teaching on earth has ever taught.

**V. 4. I have glorified you on earth, and finished the work which you
gave me to do.**

There we already have three kinds of transfiguration. He prayed before
(v. 1) that the Father would make him glorious, so that he would be
glorious again through his glory or transfiguration; there are two of
them. Now he says here that he has already transfigured the Father, and
asks again that the Father also transfigure him in himself 2c. But what
those two transfigurations have in themselves, has been said enough,
from which also this text becomes clear and easy. The Lord Christ, when
he walked on earth, transfigured the Father in such a way that he made
his praise, glory and honor great and glorious, as is seen everywhere in
the Gospel, that he always preaches and praises how he was sent by the
Father, and all his words and works, what he lives, does, has and is
able to do, he shows up and assigns to the Father. This is almost the
whole life and nature of a Christian man, as well as of Christ himself,
that he lives only to praise and honor God, recognizing and proclaiming
his grace and good deeds.

70\. such work and transfiguration is now aligned (he wants to say),
therefore transfigure me.

3\) In the old editions: \"Christians\" instead of: a Christian.

774 Erl. so, ISS-IN. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
704-707. 775

now again. This is just as if he were to say again, as above \[§ 17
ff.\]: If I am to bring up your glory, honor and praise, then I must
come into darkness and disgrace. For because he did the will of the
Father, preached and marveled, and walked in the way that pleased God,
the world became hostile to him and could not stand him; therefore, for
his sake, he had to be darkened and oppressed, and condemned to the most
ignominious death. Thus he completed the work that was given to him.
Because he now feels and knows that he must lose all his honor and glory
above the Father\'s praise, he prays that the Father will not leave him
in darkness, but will pull him out of shame and death, bring him to
honor and light, that is, make him Lord and King. Then the third thing
must follow, for which he asked at the beginning, that he may also
glorify the Father through all the world, in his Christians, so that his
honor and glory may be greater than before he died.

\(71\) Behold, they all three follow one another: first, that he
transfigures the Father in life, but over the glorious preaching fails,
that the Father must transfigure him again, that he also may extend his
clarity and make it much more glorious through his kingdom and gospel.
For, as above

24 ff.) said that if Christ had remained untransfigured, the Father\'s
clarity would not have come any further, but would have perished with
Christ. Summa, they are intertwined, the Father\'s and the Lord
Christ\'s clarity, that in transfiguring Christ, the Father transfigures
himself, and when Christ is transfigured, he transfigures the Father;
and both are an undivided clarity, that the Son must be transfigured by
the Father, the Father in and through the Son.

\(72\) As Christ, our Head, asks, so we who are attached to him must ask
that he may be transfigured in us. For as it happened to him on earth,
so it must happen to all of us, that for his sake (because we
transfigure him, praise his praise with our teaching and life) we allow
ourselves to be disgraced, condemned, cursed and killed, so that for our
sake his name and holy word are also persecuted and blasphemed. But that
he may abide in honor, and be exalted above his

If he keeps his word against the blasphemers, he must help us out again
and turn the wheel, so that the world will be wronged and condemned with
all shame, but we will come to the highest honor and glory. Thus his
honor and glory come forth, and continue to break forth into all the
world through the Holy Spirit and the mouth of the Christians. This is
what he means by completing the work that the Father gave him to do,
that he should take upon himself all shame and disgrace, suffering and
death, in honor of the Father; and all this for our sake, that we might
be saved and have eternal life, as has been said above \[§32 ff\].

**V. 5. And NOW transfigure me, O Father, with thyself, with the clarity
which I had with thee before the world was.**

This is another dry, bright text about the divinity of Christ, against
the Arians, although they have dared to bore a hole through it. He
speaks out clearly and aridly that he had clarity and was in a glorious
being with the Father before the world was created. What this is, the
faithful can well judge. 1) For before the world came into being,
nothing could ever have been without God alone, since there is no means
between God and the world; it must be either the Creator Himself, or a
creature.

\(74\) Behold, the mouth of the Holy Spirit can speak so plainly and
badly, and yet so highly and so well, that no man perceives it. 2) For
what else is it spoken, but that another should say with many words:
Declare me, dear Father, who am your only Son from eternity, the same
God with you, in One Being and Glory 2c.? This he now asks, and puts it
into prayer, to indicate how or 3) in what way he wants to be
transfigured (that is, revealed, preached and believed), namely, that he
is the one who has had his glory from eternity, that is, true God, the
Father\'s natural Son.

75 But such fine text have.the heretics

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: decrease. Latin: \^xpiibars.

2\) Latin: oupsrs xotsst.

3\) Erlanger: on.

776 **Erl. so, I9I-ISS. Sermon on Joh. 17, 5. 6. W. VIII, 707-71.\"**
777

also darkened and perverted; as they pervert all Scripture. And, for
this, God will protect us in the future, when they want to break down
again, I have admonished, and still admonish, that this evangelist
should be well practiced, and that one should learn to base oneself
firmly on it. For they will all twist such sayings with nimble grasps,
and say, as they did before: it may be true that Christ had his clarity
before the world; but from this it does not yet follow that he must be
the eternal, natural God, for he may well have been a higher, nobler 1)
creature, above and before all creatures, before the world was made, so
that he would be the means between God and all creatures in the world.
For seeing that they could not pass by such bright sayings, they had to
come up with such a thought that Christ would be the most glorious
creature, much higher and more excellent than all angels, created also
before all creatures. So we must turn our noses up at the Scriptures, so
that they may be stretched according to our thoughts, and not see that
they are nothing but fictitious thoughts. How then should it be with
those who fall into the high articles with their reason, and want to
master the Scriptures.

\(76\) Just as we have just now \[§36\] acted and contended for this
article, that Christ must be the true God, because he alone has the
power to give eternal life, and the same is received only through his
knowledge: so we also stand on this bright saying, not allowing
ourselves to be deprived of the words, nor to twist them, nor to think
of and create a means between God and the world, as none is possible to
give in truth. For this is certain, since Christ had his clarity before
the world came into being, he cannot be a creature. For he will ever
have called by \"the world\" everything that is created, or called
creature, and is not eternal, but has begun; as Moses testifies Gen.
1:1: \"In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth\" 2c.
Therefore it cannot exist that Christ should have been before and apart
from the world or time, and yet be a creature.

77 Thus Christ also speaks clearly: \"the clarity\" or glory, \"which I
have with you.

1\) So the Wittenberg and the Latin. Jenaer and Erlanger: edele.

not in, nor with the creatures. Since it was nowhere but with the
Father, it must have been in the Godhead. A king or prince also has a
glory, but in or with his people, because it can be nowhere else. But
this clarity must be entirely in God, apart from all creatures. But if
it is to be a clarity with God or in God, it must be the same and the
same, and in one undivided being. Thus in this little word \"with thee\"
both the unity of nature and also the difference of the persons in the
Godhead are comprehended at the same time.

78 The sum of this prayer is: Dear Father, I have now done my part in
the world for which you sent me; now I am perishing for the sake of your
glory, I must be oppressed and condemned as the most desperate man the
world has borne; therefore make me glorious again, so that the world may
hear and say that I am your Son from eternity. For if the Father Himself
did not do it, no man would ever have known or experienced His clarity.
For into which human heart would it ever come, or 2) be believed, that
the crucified Christ, humbled under all men, should be the true,
almighty God. Now, however, the prayer has been heard, and it is going
on, that one considers, believes and honors Christ as a true man, born
of the Virgin, and also as the true Son of God, who had his clarity from
eternity with the Father, but now has revealed the Father through the
Gospel, and has brought people to his knowledge, as follows:

**V. 6. I have revealed your name to the people you gave me from the
world.**

Here he himself explains what he means by transfiguring the Father and
completing his work, and shows how and why this was done, namely, that
nothing else was said except this: 3) I have revealed your name to the
people whom you have given me. To transfigure the Father means to reveal
his name, so that he preaches about him and enters our hearts.

2\) Jenaer: and. Latin: ant.

3\) The words: \"namely - be said\" are missing in the Erlanger.

778 Erl. 50, 1SS-ISS. Interpretations of John the Evangelist. W. vm,
7IS-716. 779

He forms us as a kind father, who has taken us into his grace and
forgives all sin, redeems us from death and the devil, helps and
protects us in all hardships, does not regard any person, work or merit,
out of pure fatherly kindness, through Christ, his dear Son 2c.

Whoever praises and glorifies, preaches, believes and confesses these
things, glorifies the Father, transfigures and reveals his name, so that
people may know what to call him, what to think of him and what to honor
him for. For this is the right name, that one may know him, that is, see
his heart, will and work, which is hidden from the whole world. For
those who do not have this faith and confession do not know him, even
though they hear and speak much about God. As, the Jews, who alone
boasted of God\'s people and servants, and yet thought no more of him
than of such a man, who had their holiness in: Law, sacrifice 1) and
beautiful services, and should please him, and therefore be gracious to
them. Just as our monasticism and spiritual classes with their worship
paint and hold him as the one who must look upon their caps, fasting,
strict life, masses and other beautiful works, and give heaven for them.

For this is inherent in all men on earth, when one hears about God, that
each one makes his own image and thoughts, so that he wants to give God
a form and color, as he is, what he thinks and has in mind, how he
should be served, and yet no reason can come higher, if it does it best,
than that it must serve him with works, and do so much that he pleases
him, and gives in return what it desires; hence all idolatry has come
into the world. But if we are to know him aright, Christ must come with
his word and reveal him; our reason and thoughts will not do it. For who
would ever have thought or considered that the Son of God Himself would
come from heaven, become man and die on the cross for our sins, and earn
us the Father\'s grace and mercy, without any work or effort on our
part? Summa, Christ shall be the man alone, will also be

1\) In the German editions: Opfern. Latin: sueritteiu.

He may well retain the title and glory alone, that he may glorify and
reveal the Father.

82 But he adds, \"To those whom you have given me from the world. For as
no one reveals it and has it preached but he, so no one can understand
or accept the same revelation but those who have been given it; the
others despise it or are offended, persecute and blaspheme it. For it
goes against their wisdom and holiness, and all that they esteem.

83 This is all said for our sakes, who have the word of the Lord Christ
and are attached to it, and is a good, comforting text for all stupid,
fearful consciences, especially for those who are troubled and
challenged by the high temptations of their transgression.

84\. If anyone wants to know whether he is chosen, or how he is related
to God, let him look only at the mouth of Christ, namely, at this and
similar sayings. For although it cannot be said with certainty who will
be chosen in the future or who will remain, it is certainly true that
those who have been called and have come to hear this revelation, that
is, Christ\'s word, so far from accepting it seriously, that is,
believing it to be true, are those who have been given to Christ by the
Father. But those who are given to him he will well keep, and will see
to it that they do not perish, as he says in John 6:39: \"This is the
will of the Father who sent me, that I lose nothing of all that he has
given me.\" And afterwards in this chapter, v. 12: \"Those you have
given me I have kept, and none of them is lost, except the prodigal
child.\" Item Joh. 10, 28. Of the little sheep that hear his voice he
says: \"I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish, and no
one shall snatch them out of my hand.\"

For this you must certainly believe, that there is no greater grace and
divine work than when a man comes to hear the word of Christ with all
his heart, and to mean it earnestly, and to esteem it great and
precious. For it is not every man\'s business, nor of man\'s
understanding and choice; it requires more than reason and free will.

780 **Erl. so, ISS-IS7. Sermon on John 17:6. W. VIII, 7IK-7IS.** 781

Will that one could grasp it and accept it, as Christ says Joh. 6, 44:
\"No one can come to me unless the Father draws him. And again, v. 45:
\"He that heareth of my Father, and learneth, cometh unto me.\" What
words, though they sound harsh against false Christians, are yet sweet
and comforting to devout hearts that love his word, when one sees in
Christ\'s heart and mind whence they flow. For he wants to show that it
is not of man\'s will and imagination that we cling to Christ and become
his disciples, but that it is God\'s work and power.

It is evident when one looks into the world how few there are who love
and value Christ\'s word, especially where great power, wisdom and
holiness reign. There is no more despised, cursed thing on the face of
the earth than the dear gospel; which the clever world can so
masterfully reprove, so scornfully mock and ridicule, so venomously and
pointedly revile and blaspheme, so grimly and bitterly persecute: In
sum, no foolishness, no vice, no error, no devil is so hostile as
Christ. All kinds of rottenness, blasphemy, public disgrace, and
immorality can be suffered, silenced, embellished, and adorned; but the
Christ must take it all upon himself and bear it, on whom everyone must
pour out his poisonous, unsaturated resentment and hatred. Therefore let
it not be a small thing to thee, but a sure and certain comfort, when
thou feelest that thou lovest Christ and his word, and desirest to abide
in them with all thine heart, that thou art among the company that
belong to Christ, and shalt not be lost.

But whether you would be challenged about this with such thoughts: Yea,
though I love Christ and love to hear him, yet who knoweth how I am one
with the Father which is in heaven above? He will also take that away
and say: You fool, you would not be able to like my word or revelation
if the Father did not give it to you! Do you not hear that \[it\] is his
own work and grace? For he has already taken you from the world and
given you to me, that is, given you such things in your heart that you
will gladly hear me and hold my word dear and valuable. There you have
it

everything, what will you look for further? Only see to it that you do
not fall away. In sum, he who clings to Christ has all grace and cannot
be lost, even if he falls through weakness, like St. Peter, provided he
does not despise the word, like the crude spirits who boast of the
gospel and yet do not respect it. For no one may take such comfort,
except the poor, miserable, challenged hearts, which would gladly be one
with God, and love Christ, and would not gladly set themselves against
His word, but are sorry that it is blasphemed or persecuted.

\(88\) Behold, he will always draw us up through him, show us the
Father\'s heart, and make him most friendly, so that we will not be
afraid of him, but will look upon him with joy, and come before him with
all confidence. And shall therefore have these sayings the more gladly.
For no one believes it, not even myself, nor others, especially in
temptation, how the devil is so mischievous as to seduce the most
refined people with his own beautiful, pointed and subtle thoughts and
ideas, by which he wants to separate us from the Lord Christ, to divide
us and separate us from the Father, so that we look and grope after the
Father only and apart from Christ, or look at Christ as a mere man;
That, of course, there is no more difficult article on earth than to
believe that the man Christ is truly the Son of God. The reason is this:
for if we believed it, we would already have won the game. For we would
think: What the Christ speaks and does, gives and gives to me, as he
entices, calls, comforts and strengthens me, forgives and bears my sin,
the Father himself does, as the same one God; what can the devil and
death with all their misfortunes harm me?

But reason cannot grasp this. So the devil helps and encourages us to
draw a line and make a distinction between God and Christ, with two
thoughts, and to look for Christ on the cross, but to look for God high
up in heaven, and thus to worry: \"Who knows what he is thinking above,
or what he has in mind for me? Where such thoughts take hold of the
heart, it cannot remain nor exist; for the person, God and man, is

[782 Eri. so, 197-199. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
71S-72I. 783]{.underline}

already cut and torn. On the cross or in the womb of the mother, one
sees nothing but a man in whom there is neither wrath nor terror, but
only kindness and heartfelt love to help us; but if you let go of such a
look and climb up into the majesty, you must run, be frightened, and
fall back, because you put yourself outside the sight of grace, and gape
into the mere majesty, which is too high and too heavy for you. For
apart from Christ, nature cannot see or attain grace or love in God,
just as apart from Him there is nothing but wrath and condemnation.

90\) Behold, this is what I call separating the Father and Christ from
each other, or dividing and separating the Son of Man and the Son of God
(that is, the one Person); and this is (I say) a real evil trick of the
worst devils. For the others are even more crude, foolish devils, as
Sabellii, Manichaei and other heresies, who teach that one should not
believe that God is man, or that a man may be truly God. These are all
still called objecta speculabilia, mere thoughts and pointed sophist\'s
findings, which are discussed in schools; but when it comes ad affectus,
that is, to the seriousness, where faith is to stand and the heart is to
base itself on it against the temptation, then it finds and stirs.

\(91\) Philip was also in this challenge \[John 14:8\], when he said,
\"Lord, show us the Father, and we will be satisfied. 2c. As if to say,
\"You tell us so much about the Father; we see and hear and know you,
but when will we see the Father? Behold, the great apostles, who heard
Christ so long and were with Him daily, are still in the carnal mind,
seeking God apart from Christ, and separating Him from the Father.
Therefore Christ also punishes him, and calls him back down to Himself,
and says, v. 9, 10: \"Philip, he that seeth me seeth the Father also;
how sayest thou then, show us the Father? Do you not believe that I am
in the Father and the Father is in me?\" But no reason can resist this.

92\. therefore, we should probably use these sayings

1\) Jenaer: the.

We must form and press within us, and get used to looking at and hearing
the Lord Christ as if we were certainly seeing and hearing the Father,
and thus wrap ourselves completely in him and hide; yes, crawl with him
in the same swaddling clothes and attach and bind him to the wood, and
not let him tempt us to go into the mere majesty, so that the devil does
not overtake us and catch us, who does nothing more than dissolve Christ
in the flesh 2) (as St. John 1 Epistle 4, 3). John 1 Epistle 4, 3), in
this most subtle way, that he separates God and man from each other in
Christ.

I must admonish and urge this because some erroneous spirits deceive
themselves and others with their thoughts, and almost insist on the
saying \[John 6:63, 1\]: \"Flesh is of no use,\" as if the spirit alone
must act with God, and Christ Himself is of no use to mankind. This
actually means that Christ\'s flesh is dissolved and torn away from the
Godhead, as a useless flesh and blood, yes, the one and only unseparated
person of Christ is separated. For what is it but that two persons are
made of Christ, because they seek God apart from the flesh, and publicly
say that man alone suffered for us, and that his flesh is of no use to
us.

94\. even though they allow it to be valid and useful that he died for
us, now that this has happened and Christ has ascended to heaven, we
should no longer cling to the flesh, but rise higher and ascend to the
Father in the spirit. 2c. Because they thus throw away mankind and
consider it useless, it must happen to them that they also lack the
Godhead. For, as enough has been said, whoever seeks God from now on,
and wants to meet or find Him other than in Christ, does not find and
meet God, but the devil himself in God\'s stead. For here thou hearest
how he utterly confesses it to himself, when he saith, \"I have revealed
thy name unto them whom thou gavest me.\" And so soon further, \"They
were yours, and you gave them to me,\" 2c. Then you hear (I say) how the
Father binds us to the Son in the flesh and blood, as the one who alone
gives him to us.

2\) Here Luther followed the reading: ö ÄE 701-.

784 **Erl. so, I9S-20I. Sermon on Joh. 17, 6. W. VIII, 721-724.** 785

revealed and transfigured by his oral preaching, that we may know where
and how to find and meet him.

95\. Since we have been given to Christ through Him, as to whom we are
to cleave, and look and listen only to His mouth, we must not so cast
down our flesh and blood, but crawl and wrap ourselves in them, as to
where the Father has placed us, even to let Himself be found, that we
may come with Him to the Father, and abide where He abides, as those who
have now been taken from the world, and shall not abide with it under
the power of the devil, nor be lost with it. Therefore let every man
thank God the heavenly Father that he has come to this, and has been
made worthy to hear Christ, and that his word is well pleasing to him,
and let him trust cheerfully and assuredly that God will not let him
perish, because he has given him his dear Son for his own, and through
him has showered him with all graces.

**They were yours, and you gave them to me.**

96 He says this for the further comfort and strength of our weak faith.
For the fact that he needs so many words is not only so that this prayer
may be all the more effective with the Father, because he knows it all
beforehand, and without which everything that Christ asks or desires is
yes, and must happen, but that he may make our heart, which is always
afraid, timid and terrified before God, confident, so that it may look
at him joyfully and boldly, and run to him with all confidence and stand
before him.

For no man on earth is able to let this happen: when he rightly
remembers God, his heart is troubled in his body, and he would run away
to the world; indeed, as soon as he hears God mentioned, he becomes
timid and shy. I am not talking about raw, desolate people, but about
those who are struck in the heart, so that they feel their sin (which we
also preach alone). For the conscience is there, feeling and knowing
that God is hostile to sinners and wants to condemn them, and cannot
escape nor escape God\'s wrath; therefore it must tremble, shake and
tremble, turn pale and grow cold, as before lightning or thunder.
Therefore, Christ must forcefully approach it, and graft such sweet,
kind, comforting words into the heart, that he will be able to overcome
the heavy, bitter and cruel wrath of God.

and that the Father is most lovingly imagined, as a heart should desire.
Therefore, let us take these words and drive them into our hearts for
the salvation and comfort of our souls.

98\] \"They were yours,\" he says, \"that is, as I said, whoever hears
the word, opens his heart and ears, and lets the revelation resound and
ring in, does not belong to the world, but to me. 1) Since then it is
certain that they are mine, and I am their Lord, Master and Savior, it
is also certain and no doubt that they are yours; indeed, they are not
only yours now, but were yours before from the beginning, and come to me
through you. So with one word all wrath is taken away, and what terrible
things may be thought in heaven and on earth, and a wide heaven full of
grace and blessing is opened upon you. If you cling to the Lord Christ,
you are surely among the multitude whom God has chosen from the
beginning to be His own; otherwise they would not come here, nor hear
and accept such a revelation.

\(99\) Behold, the great temptation and all disputing of the secret
disposition are thus straightway put away, that some may torment
themselves and fear so much as to become senseless; and yet they
accomplish nothing, but to give place to the devil, that he may lead
them by despair into hell. For this thou shalt know, that all such
giving in and disputing of understanding is certainly of the devil. For
what the Scripture says about it is not meant to distress and frighten,
but rather to comfort, the poor afflicted souls who feel their sin and
would like to be rid of it.

Therefore, let those who do not have the gospel nor want to hear Christ
be troubled. But know that there is no greater comfort on earth than he
himself shows and gives you, namely, that you are God\'s own and dear
child, because his word is pleasing to you and your heart is sweet
toward him. For if Christ is kind and sweet to you and comforts you, God
the Father Himself comforts you. Therefore you do not have an angry God,
but a vain God.

1\) So in all editions. Latin: \[sä rusus \[st. Also in § 170 of this
interpretation, \"belong\" is construed with the accusative.

786 Erl. so, 201-204. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
724-727. 787

Fatherly love and grace, proves by such work that he has given you to
the Lord Christ. Stay with him and do not let yourself imagine anything
more than how he shows and reveals himself to you through Christ\'s
word. For he has revealed himself for this very reason, that you may not
seek or search for anything else, nor worry about what he may have
decided for you, but that you may see and know in the word all his will
concerning your salvation.

**You have given them to me, and they have kept your word. 1)**

Then he gathered both together, that they are the Father\'s children and
Christ\'s own, and made a cake out of them. They are my disciples, and
yet they have long been yours from eternity. Why? Because \"they have
kept thy word. What is this? why does he not say, they have kept my
word? For they ought to be called mine (as we are wont to say), because
they have kept my word. But he speaks willingly in this way, that he (as
I said) makes it one thing, and even draws himself into the Father. As
if he should say, Inasmuch as they are my disciples, and hear me, they
hear and keep not my word, but thine. That we may be assured of the
consolation that out of the mouth of the Lord Christ proceedeth no other
word than that of the Father which is in heaven, and that is the word by
which he most earnestly and most earnestly calleth and beckonth us unto
himself (as is seen throughout the Gospel), that you only fear no wrath,
but take care of all love and goodness, comfort and help to him with all
your heart, as sure and certain that you are his own chosen dear child,
and sit in his bosom, and have all that he has given to Christ, as
follows. Behold, how could he speak more beautifully and more
comfortingly, or how is it possible for a man on earth, with so simple a
few words, to talk out such an excellent thing? Yes, where are the
hearts that can grasp and believe it?

**V. 7. Now they know that everything you have given me is from you.**

All of this goes to what I said about him having a fearful, heavy
conscience,

1\) Wittenberg and Jena: \"kept\", but later in the text: \"retain\".

which weighs us down as a burden above all burdens, and make the heart
light and joyful to come before God. Because they have your word and
have kept it (he says), and have become my disciples through it, they
know that everything I have and do, create and give is from you; that
is, they accept it as given and bestowed by you, and do not doubt that
they themselves were also chosen by you and brought to me. For all, all
(he says), who cling to me and hear me, are sure that you are also their
gracious God and Father; for they could not hear me, nor keep the word,
if you had not given it to them and chosen them for it.

103\. Behold, this is the fruit of the word, where it is received and
kept, that one may have such knowledge of all grace and goods from the
heavenly Father, given to us through the Lord Christ, and may cheerfully
and confidently consider and rely upon it, which no human reason, nor
wisdom, nor even the preaching of the law can give. This is the right
bright light and clarity, when one sees God right under one\'s eyes with
uncovered face, without any cover or curtain, as St. Paul says 2 Cor. 3,
18.

**V. 8. For the words that you have given me I have given them.**

\(104\) It is in the word that we receive and receive all things; only
that it may be known that all that Christ speaks is the Father\'s word,
and that he alone clings to his mouth, rejecting all other thoughts or
what may occur to anyone. And behold, how he speaks clearly of the
external, oral word, with a bodily voice, spoken through Christ, and put
into the ears, so that no one may regard the same as small or
unnecessary; how now many new insane spirits deceive themselves, and
think that God must deal with them in a special way, by secret
revelation of the Spirit, 2c., and thus lead themselves from God and
Christ to the devil. For here you hear of no other means than the word
that he gave them through his oral preaching; and yet the same calls the
Father\'s word, which he received from heaven and brought to us 2).

2\) \"us\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

788 **Erl. so, 204-sos. Sermon on Joh. 17, 8. 9. W. VIII, 727-729.** 789

and says that it will produce such power and fruit that they will know
the Father\'s will and heart and have everything that is necessary for
their salvation in it, as the following words further testify:

**And they received it, and knew truly that I came forth from thee, and
believed that thou hast sent me.**

\(105\) Behold, how he has so many words for himself, but only about the
same thing; for he speaks as if he had power, so that it may be seen how
gladly he would speak into the hearts of poor, weak, stupid consciences,
as he has well known what trouble and labor it takes to raise up a heart
in temptation, that it may look upon God with joyful eyes. Therefore, we
should not let ourselves be put off hearing these things often and much,
and chewing and doing them well. For they are such fine, comforting
words that they could be preached for many years, and yet much more
highly than anyone 1) could speak them. Therefore, let each one take it
and consider for himself from where and why Christ spoke it, so that he
may show us the Father\'s heart and fatherly love, and make a
comforting, childlike confidence in him.

Now this is the opinion as before: So much does the word create, where
it is accepted, that one recognizes that Christ came forth from God and
was sent, that is, that everything he speaks is God\'s word and will,
and what he does and creates is the Father\'s work and command, and all
this to help us. For this is the knowledge of which he said above \[v.
3\], that in it is eternal life; but such a treasure as is hidden from
all the world that they can never attain to it, 2) and such an art that
no reason or wisdom on earth can attain, nor can it be brought about by
any other means or way than through Christ\'s word. Whoever hears this
gets a right knowledge that makes him certain and does not leave him
wanting, so that he can conclude and say against all the suggestions of
the devil and his own conscience: Now I know that I have a gracious,
kind Father in heaven, who, through unfeeling, is able to give me the
strength I need.

1\) Erlanger: no one.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: \"that she does not know to find him.\"
Latin: ad quem nunquam veniet.

I am not to fear sin, death, or the devil, because of the love and
kindness he has sent and given me, his dear Son, Christ, with all that
he has purchased and accomplished. Only that one remains with the word,
and rejects all other thoughts, and neither wants to hear nor know
anything else from God, without what Christ speaks. For, as I have
always said, this is the only way to deal with God, so that one does not
start, and the right step or bridge on which one goes to heaven, that
one remains here, and clings to this flesh and blood, yes, to the words
and letters that go out of his mouth, through which he leads us up to
the Father in the very finest way, so that we do not find and feel a
terrible image of wrath, but only comfort, joy and peace.

**V. 9. I pray for them, and do not pray for the world.**

Then he pours out his prayer and indicates why he is concerned about
everything, namely, about his dear Christians. For after he had begun to
ask his Father to transfigure him, and had told him in many words how he
had transfigured the Father by his preaching and revelation to his own,
so that they had accepted his word and known the Father, 2c. he now
commands them to the Father, as those in whom he must be transfigured,
that he may preserve them in the world by what they now have.

So this prayer must certainly be answered, not only because he deserved
it through his holy suffering and death, but also because he says: \"All
that is mine is yours, and what is yours is mine\" 2c. As if he should
say, we are so completely one in the matter, that what I ask must be yes
and certainly happen. Therefore, let us also take comfort, be of good
cheer, and conclude with firm faith that those for whom the Lord Christ
asks will surely be healed and preserved against the devil\'s raging and
fury, and against sin and all kinds of temptation. Now we have heard for
whom he prays, namely for those who have accepted his word and have come
to love him with all their hearts and hold fast to the word.

790 Erl. so, sos-sos. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
729-732. 791

hang on. These may happily rely on the fact that they are certainly in
this prayer and are to remain with the Lord Christ.

409 But this again is terrible, that he saith, I pray not for the world.
Let us therefore see to it that we are not found among the multitude for
whom he will not ask. For therefore nothing else can follow without
their being lost, except those for whom Christ speaks evil and does not
want to know anything about them. This should ever frighten the world,
that it would freeze with trembling before such a judgment. But it only
takes it for a mockery, makes a laughing-stock of it, and remains in the
ghastly, obdurate blindness that it so surely throws it to the wind, and
lets it pass before its ears as if some fool had spoken it.

440\] But how does it rhyme that he will not pray for the world, when he
taught in Matt. 5:44, 1) to pray also for our enemies who persecute us
and blaspheme both our name and our doctrine? To this the answer is
brief: To ask for the world and not to ask for the world must both be
right and good. For he himself says soon after, \"I pray not for them
only, but also for them which shall believe on me through their word\";
these must ever be of the world (before they are converted); therefore
he must pray for the world for the sake of such as are yet to come. St.
Paul was also of the world when he persecuted and killed the Christians,
nor did St. Stephen pray for him to be converted. So also Christ himself
prays on the cross \[Luc. 23, 34.\]: \"Father, forgive them, for they
know not what they do.\" So it is true that he asks both for the world
and not for the world.

But this is the difference. In this way he does not pray for the world
as he prays for his Christians. For the Christians, and all who are to
be converted, he prays that they may remain in the right faith, increase
or continue, and not fall away from it, and that those who are not yet
in it may step out of their nature and come here. This is called praying
rightly and well for the world,\' as we should all pray; but as it now
goes and stands, because it rages against the gospel

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: teaches.

2\) Jenaer: the.

and rages, he will not ask in any way for them that God may please him
with such a being, or that he may see it through his fingers and let it
go, but that he may ask the opposition to hinder it, to hinder and to
destroy it. As Moses the prophet did, Numbers 16:15, against Korah and
his band, which rebelled against him, and were subject to his office and
priesthood, he was wroth, and cried unto the LORD, saying, Turn not unto
their sacrifice. Item, the king David, 2 Sam. 45, 34. when he was driven
away from his son, and his highest and wisest council Ahitophel had
joined him, he prayed that God would not let Ahitophel\'s council go
away, but would make it foolish, similarly he often prays in the Psalter
against the persecutors and his enemies.

442 But such prayer does not actually go against the person, but against
the being, which leads the world and drives it against God\'s word,
which does not allow the person to come to grace. Again, when Christ
prays for his Christians, he prays not only for their person, but for
their ministry and whole being: for as and where this goes and remains,
the person must also go and remain. Summa, as far as the person is
concerned, one should pray for everyone, and let the prayer go in
general, and strike in one heap, both enemy and friend, so that those
who are our enemies may be converted and 3) become friends; if not, that
their doing and acting may nevertheless go back, and have no happiness,
and before the person perishes, but the gospel and Christ\'s kingdom.
Thus did the holy martyr Anastasia, a rich, noble Romanian woman,
against her husband, who was an idolatrous and abominable rager against
the Christians and had thrown her into an abominable prison, where she
had to stay and die. She lay there and wrote to St. Chrysogonos that he
prayed diligently for her husband, so that he would be converted and
become a believer, but not so that he would not have to go out and soon
put an end to his rage. Prayed him to death so that he went to war and
did not come home again. In the same way, we pray for our angry enemies;
not that they may

3\) Jenaer: to.

792 **Erl. 50, M8-SW. Sermon on Joh. 17, 9. W. VIII, 732-734.** 793

God strengthen or protect them in their nature, as the Christians, nor
help them, but that they be converted with grace, where they are to be
converted; or do they not want him to oppose them, to control them, and
to make an end of the game with their harm and misfortune. For where one
thing must be, it is better that the world should go to ruin than
Christ, and that lies should give place to truth. For God has it in mind
that the truth shall remain, and the lies be put to shame.

With these words Christ looks at the two groups: the first and small
one, which has the word of God and should push it; the other, the great
one, who has it in mind to suppress this group and tries with all his
might how to suppress the gospel. Here we find what the world is, or who
is called of the world and not of the world. For the world is actually
called 1) those who are deadly enemies of the word, so that they cannot
see or hear it, which is no longer a human sin, but a desperate sin of
the devil, who thus reigns in the world, poisoning and embittering
hearts with his raging hatred of Christ and his word. For this is his
way, where he can only devise or stir up something, to blaspheme, revile
and persecute the word in the most disgraceful way, to the sorrow and
annoyance of the Lord Christ, there he exercises all his power and
strength; and where he cannot accomplish anything by force, he is so
wicked that he cannot hear it, runs and flees before it, more than
before the cross, and leaves nothing undone, that he may show and vent
his bitter, fierce anger against it.

\(114\) We still see this in his children and servants to this very
hour, how they daily become more senseless with raging and blustering,
and do not know how to blaspheme poisonously enough against our gospel
and persecute us; if they can no longer, they plug their ears and bless
themselves before it, as before the worst devil. Behold, such tender
fruit is the world. In the child the father is well known. What else can
one do and ask here, but that God may help his own, but that they have
nothing else to do with the gospel?

1\) \"er\" is missing in the Jenaer, in Walch and in the Erlanger.

and let the Christians see, because that annoys them the most and hurts
them, that they go down the sooner, because they have no grace and
intercession nor want to suffer? Where no good will help, there unmercy
and misfortune must help. We have the advantage of God\'s grace that we
may rely on this prayer and be sure that our thing will go and stand,
even if they rage against it with all their power and all the devils;
but their thing will go down, and they too, as firmly as they now sit.
For they are resolved in prayer, that shall smite and overthrow them,
where else our Lord Christ abideth before them in heaven. It will still
take a little time for them to rise up and sit as firmly as if no one
could lift them out of the chair, and they are so certain that they will
dampen and destroy us as if they had already done so. That is why faith
is necessary. For if this were not the case, there would be no need for
prayer.

**But for those whom you have given me, for they are yours.**

\(115\) Then he repeats again the words which he used before, that he
may ever instill it (2) in us. For the world I cannot ask (he says), for
they are not yours, but hate and persecute those whom you have given me;
but for them I ask, for they are your own goods and inheritance, there I
have care, there is all my heart and mind. Now enough is said why he
puts the words thus, \"whom thou gavest me.\" For he that is Christ\'s
is the Father\'s also. But they are Christ\'s, as he himself said, who
take the word from him and keep it. This is the most certain sign of a
gracious Father. For no one would accept the word (as has often been
said), nor remain with it, unless he were God\'s child, and given to the
Lord Christ by the Father.

I have given this admonition above \[§ 104 ff.\], and must do it always,
because we see that Christ cares so much that he always repeats the
same, and shows enough how highly it is needed, so that one ever watches
before all things, and remains only with the word. God rather let us
sink

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

794 Erl. so, SI0-2IS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
734-737. 795

(Where we ever stumble or sin) 1) In all manner of foolishness; but that
we lose not this treasure, which is Christ in his word; whatsoever shame
shall fall upon us afterward, let us abundantly recover ourselves of the
loss by this treasure. For it is this that crushes the devil\'s head,
that is, destroys his kingdom and all power. Therefore he is patient in
all things, able to suffer, yield, and concede all manner of things,
without this one piece. For where this does not work, he can break in as
and when he wants. In short, no holy life, piety or wisdom can help
against his power and authority without this word alone. Therefore this
should be our greatest concern, that we do not let ourselves be carried
away by it. For he stands by it, and means it with all his mind and
strength. He who perseveres in this, cares for it and asks for it, has
the comfort of Christ\'s prayer that he will persevere in it and that no
force will be able to prevent it.

**V. 10. And all that is mine is yours, and what is yours is mine.**

That is ever clearly and superfluously spoken out. It would still not be
so much if he said badly: \"All that is mine is yours.\" For everyone
can say that everything we have is God\'s. But this is much greater,
that he turns it around and says, \"All that is yours is mine.\" No
creature can say this before God. Now understand this not only of that
which the Father has given him on earth, but also of his one divine
being with the Father. For he does not say of his disciples and
Christians alone, but includes in one heap all that is the Father\'s,
eternal, omnipotent being, life, truth, righteousness 2c., that is, he
freely confesses that he is truly GOD fei, for the word \"all that is
yours is mine\" leaves nothing ever excluded. If everything is his, then
also the eternal Godhead is his; otherwise he could and should not need
the word \"everything\".

\(118\) But you must not forget what he is talking about and what he
means, namely, that everything depends on those who hold to his word to
admonish us, so that we may be able to keep our promise to the Lord.

1\) So the Jenaer agreeing with the Latin. Erlanger: \"wo er je wohl
über uns verhänget\". Wittenberger: \"wo er je wolt vber.uns
verhengen\".

You must remain a man and know that God speaks, does and gives
everything through him; that you look for both, all God\'s word and
work, in Christ, as Christ sets himself against you and deals with you,
promises, entices, comforts, carries, gives, all this is done by the
Father. Summa, you can neither see nor hear anything in Christ, you see
and hear the Father himself.

119\) Behold, this is what St. John in his Gospel urges in all words,
that only the high and beautiful thoughts should be abandoned, so that
reason and wise people should go around and seek God in the Majesty,
apart from Christ. He wants to lie in Christ, in the cradle and the
mother in the 3) womb, or hang on the cross; so they want to go up to
heaven, and search out how he sits and rules the world. These are vain
dangerous thoughts, where they are not rightly led. For they are all
bound to this one place, that thou shalt not grope nor see further. If
you want to meet and grasp everything that God is and does and has in
mind, then seek it nowhere, for He Himself has placed it and laid it
down. This you hear in the word: \"All that is yours is mine\" 2c.
Therefore, a Christian should not know how to seek or find God in any
other way than in the bosom of the Virgin and on the Cross, or how and
where Christ shows Himself in the Word.

120 St. Paul also says in 1 Cor. 2:2: \"When I was with you, I did not
want to be more wise than some high spirits, nor did I pretend to know
anything, but only about Jesus Christ and Him crucified. Behold, is this
the high apostle, who has had such excellent enlightenment, and knows
nothing more glorious and delicious to praise against the false
apostles, nor to preach more highly than the poor crucified God? What do
the arrogant spirits do, who strive for high, great revelations, and
think that one must come much higher, and exalt oneself in the spirit?
In the same way he says Col. 2, 3: \"In Christ are hidden all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. As if to say, \"Do you want to go
high, and know something special and excellent, wise and

2\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: almost.

3\) \"im\" is missing in the Wittenberger and in the Erlanger.

4\) \"only\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

796 **Erl. so, SI2-SIS. Sermon on John 17:10. W. VIII, 737-740.** 797

If you want to be wise, yes, all divine secrecy and wisdom, then study
and learn only in this book, there you will find it all. But (he says)
it lies buried deep and hidden, so that fes) no one but faith can see
and come to it. According to the eyes and appearance of the flesh, you
see nothing but a poor, weak man, forsaken by God and the world. But if
you believe the Word, you will find all divine counsel, wisdom and
strength in the midst of weakness and foolishness. If not, you may climb
high and gaze at the majesty, but you will run into the cops and fall.

For the devil also delights in beautiful, high thoughts, and can also
make a mask in his heart as if he were God, and disguise himself in
glory and majesty, as he did to Christ himself, Matth. 4, 8. Summa, as
far as great wisdom, holiness and majesty are concerned, he is master
and God in the world. He also once ascended so high that he could not go
any higher, because he wanted to become like God and sit in His chair;
therefore he still cannot leave his ways, always wanting to be honored
in majesty before God. Therefore God has done him the wickedness to let
himself down to the lowest level and to hide himself in the lowest form
than in the bosom of the virgin, and he does not want to be found in any
other way \[Gal. 3, 13. Rom. 8, 3. 2 Cor. 5, 2.\]. The devil cannot get
there, for he is a confident, proud spirit, even though he can pretend
to have the highest humility. Therefore no one can deceive him, except
that he binds himself to the stake where God has fastened him. 2) If he
seizes you in any other way, you are lost and carried away, like the
chick of the consecration, except for the wings of the hen.

**And I am transfigured in them.**

\(122\) It has been said enough above \[§ 79 ff\] what transfiguration
means, and how he wants to be transfigured by the Father and transfigure
him in turn. Thus he also expressed shortly before how he would be
transfigured in us, when he said \[v. 8\]: \"The words that you have
given me,

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: and.

2\) That is, in order to escape the devil\'s cunning attempts, flee to
the cross of Christ, through which the devil has lost his power. Hebr.
2, 14.

I have given them, and they have received it, and have known truly that
I came forth from thee, and that I am sent\"; that is, to transfigure is
nothing else than to have a clear and distinct knowledge of Christ,
through whom the Father reveals himself to us, that we may know what he
has given us through this his Son. And recently to say: As he is
transfigured by the Father through the word and revelation, so he is
transfigured in us through faith and confession. But it is well to say
transfigured, for he may well be transfigured (not for himself, but for
our sakes, as he then says, \"I am transfigured in them\"), as he who is
darkened before the world, and is in no reputation. For I have said \[§
120\]: Whoever looks at Christ with the eyes of reason sees nothing but
a wretched, poor, forsaken man, yes, utterly despised and cursed; there
he goes on earth thirty years, so that no one respects him or notices
him; yes, when he is to prove his glory, he lets himself be hung most
shamefully on the cross and put to death.

123\. So now the summa is: By the world I am darkened, blasphemed,
condemned, everyone resents and is offended by me; but they, my
disciples and students, because they hear the word that I am sent by you
and have all that is yours, they transfigure me; for by this I am
uncovered and put before their eyes, that they regard me as another man
than the world, namely, as your Son, eternal and true God, Lord over the
world, devil, sin, death 2c. This they did not know before by human
reason, nor did they look at me in the forehead; but now they have
another light, namely the word that you have given me and I have given
them, and they no longer look at me as the world does, according to
their understanding, but as they hear about me in the word revealed by
the Father.

And let this be no small comfort, that Christ Himself boasts of us to
the Father, that He is transfigured in us. For this glory we should not
take all the world\'s good and honor, that through such weakness and
wretchedness of our poor flesh and blood he should be transfigured, and
so heartily please God the Father, and

3\) Thus the Jenaer and the Erlanger. In the original and in the
Wittenberg: magnificent.

798 **Erl. 60, 215-217.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 740-742.** 799

so precious when we praise and esteem Christ.

\(125\) Therefore let every man see for himself how Christ may be
transfigured in him. For there are many who boast of the gospel and know
how to speak of it, but transfiguration is not so common, nor is it
everyone\'s business. For to transfigure Christ, or to believe in him,
is nothing else than to believe, as we have heard, that whoever has him
has the Father and all grace, divine goods and eternal life. The saints
of the world, the pope, and the spirits of the rot cannot do this. For
although some say of Christ, and can also use the words, that he is the
Son of God and has redeemed us, 2c., they never learn or experience how
one must accept, need, seek, find and hold him, and in or through him
take hold of the Father; meanwhile they go in the clouds, and go about
with their own thoughts.

\(126\) This is what we see in some of our red-blooded spirits, who have
learned from us to speak of Christ and the faith, how seldom they
practice this doctrine, yes, how coldly and clumsily they speak of it,
when they are supposed to touch this main piece, and rush and flutter
about such texts, considering it a minor art, which now 1) everyone has
long since been able to do. Summa, they are vain other thoughts, of
which they are full; that, although they sometimes hit something, yet
they themselves understand nothing of it, and quickly fall away from it
to their dreams. A true preacher, however, presses this article most of
all, yes, without ceasing, as everything that belongs to God\'s
knowledge and our blessedness lies in it, as you see in this Evangelist
John and St. Paul\'s Epistles everywhere. For here it is true on both
sides that it is said: \"When the heart is full, the mouth overflows.

**V. 11. And I am no longer in the world, but they are in the world, and
I am coming to you.**

He had two reasons for praying for them. The first, that he says, \"They
are yours and given to me,\" that is, taken from the world into your
kingdom and possession, grace and protection. The second: For I am
glorified in them, that is, because.

1\) Wittenberger: only.

2\) \"vain\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

They praise and confess me as the one who has all that is yours. To
these he adds the third, that he now departs from them, and leaves them
behind in the world, under all kinds of driving, misfortune and
persecution. For when he says, \"I am no longer in the world,\" he is
speaking as one who is now to depart and die, and has already departed
from the world; just as the prophet Isaiah, Cap. 53:8, said of him
before, \"He is torn away from the land of the living\" and cut off,
just as one who is forcibly expelled from this life and must forgive
himself for all his sins, that he never lives this life but another
life, which he calls \"going to the Father.

But here the question arises: Because Christ says that he comes to the
Father, he must ever remain in the world. For we believe that the
prophets rightly said that God is in all places, filling heaven and
earth; as it is often written in Walter, as Ps. 139, 8, that he is at
home both in heaven and in the abyss or hell. And St. Paul, Apost.
17:27, 28, says: \"He is not far from any one of us, for in him we live,
weave and are\"; that is, he is present wherever he is sought and called
upon, and can be found; as he proved to the people of Israel when he
divided the Red Sea and made a dry way for them through it, but drowned
all their enemies in it. 2c. \[How then does he speak here that he is no
longer in the world, and makes a noise before the eyes, as if he were
leading away far away, so that we could no longer have him with us?

129 Answer: One is used to speak of it in two ways. One is that he has
gone up like this and is sitting up in heaven as if in a swallow\'s
nest; thus, with the thoughts of the eyes and face, which only clings to
one place at a time, and cannot see both heaven and earth at the same
time, as if he must also be caught and encircled in one place, so that
in the meantime he cannot be elsewhere. According to their vision and
thought, they conclude from this or similar sayings that Christ cannot
be everywhere in the sacrament with his body and blood. But we answer
according to the Scriptures, and say:

800 **Eri. so, 217-sis. Sermon on John 17, II. w. vm, 742-745.** 801

To be in the world is to be in this external, sensual, sensitive being,
that is, in the life that the world needs and lives, which is called a
natural life, in which one must eat, drink, sleep, work, have house and
yard, and summa, need the world and all the necessities of this life.
Again, those are called to be no longer in the world, who are withdrawn
and separated from all that is now told, so that they are not allowed to
eat, drink, walk, stand, and in short, live no natural, bodily works,
which the prophet Isaiah Cap. 53, 8. in his words, where he is called
\"cut off from the land of the living,\" or, as we say, cut off from
this life; not that he is cut off from the world and is never with us,
but that he is not allowed to live as a man of his bodily life. That is
why he now never lives a worldly life, that is, this bodily life and its
necessities. That is why it is vain foolishness and loose theiding with
their thoughts when they dream that they have left the world for the
Father, that they have left heaven and earth for another place.
Otherwise the devil alone would have to rule in the world, so that God
would have no room, and Christ could be neither in the sacrament nor in
baptism, yes, after their consequence, not even in the believer\'s heart
1).

\(130\) Now it is much different to be in the creature (that is, in the
place where the creature is) and to be in the world. They are in the
world, he says, that is, they live as one lives in the world, needing
the body\'s work, the five senses, all the elements, without which this
worldly being and body life cannot be sustained; but I go away, that is,
I renounce and withdraw myself from all bodily being, eating and
drinking, working and suffering, and from all outward society.

131 Therefore, if Christ is in the sacrament with his body and blood,
and in baptism with his Holy Spirit and all his divine being, he is not
in the world, for he does not walk, stand, change, speak, or do any work
that is done on earth; otherwise the text could not stand as it does.

1\) So the Jena and the Latin. Wittenberg and Erlangen: \"also not with
his Christianity on earth\".

follows, \"and I come to you\". For, tell me, where is the Father?
Certainly not up in the swallow\'s nest. But if he comes to the Father,
he must be everywhere, where the Father is. Now the Father is
everywhere, in and out of heaven and earth and all creatures, so that he
cannot be bound or pinned to any particular place, as the stars are
pinned in the sky. For we must say and believe that he is with us
wherever we call upon him, in prison, in water, in fire, and in all
troubles. But our enthusiasts must neither hear nor see this text, but
flutter over it, and only pinch out a piece that they can stretch for
themselves. But enough of this has been said elsewhere.

**Holy Father, keep them in your name.**

He expresses what he asks, namely, that the Father may command them,
because he goes away from them and leaves them alone in the world, and
keep them as he kept them, because he was with them. But that he says,
\"Holy Father,\" comes from the great and mighty fervor of a fiery
heart. For with this single word he looks around him, and sets it
against all unholy beings that the world leads, yet with a great,
holiest 2) appearance; as if he should say: O dear Father, what do I see
of mobs, error and seduction, as well as tyrants and despots, who will
dare to cause all mischief and misfortune under your name against true
holiness; so that I may say: There is no one holy anywhere, they glitter
and adorn themselves as they wish, without only your name and word,
which I preach. In this way he also speaks Ps. 22, 4.: Tu autem in
sancto habitas etc. \"But thou art holy, and dwellest under the praise
of Israel\"; as if he should say: Everyone wants to be holy, to have the
Holy Spirit, to teach and rule the world, but they meet it, alas, that
under thy name and with a holy appearance they all miserably deceive and
seduce the world. Because you alone are holy, and the abomination and
the devil\'s deeds are so many, you keep them in your name.

133 Why this? or, how in his name? Do all liars bring and boast

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: saints. Latin: prastsxbu vt splsnclors
sumniLtz sanotimoiiias.

802 Erl. so, 2IS-SSI. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
74S-748. 803

and deceiver (as now said) God\'s name, and this name must have done
everything in the world, as one says: In God\'s name all misfortune
arises, and no error can come on earth, he must carry this name, and
sell himself under it. Answer: But they are not God\'s name, nor are
they preserved in his name; therefore he exhorts the Father of his
holiness, because so much unholiness rises up against it, that he should
separate his company from all such, and preserve them, that they may
abide in the one name.

All this is asked in our German: Dear Father, protect them from all
false doctrine, so that they may stay with your holy word and pure,
truthful gospel, so that they too may become holy and not fall away from
it, nor fall into false, seeming holiness; for otherwise it is lost
where you do not hold. For the devil is too mischievous, and the
pretense and the fear of false doctrine is too great, that it is not
possible to overcome with all our prudence and strength, and (as Christ
himself says \[Matth. 24, 24.\] also 1) the elect hardly escape, lest
they be deceived into error.

By this prayer we poor people may also be preserved, otherwise no man
could remain on earth before so many sharp, mischievous, mighty spirits
and mobs, which have been from the beginning to this day, and with such
violence, chance and attachment have torn down and drawn to themselves
only the very finest, most learned and best people on earth (who should
break one\'s heart), who could help the country and the people; without
which poor simple-minded people, who would like to drive right and be
pious.

136\) O what an abominable sight it is to behold, what a world has
fallen from the Gospel, and have lost the Word, shortly after St.
Paul\'s and the apostles\' times, when it stood so well throughout Asia
and Greece, since now not a letter of the Gospel is to be found, and all
is lost in the abominable blasphemy, under the Turk and Mahomet;
likewise also under the Papacy.

1\) Jenaer: also them.

2\) This parmthesis is in Latin: wiZsrudils Uietu.

3\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: like.

and has now begun in the German lands with so much deception and
seduction; yes, even among us: how few are they 4) who have and keep the
gospel pure and in right understanding? Therefore it is still and always
necessary, if we could, to pray with Christ every moment: O dear Father,
help us and keep us in the right holy nature of your Word, so that the
devil does not creep up on us, overpower us with his wonderful glow of
the most beautiful angelic holiness.

\(137\) Now this is what it means to remain and be preserved in his
name, if one keeps the word pure and true in his heart. For this is
God\'s name, or honor and glory, that he should be preached and known in
this way, that he alone gives forgiveness of sins by pure grace through
Christ, and makes us blessed. Whoever remains in this doctrine or faith
is God\'s own, that he calls him his God and Father, and is called after
him, and is also holy. For as God is, so is His word and His name, and
as the name is holy, so we also become righteously holy through it, not
through our life or works. Whoever then forsakes the word is never holy,
even though he seeks and pretends to other great holiness.

**The one you gave me.**

This is, as said above \[§ 83 ff\], who have my word. He often brings
this up again, and cannot forget it, for the excellent, great comfort of
all who gladly hear and accept his word, so that he alone remains
master, teacher and head, but we remain his disciples; so that we may
know that God himself has brought us to hear Christ, and that our
salvation is not in ourselves, but in God\'s hand, from which no one can
snatch it. Therefore he says, \"Because you gave them to me to be my
disciples and to be called to true holiness, you also wanted to keep
them so that they would not be defiled, nor be defiled and deceived into
some error.

**That they may be one, like us.**

139\) Here again the mobs have done their heart\'s work, so that it is
to be pitied how they have destroyed the

4\) \"Their\" (jr) is missing in the Wittenberg and the Erlanger.

804 **Eri. 5\", Wi-W. Sermon on John 17:11. W. vm, 74\"-7sv.** 805

Finest sayings, so comfortingly spoken, so shamefully acting and
perverting, or fluttering and running beyond.

\(140\) This whole text is to the effect that the Lord Christ saw that
those who had begun to hear his word would come into all kinds of
danger, so that they would be snatched away. For when the devil sees
that Christ has disciples, he becomes mad and unreasonable, pours out
all his wrath and fury, opposes them both with all violence and malice,
and does not cease to snatch them away. Therefore he asks that he 1)
keep them and keep them under his name, so that they are not scattered,
and one here, the other there, torn away, but remain one thing and
undivided.

But this word: \"that they are one\" 2c., has had to be twisted and
falsified by the Arians, who denied Christ\'s divinity, in order to
strengthen their lies with it. For they wanted to spin out so much:
because he says: Christians should be one, as he and the Father are one,
so he does not have to be of one nature or essence with the Father;
because we cannot be of one nature or essence among ourselves. For each
one has his own nature, that is, body and soul for himself, therefore
the word \"to be one\" must mean as much as to be of the same mind, as
otherwise one speaks of two who have the same mind, will, heart and
courage. So this noble text against faith and St. John\'s teaching,
which drives this article most violently, must serve for their heresy
and lies.

\(142\) Now Christ does not say that they have one will or mind, as they
do, although this is also true, that Christians are all of one faith,
love, mind, and spirit, as they have one Christ, spirit, and faith;
although there is a difference between all of them according to their 3)
office and works, externally; but he does not speak here of unity, which
is called equality, but puts the words ut sint unum, that they are one
thing, and so

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: \"that they the father\". The Latin
agrees with the reading of the Jenaer, which we have brought.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: and

3\) Jenaer: his.

One thing, like the father and me; so that it is said of the essence,
and points much further, because have the same courage and sense. But
what the one or one thing is, we shall not see nor know, but must
believe. But it is nothing else than what Paul says in 1 Cor. 10:17 and
12:12, and in other places, that we Christians are all one body; just as
the body is and is called one thing, so the whole of Christianity is
called one body or one church, not only because of the one or the same
thoughts, but rather because of the one essence.

Now there is much greater unity between the member and the body, than
between your thoughts and another\'s. For his thoughts are in his body,
and yours also in yours, and you cannot say that my thoughts and yours
are one thing. As all members are one thing with one another, that is,
one body, so that if one member is from or apart from the body, it is
never one thing and being with the body, but a separate body or being;
but as long as they are all with one another, it remains one body, so
that there is no difference or separation of being. For the foot, when
it is alone or cut off from the body, is never one with the body, but a
leg that is thrown out into the shingle. But if it remains with the
body, I must say that it is one, that the body cannot be without the
leg, nor the leg without the body.

\(144\) Christ also means here that his Christians should be attached to
one another so that they are and remain one thing and one undivided
body, just as he and the Father are one. There is not only one mind and
will, but a completely one, undivided being. For if Christ were
separated from the Father, it would never be One God, but a divided,
separate and distinct being. However, there is still a much greater
unity of the divine nature than of the members in one body, which we
also cannot comprehend. So then (he wants to say) my dear little group
or Christianity should also be one body and one church, whole and
undivided. For although there is here another unity than of nature,
namely a spiritual unity, it is still called completely one thing, so
that none is without the other.

806 Erl. so, 223-226. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
7S0-7SS. 807

And if a piece were torn down, it could never be called One or One
Thing.

\(145\) Behold, thus is the little word \"one\" to be understood; not as
they have perverted it, that it should signify no more than a likeness.
As when I see two people who are very similar to each other, I say,
\"That is one face\"; item, of two skirts that are the same, one says,
\"That is one cloth. But here it is clearly written, ut sint unum, una
res, which is not used in Latin or Greek to speak of equality or unity.
In German, however, the little word \"ein\" is not so clear. For it is
needed in both senses. Therefore we must translate it in this way, as we
say \"one thing\" or \"one body and kitchen.

146 For this reason I speak, that we do not let this text be perverted
or weakened by such little things of reason and untimely philosophy, for
there is a mighty, great comfort in it for all who believe in Christ and
keep the word, namely, that we are all members of one body, as one flesh
and blood, and have the advantage that everything that concerns one
member concerns the whole body, which does not happen in equality or
unity. For though many have one mind and will, yet one does not take
care of the other as in one body. From this unity, Christianity is
called communio sanctorum (non similitudo), a communion or congregation
of saints, since all the saints or Christians are one company and one
church.

If a Christian has the defiance to know where the devil is attacking
him, he does not attack one finger, but the whole body, that is, all
Christians in the world, even God and Christ. Just as in the body, where
the smallest toe is stepped on, the whole body wipes itself, 1) and the
eyes look sour, the nose wrinkles, the hands grasp, and each member asks
and worries what has happened to it. For this belongs to such unity,
that there is no piece or part that lives and feels for itself alone,
and not all the others, that is, the whole body\'s life and soul.

1\) wipe out\-\-\-- drive up. Latin: sxilit. In the old editions:
\"wüschet\".

Feelings. Wherever the least member of Christianity suffers, the whole
body soon feels it and is moved, so that they all run together, 2)
lament and cry out; so our head, Christ, hears it and feels it. Though
he pause a little, yet when he begin to look sore, and wrinkle up his
nose. For thus saith he by the prophet Zachariam Cap. 2, 8: \"He that
toucheth you toucheth the apple of mine eye.\"

Behold, this is a great promise, for the consolation and defiance of the
Christians against their persecutors, that they know that he is so close
to us, and that he takes such hard care of our suffering, that he is
called to attack the apple of his eye, and that he will bear as little
as anyone can bear to have much pain done to his eyeball; so that the
devil, when he attacks a Christian, attacks him so that he must bite his
own tongue and burn his own fingers. We read a fine example of this in
the history of St. Paul: When he was persecuting the Christians and had
helped to kill Stephanum, he thought that he had also torn off a toe.
But what does Christ in heaven say to this? He does not say, \"Why do
you stub my toe or persecute my poor people?\" but says, \"Saul, Saul,
why do you persecute me? It is too hard for thee to lick against the
goad. \"2c. \[Acts 9:5\], just as if he had attacked his own person.
Why? Because no member of the body can be touched, the head must feel
it, yes, feel it first; for from the head all power comes and goes, so
that the body can feel and sense.

This is (I say) the highest consolation in all the sufferings of
Christians, where they are challenged by the devil or attacked by the
world, that they do not suffer alone, but all Christianity on earth,
yes, all the angels in heaven, together with Christ and the Father
Himself, take care of their suffering and bear with them, and nothing
can happen to them, it must happen to all of them. Whoever knows and
believes this can bear and overcome all kinds of misfortune. Again,
there is no thing that makes suffering or adversity so difficult and
unbearable, for where the heart feels that it is suffering, it is not
suffering at all.

2\) Jenaer: run.

808 **Erl.so,WS-SSS. Sermon on Joh. 17,** II. 12. **W. VIII, 7SS-7SS.**
809

alone, and sees no example or fellow member of the same suffering, as if
it were alone abandoned and peeled away, as all the sufferings of
Christians appear in our flesh\'s eyes. Therefore faith must hold to
this word, against its own feeling and the cries of the world, which,
when it attacks a Christian, thinks it has subdued him, that no one can
help him or save him, as it praised and exulted over Christ himself when
he hung on the cross.

\(150\) Behold, this is the unity of Christians which Christ has
indicated in these words. 1) But there is no other way to come to this,
except by God\'s keeping us (as He said) in His name, that is, if we
abide in the word which we have received from Christ. For the Word keeps
us together, so that we all remain under One Head, and cling to Him
alone, seeking no other holiness, nor anything that is to be valid
before God, but in Him. Summa, through the word we are incorporated into
Christ, that all that he has is ours, and we can take care of him as our
own body; in turn, he must also take care of everything that happens to
us, so that neither the world, the devil, nor any misfortune can harm us
or overpower us, for there is no power on earth so great that can do
anything against this unity. But this is how the devil deals with it,
that he cuts this bond and tears us from the word by his mischievousness
and treachery. Where this happens, he has already won. For apart from
the word there is no more unity, but only division, innumerable sects
and groups, which he casts among themselves by his nets and cords, that
is, the doctrine of men, since each one seeks special holiness in his
own works. 2c.

**V. 12. While I was with them, I received them in your name.**

151 That is, while they heard and saw me, and dealt with me in the
flesh, I preserved them by thy word, teaching, admonishing, stopping,
comforting, warning, and all manner of things, that they might not be
deceived from the pure word and knowledge. But now that I am no longer
in the world, that is, they will no longer know me in such a physical
way.

1\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: indicate will. Latin: innuit.

And if they have not sight, nor hearing, nor change, keep them in the
way they began, for they have thy word, and are thine own, as follows:

**Those you have given me I have preserved, and none of them is lost,
except the prodigal child, that the Scripture may be fulfilled.**

\(152\) I have kept them unchanged and undeceived by false doctrine and
holiness, and have kept them so firm that not one of them would be lost
without the Prodigal Child, Judas. Why is that? Because he has never
been attached to me in such a way that he meant me or my word seriously,
but made himself mine so that he might become rich with me and under my
name, and yet with such an excellent appearance that none of the
disciples ever noticed it. But such a devil child 2) the Lord Christ had
to have among his company, and to suffer with him \"that the Scripture
(he says) might be fulfilled,\" which said before that Christ and his
own must always have such Judas apostles in their company; as he himself
elsewhere indicates from the 41st Psalm, v. 10: \"He who eats my bread
tramples me under his feet\" 2c. Thus, he bears a figure of all who seek
their own in the Gospel. As now, unfortunately, also many of his
children, who boast of the gospel, and yet seek nothing with it, but
their fame and chamber or advantage, think it is a trade or business, so
that one can gain honor and goods, as St. Paul says 1 Tim. 6, 5, as
until now the pope under Christ\'s name brought all the world dominion,
honor and goods to himself, and still has.

153 Therefore he gives them leave, saying, \"They are not my disciples;
therefore I cannot keep them, but let them take my name, and sell
themselves under it, if they do not desire to be Christians, but become
my worst enemies at the last, and do the greatest harm in Christendom.
But those who would gladly stay with it, and keep it, and leave it as
they should, have the consolation that Christ will not leave them, and
by this prayer they shall be preserved as he has preserved his dear
ones.

2\) Erlanger: Such the Devil\'s Child.

810 Eri. so, 228-sso. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
7ss-7ss. 811

The others must neither seek nor accept such consolation. The others
must not seek anything here, nor accept such comfort. For there is
nothing to be gained by anyone setting his sights on the world\'s
favors, goods and possessions, and accepting Christ\'s word with
earnestness. For it is decided \[Matth. 6, 24\]: No one can serve two
masters, God and Mammon do not stay with each other.

**But now I come to thee, and speak these things in the world, that they
may have my joy made perfect in them.**

Behold, these are all such poor, simple words, and yet no one
understands them without purring over them, as if there were nothing
easier to understand, and no one really respects them. We have already
heard what it means to go out of the world and come to the Father, but
he repeats it here so that he may comfort his dear disciples all the
more, so that they may know where and on what their confidence and
protection should stand and rest in the world. For since he has
preserved them until now, when he was with them bodily or personally,
but now he is to step from this visible worldly life into another
invisible life and world, leaving them alone behind him; indeed, since
they themselves do not remain bodily with one another, but are scattered
from one another now and then through the world, they may well have a
strong protection and good assurance that they can stand in the world
against all kinds of impulses and misfortunes. Therefore he wants to
show them another, certain place, where he wants to keep and preserve
them much better, namely with the Father, where he himself goes, so that
he takes all things into his power, and can be with them everywhere,
whether he goes outwardly and bodily from them.

This is the opinion of this whole text: \"I have kept them with me in
the flesh for so long, after I brought them together and planted the
word in them, that it took root and remained with them, but that it
should continue to come through them and be spread throughout the world,
and have been with them only to begin this, and to acquire and create
everything that they, along with all of Christendom, should have and
receive through me. But now it is time for me to come to you again, to
take my kingdom and spread it through them, and to spread the word
throughout the world.

Therefore, I command them to you, come to you also for this reason, that
you yourself, through your Holy Spirit and divine power, strengthen and
sustain them.

156 And these things I speak now in the world, that is, for this purpose
I leave these words behind me for last, that they may hear it, as I pray
for them, that they may fall under your protection and guard, and that
they may be comforted and assured that you will not leave them, though
all the devils and the whole world rage against them in the most
horrible manner.

157 Here again it is clearly shown and strongly demonstrated what the
outward word or oral preaching of the gospel is good for and necessary
in Christianity, for he does not want to protect and preserve them
without outward means, even if he could, and otherwise has all things in
his hand, but needs the word so that they know what they should hold to
and what they should comfort themselves with. For it shall not be so
that they see and feel, but believe, and in the sight of the world the
contradiction shall appear, as if he would not preserve them, nor
protect them, but oppress and destroy them.

He says, \"I have come to you so that you may keep and preserve them
yourself, but it is necessary that I speak these things because I am
still in the world, that is, with a bodily voice and words, as one man
speaks to another. Why or for what purpose? For this (he says), \"that
they may have my joy in them,\" that is, that by the word they may be
caught with the ears, and kept in the heart, comforted, and 1)
cheerfully defy it, and say: Behold, this is what my Lord Christ has
said, so faithfully and earnestly has he pleaded for me, this is what I
have heard from his mouth, or received from those who have heard it and
are sent by him to preach it to me, that he will not forsake me, even
though he is not with me in body, and leave me alone, but will protect
and preserve me by the Father\'s almighty, eternal power and might. For
this we know from the same discourse, that He and the Father are one,
and all that proceeded out of His mouth is the Father\'s own word and
heart 2c.

159\. see, that is called he \"his joy full-

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

[812\^ Eri. so, 230-sss. Sermon on Joh. 17, 13. 14. W. vin, rss-ni.
813]{.underline}

To have come,\" that is, a righteous, complete joy. And is probably
called \"his joy,\" or a joy from him; for it is not a worldly nor
outward, but even a secret and hidden joy. For before the world they
(the Christians) have vain mourning and heartache, persecution and
misfortune, either both from tyrants and mobs, or without means from the
devil himself; and must suffer the world to be glad, rejoice, and make
their play of joy, when things go ill with them; as Christ said before
John 16:20, \"Ye shall weep and be sad, but the world shall rejoice.
\"2c. But nevertheless they shall have perfect joy under such mourning
and sorrow, as also Joh. 16, 22. follows: \"Your heart shall rejoice,
and your joy no one shall take from you.\"

160 It is therefore necessary to keep the word with all our heart, and
to take comfort in the fact that he has promised us so dear, that he
will be with us with the Father, and will keep us, that no evil shall
harm us, that no power of the devil and of the world shall oppress us,
nor tear us away from him. So we always find joy and consolation, and
\[that we\] become more joyful the longer, and let no suffering nor
opposition grieve us or make us despondent; yes, even it becomes sweet
and gentle to bear all kinds of suffering for the love of Christ;
otherwise a Christian can have no joy on earth, which is perfect and
righteous. For though thou mightest have all the joy of the world in one
heap, it would not help thee to stand against any temptation or
calamity; for worldly joy stands only on uncertain temporal goods,
honor, and pleasure, 2c., and cannot remain longer than such are there,
but passes away and vanishes, when only a sour wind blows upon it, and
it shall suffer a little adversity. But this is such joy, which abideth
for ever (as the cause thereof is eternal), and continueth and
increaseth in the midst of outward affliction and misfortune, that with
a merry heart one may forgive and despise all the joy of the world.

**V. 14. I have given them your word.**

161 Therefore he will show them how they should fare in the world, so
that they may have such comfort.

in the word and joy of Christ. And expresses still further what he has
now said, but means again the word which he has given them verbally and
left them, the Father\'s word, that they must neither desire anything
else, nor seek any other comfort; but hold the word dear and high, dear
and valuable, as their highest treasure on earth, given to them for joy
and comfort, against all adversity. I have no other treasure,\" he says,
\"that I can give them without the word that I received from you and
brought from heaven. I gave it to them, and I am doing it so diligently
now that I would gladly speak it into their hearts, so that they might
have such my joy completely, roundly and wholly, and forever with them,
that they might say after my death: There I have the word of my Lord
Christ, yes, of the Almighty Father from heaven; I know this, and I am
sure of it, if I keep it, that no power on earth, nor the gates of hell,
can harm me, for he holds me in his almighty hand and fatherly
protection, from which no one can snatch me, for he loves his word, and
will keep it, and therefore also protect and defend all who cling to it.
This is also a great need, for we poor children are in great need of it,
as follows:

**And the world hates them.**

162 There is our title, and the right color of the Christian\'s court,
which we wear on earth. If thou art the disciple of the Lord Christ, and
lovest his word, be not ashamed to use this rhyme for his sake, and be
glad to have the world for an enemy. There you will find not only
strangers or bad boys, but also your closest and best friends, as well
as honorable, holy people in the eyes of the world, who will be
dangerous 1) and angry with you, will badmouth you in the worst way, and
will attack you on all sides; And there shall be no other cause nor
blame which they can lay upon thee, or accuse thee of any evil, that
thou shouldest be too near to any, or do any harm, damage, or wrong,
except thou have Christ\'s word, 2) preach and confess it; and thou
shalt hear that thou art a heretic, and the devil\'s own, and that the
highest

1\) dangerous hostile.

2\) In Latin, the conjunctive is here also.

814 Eri. so, \[ss-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
761-763. 815

Abomination on earth. The name outweighs and surpasses all wickedness in
the world, and there is no greater sin or disgrace than to be a
Christian; nor is the world so bitterly hostile to any vice. All other
wickednesses it can credit, bestow and palliate; all peelings it can
house, suffer, have mercy on and help over; but the dear Christians the
earth cannot bear, that whoever persecutes them, condemns them,
strangles them 2c., that is the greatest virtue and highest service of
God (as Christ says Joh. 16, 2.) and 1) helped the world.

For this reason, this saying, \"The world hates them,\" is finely put,
as if to say that it has nothing else to do with its hatred but to rage
against the Christians, even though it has reason enough to exercise its
hatred against those who are well worthy of hatred, such as the devil
and evil men. For the power and dare lies in the little word \"they\".
Who are these \"they\"? The dear poor apostles, Peter, Paul 2c., these
are the harmful, damned people, so the world cannot bear. What did they
do? They have not stolen or robbed anyone, nor have they been close to
anyone 2) by a hair\'s breadth. What then? They have served everyone in
vain, with hard work and toil, offering and offering God\'s grace and
eternal blessedness and all good things. What do they get in return?
Vile, bitter anger and hatred, so that they must be driven out of the
world and condemned nine cubits below hell.

This is the thanks and reward that the world should give to Christ and
his apostles. What more can it do than to most shamefully strangle an
innocent man, who has brought it all good, salvation and happiness, as
the most wicked of evildoers? and no one does this but the most holy
people on earth, who make themselves believe that they have never done a
higher service to God than to crucify His only Son. Just as now our
furious tyrants, if they can only blaspheme the gospel and all of ours
with confidence, persecute, murder and burn, so they are called
Christian princes and patrons of the church; that makes everything they
do honorable.

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: und heiht.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: no one.

otherwise commit shameful evil acts against God and man. Now, behold, is
not the world delicately depicted in this, what it is, where it wants to
be at its best? If this is its beautiful, best virtue, let the devil
praise it in our place. I hope (praise God) that we will also be found
in [the]{.underline} dye, for it is also hostile enough to us; as we
have experienced up to now, and still have, how it rages against our
teachings in the most outrageous way, and, when it can no longer do so,
proves with blasphemy, cursing and shouting that it is hostile to us
from the heart.

**For they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.**

I also belong to the same register (he wants to say), yes, I stand in
front and above; therefore it shall not be better for them than for me.
If they have called the master Beelzebub (he speaks elsewhere \[Matth.
10, 25.\]), how should they honor his disciples otherwise? She also has,
in her opinion, a great, honest cause that she is hostile to me, for I
am not one with her; I must show her blindness and misery, punish her
wisdom and holiness, which is not valid before God; not that I harm or
hurt her, but that I would gladly help her to snatch the poor, captive
souls out of the devil\'s jaws and bring them to God. He (the devil)
cannot suffer this, therefore he rages and rages so, incites and
emboldens their hearts against me and my word; so the world cannot and
will not step from its blindness and presumption, that it should condemn
its thing and let nothing count. The quarrel arises because of this,
that we become divided about things, and has to load all its hatred and
anger on me, and it goes just as he said above Joh. 7, 7: \"The world
cannot hate you, but it hates me, because I testify of it that its works
are evil.\" As it is therefore hostile to me because of the word, so it
also hates my disciples, to whom I have given the word, and have thereby
taken them from the world and set them apart.

166 Let this be a joyful and comforting sermon to us who have the
gospel, and who indeed feel it.

3\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: \"in this word of Christ\" instead of: in
the color. Latin: üoe eolors vestitos.

816 **Eri. so, SSS-SS7. Sermon on John 17:14-16, W. VIII, 7K3-78S.** 817

it hates us, and yet nothing can blame us unless we are Christians, and
do not want to stay with it 1) in the devil\'s power. Therefore I have
given them (says Christ) your word, that they may have their joy and
delight in it, in defiance of and contrary to the unholy world, and
cheerfully pardon their favor and grace, yea, run and flee from it, that
they may have no part in it 2).

**V. 15. I do not ask that you take them from the world.**

It is not necessary that they also leave the world with me, for I still
have more to accomplish through them, namely, that they extend my
kingdom and make my small group larger. They now have the word from me;
but because I can no longer remain in the world, but they are still to
bring many who will believe in me through their word (as he says soon
after), I ask for their sake that you do not take them away, even though
they would like to be rid of the world, and they are tired and full of
the world again.

This is the reason why Christians, and especially preachers, should
desire to live, and we should pray with Christ for their long life. For,
dear God, it is highly necessary, the devil and the world are hostile to
us (as we have now heard) and put all plagues on us, so that we have to
see and hear without ceasing what hurts us and goes through our hearts.
So much is the great shameful ingratitude and contempt, in addition to
the abominable blasphemy and persecution of God\'s word, that a pious
preacher must at last be disgusted to preach a word; that God 4) could
do nothing better for us than to take us away soon, so that we may not
see nor hear such misfortune. But how shall we do it? There is still
some small group that has to stand daily in all kinds of traffic, that
would like to be torn away from it; we have to care for it and work for
it, and not let it go as long as we live. For it is a toil and a labor,
even though we all have heads and shoulders.

1\) sollen\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) Wittenberger: \"dran\" instead of: \"at her\".

3\) Erlanger: them too.

4\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: and God us.

Join hands, that we may keep the word with some, and resist lest it
perish, and all go to the devil.

**But that you save them from evil.**

We must suffer misfortune and evil in the world for the word\'s sake,
both from tyrants and mobs, who attack us on all sides, both with their
fists and false doctrine, with cunning and violence, so that they take
the word from us. In addition, we must have all the devils around us,
and stand as a single sheep in the midst of wolves, yes, in the midst of
angry, roaring lions (as St. Peter says \[1 Ep. 5:8\]), all of whom have
sharpened their teeth on us, aiming to tear us apart and devour us. Dear
one, who keeps us here, that we remain and stand against so many
terrible enemies, and do not despair every moment, and lose both faith
and word from our hearts? Who keeps us now until this hour against our
tyrants and all devils? They have made many a counsel, so many secret
practices against us; they are powerful enough, and we are weak enough;
they do not lack their will, they mean evil, poisonous and bitter
enough, and would gladly drown us in a spoon and devour us in one bite.
Answer: Certainly no human power nor wit. But here is a little word that
does it: One sits above, who remembers this prayer, and says: My Christ
once prayed for them, therefore they shall be protected and preserved.
This is our defiance, our protection and our defense, so that they do
not have to do to us what they would like to do, even if they should
burst with anger and wrath, until they are tired of us and run away, so
that God removes us from their teeth and they perish.

**V. 16. They are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.**

This is where our comfort lies, which is why he repeats it so often, and
in this way he strikes their hearts and minds. As if to say, \"You feel
and complain that you must remain in the midst of the world, which does
not want to suffer you, and which creates all kinds of misfortune; that
you must sit in danger and worry all hours, I know well, but let this
comfort be enough for you.

818 Erl so, SS7-SS9. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
786-7S9. 819

so that it will not become powerful over you. For you do not belong to
her, but to my Father; let the world pass away, it belongs to the devil,
its God; but you shall nevertheless have protection in the midst of the
world, and be preserved that you have no part with her until God sees
the time, and lifts you out, that you may escape the calamity and
destruction that must come upon her.

**V. 17. Sanctify them in your truth.**

He is still drifting toward one thing, because all he prays for is the
word. Say not, If thou wilt preserve them in the world from evil and
calamity, let them run away into deserts or monasteries; but keep them
thus, that they may only remain holy, and that the same in thy truth,
that a righteous holiness may be. Again, they are in all kinds of danger
and distress in the world, but none greater or more dangerous than that
they should be defiled, yet under a pretense and delusion of righteous
holiness.

For the devil works with all his wisdom and strength to raise up and
introduce such doctrines through his flocks, which have the very highest
appearance and name of right truth and holiness; which he can adorn to
shine and glitter before all, and must be the most beautiful, as a
harlot before other honest women. For such is she, the fair red whore of
Babylon, Revelation 17, adorned with purple, scarlet, gold, pearls, and
all manner of precious stones, with whom kings and lords and all the
world court.

Now there is our strife and battle, over which we Christians must fight
with the devil. For he does not afflict us with temptations and gross
sins, knowing full well that he cannot win us over with them, nor
conquer us, but because he sees that we are working for true holiness,
he goes to us and reproaches us with vain holiness, so that he may help
us to it, makes such a great pretense, which is not humanly possible to
overcome, that we are to grasp at it and accept it for true holiness, so
that we have to fight against vain holiness without ceasing.

This is the opinion of this prayer: I see how all the world is looking
for great sanctity.

But thou, dear Father, wilt preserve and guard them from such
appearances and glittering holiness, and make them righteously holy. For
this means: \"sanctify in truth\", as also St. Paul speaks Eph. 4, 24:
In justitia et sanctitate veritatis, that is, in right, pure, true
holiness. As if both. St. Paul and Christ, say: There are many who have
the name and fame as holy, and want to make everyone holy, but in
essence is false and vain lies. The beautiful whore Babylon, with the
beautiful golden cup, leads the most beautiful words and scripture, but
is nothing inside, but vain abomination of all abominations. What then
is this, or how is it done, that one may become truly holy? For this is
the art, that one may meet it \[i.e. true holiness\] aright, and not be
deceived by appearances. He answers 1) himself, puts the gloss to the
text, and speaks:

**Your word is the truth.**

See, there it is: If you really want to know what righteous holiness is,
so that you can distinguish it from all others, look only to the word,
and do not let any pretense deceive you. This is the right touchstone;
indeed, it is itself that which alone makes right and true holiness. Let
others boast of their holiness in plates, caps, ropes, fasting, vigils,
austere life, special exercises and great sufferings 2c. But know that
whatever is not the word, or goes in the word, is not holy, but
certainly false and deceitful.

Do you say, \"Yes, but do the mobs also praise the word of God? Answer:
The devil also knows that it is a matter of the word, and Christ points
to the word; therefore he also wants to guide God\'s word. But we say
that one should look only at the mouth of Christ, what he speaks. This
is the truth of the Father; whoever hears and believes this has the
right word of God, which makes him holy truly and without hypocrisy. For
if you believe in his word, you cannot rely on your reason, wisdom,
powers and

1\) In the old editions: He answers.

820 Erl. so, 2A-24N Sermon on John 17:17, 18. W. vm, 709-771. 821

He cannot leave his work, nor be presumptuous to become holy by it, nor
count for anything in the sight of God; therefore such a one cannot
become hopeful nor proud, for he finds nothing in himself to defy or
boast about.

\(177\) Behold, therefore, where faith is righteous, right humility must
follow. After humility follows righteous patience and love toward one\'s
neighbor, that one despises no one, gladly serves everyone and does
good, suffers what befalls him, is not angry and does not take revenge,
whether one shows him ingratitude, disloyalty, sorrow, scorn and shame.
Summa, such a man who 1) bears no falsehood against anyone, but a
sincere, pure and pure heart, as it is righteous before God in faith and
without hypocrisy. For he does not seek his own in his works and life,
nor does he look to anything that is his, but is satisfied with Christ
and his goods, in which he has all fullness, and does all works in vain,
only for the service of others. Behold, this must ever be a righteously
chosen man, both before God and man.

178\. Now hold even the other false saints against this. For there you
will find no faith in Christ; indeed, they hold him in low esteem; they
may speak the word in pretense, but they are not in earnest, nor do they
stick to it; meanwhile they go about with specially chosen works and
practices, in which they seek their glory, so that they are thought to
be the holiest; Neither are they a trustworthy, proud, nor unpleasant
people, who despise everyone, must stink at everything and be nothing
that is not their thing, and cannot suffer their thing to be blamed with
a word, can neither tolerate nor take credit for anything, so that no
one can enjoy it, and want to have served them alone, do no work that is
useful to the neighbor; yes, they are the most poisonous and
bloodthirsty people against the true Christians. As one can see such
fruits everywhere in the Gospel and St. Paul\'s epistles, and can now
see them daily before one\'s eyes in all of our groups, the Pabstics,
Anabaptists, enthusiasts, or whatever they are called. See, so you can
easily 2)

1\) In the old editions: \"such a man, that\". Afterwards in this
paragraph \"it\" instead of: he.

2\) So the Jenaer. Latin: Uauct clillieultsr. Wittenbergers and\"
Erlangers: bodily.

feel and see the tree by the fruits, which have and lead Christ\'s word
quite purely and loudly, and without hypocrisy. For one does not suffer
one another, where it is in the heart, to seek holiness by one\'s own
work or life, and to rely on it.

Therefore let all wise men, scholars, clergymen and saints read and hear
these words, and yet let none understand what it is, but rather despise
it, as those who already can and have done it; or, when it is said to
them, will not suffer nor hear it. But we know, by the grace of God,
that true holiness is nothing else than when he gives us a right faith
in Christ\'s word, and continually strengthens and increases it; from
which all kinds of good, righteous fruits, as now said, grow and
increase daily, all of which is not our work and ability, but his grace
and divine power. For we freely say and confess before all the world,
against the devil and all his multitude, that no life, nor work, nor
spiritual, high thoughts, nor devotions of our own, nor anything that
can be called or done on earth, can make us holy. In short, that there
is nothing in us from which holiness comes. For fasting, going barefoot,
having nothing of our own, pretending great humility and suffering, can
also be done by husks and boys, Turks and pagans 2c. But to cling to
Christ alone, through faith, as in which we have God\'s grace and
eternal life, without any work or merit on our part, is not the work of
man, but of God. Behold, it is in this work that it lies; where this is,
the word is pure and clean, and true holiness, which can judge and
condemn all other false appearances.

**V. 18. As you sent me into the world, so I also send them into the
world.**

Here you see why he asks that they be sanctified, namely, because he
sets them apart and sends them to preach the gospel. And herewith he
confirms the dear apostles as doctors and preachers, attaches and binds
us all to their mouths, as many as are ours, learned and unlearned, so
that everyone must humble himself, how wise and wise he is, and let the
poor, silly fishermen master and teach them, and hear them as the Lord
Christ.

822 Erl. so, 241-243. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
771-774. 823

stum himself. For verily it is much said, that he saith, \"I send them,
even as thou hast sent me.\" As he also said above \[v. 8\], and as we
have heard, that it is a great and excellent art to believe that Christ
was sent into the world by the Father, that is, that thou mayest put thy
conscience wholly upon it, and take all the words that proceeded out of
his mouth without doubt, and hear them, as though thou didst now hear
the Father\'s voice speaking to thee from heaven. Which, if we could
believe it with earnestness, we would not so throw it to the winds; as
now the great multitude, both teachers and disciples, who excellently
boast of God\'s word, and yet only juggle and play with it, just as if
some cobbler had spoken it; but act and hold it with all humility and
honor, and high gratitude, as our dearest treasure.

For what is it that anyone could desire more, if we ourselves should
desire it, than to hear God Himself speak orally? And if there is no one
where it would happen to him, he would gladly run for it to the end of
the world. Now you have here a sure testimony that whoever hears
Christ\'s mouth and word hears the word and mouth of Him who created
heaven and earth with one breath and carries and holds them with one
finger, and such a word in which He shows and reveals to you all His
heart and will, in addition to which He offers and gives all His grace
and goodness: in short, in it stands all our salvation and blessedness,
help, comfort, protection and victory in all troubles and temptations,
as to which heaven and earth, devil and world, with all creatures, must
give way.

182\) See, he says the same thing here about the apostles\' mouths and
preaching: \"As you have sent me, so I also send them,\" that is, as
they have heard me, so they also shall hear my disciples. For it is just
that he says to them elsewhere (Luc. 10, 16.), \"He that heareth you
heareth me.\" Therefore we must approach and look at the mouth of St.
Peter and Paul, and all others who have such testimony, so that your
heart may rely on it as surely as if you heard all the angels from
heaven, yes, God Himself speaking with His own voice. Behold, this is
called ever the dear fishermen and unlearned laymen gloriously crowned
as doctors, yes, as priests.

The most important thing is that the people of the world have been
consecrated by the high and noble majesty of the stars or bishops, as
never happened to any scholar, sage or saint on earth.

183\] Now the mouth is shut to the ragamuffins and some blasphemous
tongues, who slander against us: You are hostile, one should not accept
the doctrine of men and the commandment; how? were not Peter, Paul 2c.
also men? So cleverly they go along, the dear slobberers, as if they had
it quite well together. And so much shall be concluded: St. Paul is a
man, the pope is also a man; and St. Paul is holy, the pope (is it true,
as they say) the most holy. Now if one should not hear and accept the
pope, one would not have to hear nor accept St. Paul either.

But you \'answer thus: Dear, let the pope also bring a text that makes
him a teacher like the apostles here, and we will also hear it. Christ
says: His apostles and preachers should teach in this way, and preach
exactly what he taught and preached. Where now St: Paul would have
preached something else, more or less, than Christ himself, it would
never be the word of an apostle of Christ, but the word and preaching of
men. Paul of Tarsen is a man, but when he says: \"Paul, a servant and
apostle of Jesus Christ\", you no longer hear a bad man, but the mouth
of God and the Lord Christ, who put his word into his mouth.

For this is called the doctrine of man alone, which a man has brought
forth and invented of himself; as this is called the work of man, power
and wisdom, 2c. which is in man, and comes from his own ability, not
that which God works in him above and beyond nature. When St. Peter
raises the dead, or speaks with all kinds of tongues, it does not follow
that you would conclude: Peter raised the dead, therefore raising the
dead is man\'s work. Balaam\'s donkey also speaks with the voice of man;
should anyone therefore be so foolish as to say that speaking with the
voice of man is the word of a donkey, or the work and power of a donkey?

186 Therefore we say, The apostles were men, it is true; but they spake
nothing but men. For

824 **Erl. so, S4S-S4S. Sermon on Joh. 17, 18. 19. W. VIII, 774-777.**
825

It is much different to be a man and to speak from God\'s command, power
or wisdom. We want to hear people, but not as people, out of our own
authority, good judgment and understanding. So it is said (says St.
Peter 1 Petr. 4, 11.): \"If anyone speaks, let him speak it as the word
of God; if anyone has an office, let him do it as from the ability that
God gives.\"

187 For this reason, he himself has conscripted the apostles here, 1) so
that they may not speak anything other than what he has spoken and
commanded them. He also wants no man, whoever 2) he is, to be accepted
or heard any longer. Summa, we do not speak here of man\'s person, but
of the command and office. Therefore it is not valid how holy you are,
as if one should hear and believe you, or your word and sermon be better
and more valid. We do not want to hear what St. Paul, the holy man,
says, but what the servant and apostle of Christ says. I do not ask how
holy you are, but what you preach and from whom you are commanded.

Let the pope and bishops (as I have said) also carry out and perform
such ministry and preaching as the apostles (because they have it and
are seated in it), and let us accept them with all honor and carry them
on our hands as God\'s angels, yes, as Christ Himself, as the Galatians
honored St. Paul. But they are afraid of one thing, that they too may
suffer, as Christ here indicates, that they should suffer in the world
3) (as he himself also suffered), and is still happening to us and to
all who preach God\'s word: that they should not remain 4) lords and
have the world\'s goods, nor defy and insist on lords and princes, but
be hated by the world, suffer contempt, ingratitude, shame, persecution,
and all kinds of misfortune; that would not be advisable for them,
therefore they would rather remain unsworn.

1\) retracted\--Bounded, restricted. Latin: ivtra osrtos ünss ooüidnit.
For this passage Dietz in his dictionary p. 522 K erroneously gives the
meaning: \"included.\"

2i Wittenberger: \"like\" instead of: who.

3\) Instead of the last phrase in the Wittenberg and Erlangen: \"that
the apostles might go.\"

4\) Wittenberger: would have to.

**V. 19. I sanctify myself for them.**

He would almost have forgotten to add this, but herewith he wants to
defend himself once again against the mobs and the false saints who seek
and draw their holiness from themselves, from their works, spiritual
orders, and in these words he expresses where our holiness comes from,
how and by what means it is acquired, so that we get it. For since he
said that the Father should sanctify it, and that the same by the word,
by which henceforth others also come to it, someone might now further
ask: What kind of holiness is it then? by whom is it acquired and
brought about? or, what kind of word is it that presents and brings such
things to us? For it cannot be the Ten Commandments (although they are
God\'s word), because they all had them before; and although they are
holy, they cannot give this holiness of which we speak here, which makes
us righteously holy before God, since we are not able to keep what they
require of us, nor can we make the heart pure, even though we do the
works outwardly, which even hypocrites and husks can do.

190 To this Christ will answer, \"This is the preaching by which they
must be sanctified, that I sanctify myself for them. There you hear
nothing of our doing nor of our merit, but of Christ\'s work and gift,
which cannot be received but by faith. But he uses a word from the Old
Testament, which Moses always uses of his worship, calling all the
sacrifices that the people brought sancta (that is, holy). And herewith
he wants to abolish all of them, together with the whole service of the
Old Testament, 5) as they cannot make holy in the sight of God. As if he
should say: There they were called holy people, when they brought their
sacrifices, oxen, sheep, flour, grain, wine 2c., which, when the priests
got hold of it, it was no longer called a common thing, but a holy
thing, and given to God. Thus for the children of Israel the creatures
(which were sacrificed for them) were sanctified, that they also became
holy thereby; but all this was still only an outward holiness. My

5\) \"have\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

826 Erl. so, 245-218. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
777-779. 827

But Christians must have another sacrifice, by which they are truly
sanctified. This is how it is to be done, that I sanctify myself for
them.

191 Therefore you must not understand this word: \"I sanctify myself\"
as if he should still become holy, as if he was not holy before; for he
was holy in his mother\'s body, as the angel Luc. 1, 35. says: \"That
which is born in you shall be called holy\", but \"sanctify\" he means
here, to lead and carry out a priestly office or work. As if he should
say: I also want to say mass once (as the priests speak of their
sacrificial mass), or do a holy sacrifice, and stand up in a priestly
work. What should this be? I want to sanctify myself, that is, I want to
be the sacrifice and the offering myself, yes, the priest for it. That
the words in the simplest German mean so much: I offer myself for a holy
sacrifice; and the same (he says) \"for them\". For he may not do it for
himself at all, because otherwise he is holy, and is priest only for
this reason, that he may make us holy.

192\) There is much to be said about this, for it is a beautiful saying,
and rich in measure, that it includes many and various sayings in the
prophets, which, if we were to delete them, we would have enough to
preach about for a year, and yet always preach about what Christ has
done for us; only that it should be known that this text looks there,
and includes everything in one heap. Now, the summary is briefly stated,
that Christ is our priest, and that he himself intercedes for us, that
he sacrifices himself on the cross to God the Father, so that through
such sacrifice and death we may be reconciled to God and also become
holy. This is our main article, and the fountain of all comfort and
treasure, of which we Christians know. 2) He must put on such things in
this place. For since he speaks of the word and truth by which we are
sanctified, he cannot be silent as to what it is by which we come to it,
namely, that he himself is the one who earns it for us and 3) acquires
it for us.

1\) \"they\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) In Latin: Hnsm nos Düristianos nosss oportst. It seems to us that
\"to be called\" should be read instead of \"to know\".

3\) Jenaer: or.

has and gives. He who grasps and believes this word is truly and
righteously holy, as follows:

**That they too may be sanctified in the truth.**

193 Behold, how he speaketh so plainly of true holiness, to warn us to
beware, and not to lack true holiness; and to forbid that any man preach
any thing but his own sanctification, nor think of and attack any thing
wherein he seeketh holiness. For he has well seen how hard it is and how
much it is a matter of dispute (so much is it a matter of concern to us,
even to those who are Christians, that we should seek something in
ourselves that we ourselves might do and attain holiness. For this
reason he (I say) so diligently repeated the word \"in the truth,\" and
set it against all worldly and human holiness. My holiness, he says,
makes them truly holy.

If this is true, you can conclude for yourself that everything else must
be in vain, even condemned, if one fails to become holy before God. For
it does not stand with one another that Christ\'s blood should and must
make holy, and that our status and works should attain holiness, even if
it were the life and works of all monastic orders, of all holy fathers,
Francisci, Hieronymi, even of St. John the Baptist; which, even if they
are the best works, they nevertheless become unholy and condemnable if
one hangs such delusion and presumption of holiness on them, to the
shame and blasphemy of the blood and death of Christ.

195\. But again, where faith is right, that Christ\'s holiness alone is
valid before God and is our sanctification, he also makes all our life
and works holy; not because of their merit, but because of the faith
from which they flow, without which no work nor life pleases God.

From this you can judge and answer the question: What is the holiest
state or life on earth? namely, nothing else than the common Christian
state, that is, of those who believe that Christ alone is our holiness;
through which main holiness (as said) also everything,

828 **Erl. SO, S4S-W0. Sermon On Joh. 17, 19. 20. W. VIII, 779-7W.** 829

what is in lins, what we live, do and do, is called holy, as the person
is holy.

197 You also see from this text how we have been deceived until now by
our dream preachers, who have never told us a word about such holiness,
and have never preached about any saints, except those who have died and
are in heaven, when all Scripture, when it mentions saints, speaks only
of living saints. This is because it has nothing to do with the dead,
who lie under the earth and do not hear the word; but only those are
called holy who hear and accept the word, even though they are still in
the flesh and blood.

198 Therefore we also ought to consider and call holy with Christ those
who have his word, and earnestly mean and confess it, especially in
temptation and persecution, though they be wretched and weak men, and
have no appearance of special holiness. For we cannot see it painted on
anyone\'s forehead who is righteously holy or not. But we can see that
where the word is and bears fruit, that for its sake people suffer what
they ought to suffer, there must certainly also be living saints.

Now here speaks the false humility of our work saints: God forbid; how
could anyone be so hopeful and allow himself to be called holy? Are we
nothing but poor sinners? Answer: This all comes from the old delusion
that, when one hears of holiness, one only looks for great and excellent
works, and looks at the saints in heaven as if they had earned and
deserved it themselves. But we say that the true saints of Christ must
be good strong sinners, and remain such saints, who are not ashamed to
pray the Lord\'s Prayer, and say: \"Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom
come, forgive us our trespasses\" 2c. \[Matth. 6, 9. 10, 12.\], since we
confess that God\'s name is not sanctified in us as it should be, nor
does His kingdom thus proceed, nor His will be done. Therefore they are
called holy, not that they are without sin, or that they become holy by
works, but the contradiction that they are nothing but sinners and
condemned in themselves and with all their works, but become holy
through a foreign holiness, namely of the Lord Christ, which is given to
them and is their own through faith; which is so strong and so holy,
that it is not a sin.

powerful, that it covers and wipes away all sin and infirmities that
remain in flesh and blood; as I have often said that Christ\'s kingdom
is nothing else but vain forgiveness, which only deals with sins, and
forever blots out, covers 0 and makes pure, because we live here.

**V. 20. But I do not pray for them alone, but also 2) for those who
will believe in me through their word.**

Let us write this text in letters of pure gold, as it especially
concerns us. For what he spoke before would still read as if he had
meant his apostles alone. Yet he made it clear that it should go further
than he said, v. 18: \"As you have sent me, so I send them into the
world\" 2c. But lest a foolish conscience should doubt, and say, Yea, he
hath prayed for the apostles and Jews (to whom they were sent); but
where remain I? Therefore he comes first, calls and seizes us Gentiles
also, and includes the whole of Christendom, until the last day, in
prayer, that it may go through the whole world, wherever the apostle\'s
word and preaching goes, and be received by faith, no place nor person
excluded. This is our defiance and consolation, treasure and treasure,
that of course for us Gentiles there is no more comforting saying in
Scripture than this.

201 And mark this text even as Christ lifts up the apostle\'s sermon and
praises it, that by it we must come to him and believe. For against this
there now runs a devil\'s rabble by his red spirits, who despise the
outward word, and pretend that the Spirit alone must do it all; outward
things, signs, and oral preaching are of no use for faith in the heart,
the inward man must have an inward word. 2c. To the same lying spirits
3) write only this text: \"Who will believe in me through their word\",
in front of their noses with large letters, and ask them: whether the
word \"believe\" belongs to the inward or outward man? or whether the
word \"believe\" belongs to the inward man?

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: \"decket, feget\". The Latin agrees with
our text.

2\) \"also\" is missing in the editions (except in Walch).

3\) \"Lügengetstern\" is missing in the Erlanger.

830 Erl. so, \[so-sss. Interpretations about the evangelist John. W. vm,
iss-iss. 831

If the apostles preached the word outwardly or inwardly, they cannot
deny that this word \"believe\", which is only of the heart and inward
man, and \"by their word\" belong together and make an inward man.

For this is called an inward man, which believeth, and putteth his
heart\'s confidence wholly in God; but outward is called, which eateth,
and drinketh, and seeth, and heareth, and walketh, and standeth, and
worketh, and otherwise worketh, and doeth all manner of works of the
body. But faith is not a work of the body, as ears, mouth, hands or
feet, but of the very foundation of the heart. Since Christ says that
they should believe, that is, become inward or spiritual men through the
apostle\'s word, it follows irrefutably that such a word does not serve
the outward, but the inward man, and it is nothing for them to slander
that oral word or sermon is of no use without an outward testimony or
confession of the inward man.

And they say, If the outward word can do this, then all who hear it must
believe and be saved. Answer: They must give thanks. For this is already
half known, that they cannot deny that some nevertheless believe. For so
we also say, Though all believe not, yet are they many that believe.
Neither saith Christ, that they shall all believe: but it doth not
follow that therefore no man believeth. What then is it said that they
conclude that they do not all believe, and therefore faith does not come
by the word? I would also conclude that they are not all obedient
rulers, overlords, or parents, and therefore no authority, ruler, or
parent should be of any use or need, and God\'s commandment should be in
vain.

204 Therefore we turn it back, and say thus: We know that some believe
who hear the word, and can prove it by many sayings and examples of
Scripture; therefore we conclude that the word is useful and necessary,
not to the ears alone, but also to the heart or inner man. But the fact
that some do not believe, even though they hear the word, does not take
anything away from the word, but nevertheless remains true that it is
the word.

This is the means by which faith comes into the heart, and without it no
one can believe. Just as the earth cannot bear fruit or beget fruit
without the seed, even though the seed is not always implanted and
sprouted; this is not the fault of the seed, but of the earth. Just as
it is not true to conclude that the earth does not bear fruit without
the seed, so any soil on which the seed falls must bear fruit. It does
not follow here that everyone who hears the word believes, although
faith must come through the word. But let the fools depart, for they are
not worthy to stir up their filthiness over such a glorious, delicious
text; therefore let us take hold of the saying, and make it useful for
our comfort, and see why it pleads for us, or what it shall accomplish
and work.

**V. 21. That they may all be one.**

205\. these words we also have above

\[He explains what it means to be one or one thing, and what it
accomplishes, namely, that all our protection, redemption from sins,
death, the world, and the power of the devil is contained in the one
Word. For whosoever believeth by the word of the apostles, to him it is
promised by Christ, and in virtue of this prayer, that he and all
Christendom shall be one body and one Church; namely, 1) that what is
good and bad for him (as one member) is good and bad for the whole body,
and not one or two saints, but all prophets, martyrs, apostles, all
Christians, both on earth or with God, suffer and conquer with him,
fight for him, help, protect and save, and stand in such friendly
interchange that they all bear his lack, suffering and adversity, and
he, on the other hand, is made a partaker of all their goods, comfort
and joy.

206\) Now how could anyone desire anything more blessed than to come
into this fellowship or brotherhood and become a member of this body
called Christendom, which is such a body that God has given to Himself
with all of His goods: Summa, a mighty woman and a mighty man.

1\) \"namely therefore\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) \"sich\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

832 **Erl. so, M-SS4. Sermon On Joh. 17, 21. W. VIII, 7SK-78S.** 833

Empress in heaven and earth, both devil and world, death and hell must
fall at her feet when she speaks a word. For who will break or harm a
man who has such defiance? for he knows that if he has the smallest
suffering, both heaven and earth, all angels and saints, must cry out.
If a sin attacks him, which wants to frighten, bite and press his
conscience, and threatens him with the devil, death and hell, God says
with the whole bunch: Dear sin, let him be unbitten, death, unchoked,
hell, uneaten. But there faith belongs to, because it seems before the
world\'s eyes and reason so much different, yes, just the contradiction.

**Just as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be
one in us.**

There he again touches the high article of his Godhead, which we dealt
with above \[§§35. 73. 117\] several times, and sets himself and the
Father as a likeness and example, to transfigure what he means for a
unity. I and you are one (he wants to say) in one divine essence and
majesty; according to the same example, they should also be one among
themselves, and that the same so that the same unity in us is one, that
is, incorporated in me and you; Summa, that they are all one, and vainly
one in both of us, yes, even one kitchen, that they have everything that
you and I are able to do; so that we also become comrades in the divine
nature, as St. Peter says in 2. For although the Father and Christ are
one in another, higher, incomprehensible way, because of the divine
nature, yet we have all these things, so that they are ours and we enjoy
them.

Now this is set for our consolation and defiance against the world and
the power of the devil. For even if he attacks a single weak member of
Christendom, and thinks he has eaten it; yes, even if he wants to attack
the whole of Christendom, and despise it, and say: What do I care about
Christianity, what are they more than flesh and blood? he must again
hear and feel that he is not attacking us, but Christ in us; yes, not
even Christ alone, but the Father, that is, the almighty, eternal
Majesty, before whom he must tremble and fall to the ground.

Behold, all this is a consequence, that he who touches the least thing
touches heaven and earth and all creatures. Summa, you cannot despise,
revile, persecute or do violence to a Christian, nor honor and do good
to him again, for you have done it to God Himself. Therefore, Christ
Himself in His majesty will pronounce the judgment on the last day, both
to the pious and the wicked: \"Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of
the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me\" \[Matth. 25,
45\]. For God has hung all that He has on the Lord Christ, and Christ on
His bride. So every Christian hangs on the same as a link, and
everything is joined together as a chain, and makes a whole round
circle, yes, a dear beautiful wreath.

**That the world may believe that you have sent me.**

This is the fruit that is to follow through and from such unity, namely,
that Christ\'s word may continue to break forth and be accepted in the
world as God\'s word, in which there is an almighty, divine,
unconquerable power and eternal treasure of all grace and blessedness.
This is (as has often been said) the high and excellent art, which is so
deeply hidden and strange, and can never be learned; that is why he
cannot speak anything else, and does it in all words. For it goes into
no man\'s heart that one should step out of himself, and leave nothing
that anyone knows or is able to do, and crawl naked into Christ\'s
righteousness, holiness, and wisdom (expressed and presented in the
weak, lowly word).

I say it from my soul, as much as I have seen and experienced, both
preachers and scribes, who now want to be and are supposed to be the
best (with very little exception), know nothing at all about this piece;
and even if they occasionally advise and take action, it is still as if
spoken or heard in a dream. \[They all know how to reproach the pope,
monks and priests, but they really know little about the right reason
for overthrowing the papacy and all kinds of false teachings.

212 Therefore I must also admonish so diligently that one should not
forget such sayings and all this.

1\) Erlanger: to the.

[834 Erl. so, 2S4-2S0. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
7SS-7SI. 835]{.underline}

I do not know anywhere else where this main part of the whole Christian
doctrine has been so abundantly summarized in one heap and so powerfully
expressed, namely, that we have everything in Christ that we ought to
have, and nothing in ourselves or in some other people. The words are
simple and silly, which also makes the clever spirits rustle and despise
them, as if they had trampled them on children\'s shoes for a long time,
and meanwhile write and preach the world full with their dreams and own
thoughts.

**V. 22. And I have given them the glory which thou gavest me, that they
may be one, even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me.**

\(213\) Behold, how long he standeth and goeth forth of the same thing,
as he would gladly declare it, and so persuade them that it is the
highest, most needful, and most comforting doctrine that ever was
preached. \"I have given them (says he) my glory.\" This is an
excellent, glorious thing or good above all majesty and glorious being,
not only in riches and treasure, but also truly glorious to praise and
extol. For this is what the Scripture calls glory or honor, not only the
mere clamor and prestige, but to esteem such a thing worthy of great
praise, precious and valuable; as Christ calls Matt. 6:29 King
Solomon\'s glory all his royal treasure, riches, power and honor 2c. Now
what is this glory that Christ has and gives? Just that which he said
just before \[v. 21.\], \"that they all may be one\" (he says), as the
Father and I are one. This is the excellent treasure, and a wellspring,
yes, the real treasure trove of all divine goods, life, comfort and
blessedness, who could only believe it.

214\. but faith is not a lazy, loose thought, but a living, earnest,
comforting, and undoubted confidence of heart of such excellent glory,
by which we are One Thing with Christ, and through Him with the Father;
and so One Thing, that, 1) as little as Christ can be separated or set
apart from the Father, so little may Christianity

1\) \"that\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

and every Christian member will be divided by him; and thus everything
will be linked and bound together, as has been said enough.

But whence cometh this glory, that they are all made one in Christ and
the Father? Not by our works or worthiness, but by the word that r has
given us. It is not called earned, nor acquired and brought about by
human labor, strength, and ability, but brought to us, given, and
bestowed by Christ. For works do make special cases and various sects or
divisions, since one otherwise works and lives like another; just as in
this outward life and government there must be various offices and
ranks, since each one does his own work. But through the Word it all
becomes one, in one faith, and through the same One kitchen and
spiritual body, although the works of the individual parts or members
are not one. Just as in our natural body the works are various and
different, so that each member has its own work, and none of the others
has or practices it, and yet they are all one thing with each other,
because of the essence and all goods. For the smallest and weakest
member is of the same blood and flesh, has the same health and life as
the noblest and strongest; and yet every work is directed to serve all
the members and the whole body at the same time, and each cares for and
works for the other. So it is also here that faith holds all works
together, binds them and makes them one, that all hearts are at the same
time attached to one Christ and the Father, and everything that they
work and live flows and goes out of such unity of faith.

**V. 23 That they may be perfect in one.**

Behold, how his mouth overflows with words of one kind, and 2) so well
pleases him that he tickles himself, as it were, and can speak nothing
else; and yet he speaks so childishly before prudent reason that I may
well say, and have often said, that I have never read a book that speaks
so very simple, 3) and with such bad words grasps so excellent,
inexpressible things. It is not enough

2\) \"him\" is missing in the Jena.

3\) Jenaer: talked.

836 **He,, so, \[ss-sss. Sermon on John 17:23, 24, W. VIII, 7SI-7S4.**
837

(he says) that they are one, but must also be \"perfect in one\". As if
he should say: I have a Christianity, they should and will all be one
thing; but this is still lacking, that many under it are still weak. The
one being is there, but it depends on faith alone; as much as there is,
so much there is. Therefore he asks that they also increase and become
stronger and stronger in the faith they have begun, and thus become
perfect, round and completely one in Christ.

217 St. Paul also says, Col. 2:10: \"You are complete in Him,\" that is,
you are complete in Christ, that you may seek nothing else; nothing is
lacking in Him, but our faith is lacking. Therefore, he who has Christ
is called consummatus, or perfect; that is, he has a complete, perfect
treasure of all good things that he can desire and wish for, eternal
life, righteousness, wisdom, and all divine goods, and lacks nothing
unless he alone looks and holds fast to it. The treasure lies there in a
heap; but the vessel is weak, which cannot keep so perfectly. For we
carry (as St. Paul says 2 Cor. 4:7) our treasure in earthen vessels.
Therefore we must work daily, with prayer, preaching, exhortation, with
all kinds of sufferings and temptations, so that we do not lose such a
glorious treasure, nor let the devil take it (who is after it with all
his power, wiles and wiles), but the longer the stronger and more surely
we take hold of it and keep it, daring and putting body, life and all
things into it.

**And let the world know that you have sent me.**

These are the two things he always insisted on: One, that we (believing
by the apostle\'s word, and still coming daily) all become one thing
through faith. Secondly, that through such unity it may be known and
made manifest to the world how Christ was sent by the Father, and how we
are loved through him. For in the two things, namely, the word and
faith, all depends; he who loses them or forgets them has lost
everything; there is no more counsel, help, or comfort, and no more
piety, work, or life. For there is no unity, nor Christ; neither is
there word, nor salvation.

knowledge of the Father. Summa, the light is extinguished, that one
cannot find a way, and gropes in darkness and goes miserably astray,
chased and driven by the devil according to all his will; as we have
also, unfortunately, well experienced so far.

**And love them as you have loved me.**

219 This is what should finally follow from the knowledge and word, so
that our hearts can happily and without doubt say that they are God\'s
dear children and have a kind, gracious Father. For this belongs to
Christ and his ministry, that through his word he makes us most assured
of all love and grace toward God, and of such love that he has loved
Christ, his only Son, from eternity to eternity, that it is called: One
love in Christ, and for Christ\'s sake; summa, an overflowing, eternal
love, which no human heart can comprehend. Behold, this is the
excellent, unspeakable glory, given to us in Christ, but in word and
faith alone, until we shall also see it presently before our eyes in
that life, as follows:

**V. 24. Father, I want that where I am, they also be with me whom you
have given me.**

This is the last but most comforting part of this prayer for all who
cling to Christ, that we may be sure and certain of what we finally have
to hope for, where we shall find rest and abide, because here in the
world we are miserable, outcast, and have no certain abiding place.

For we have heard that he who is a Christian must forgive himself all
the world\'s favor, grace, safety, comfort, and rest, and be the
devil\'s footcloth, that he must without ceasing stand in danger of life
and limb, and await all the hours of death. Now it is a terrible,
horrible thing about death, especially when it is always before one\'s
eyes, and a person does not know where he should take the first step or
where he should stand and stay overnight. Therefore Christ, as a pious
and faithful Savior, cares for us and promises to provide us with an
inn, so that we may be with him and have as good a place as he had with
his Father. As

838 Erl. so, SSS-SS1. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
794-797. 839

He should say, \"Be of good cheer, and do not worry where you are to
stay or how you are to go; only let the devil and the world rage and
rage, murder, burn, and cast you out into the world; you shall be well
provided for, and come where you desire, and where you can rest and
remain safe from the world and all devils.

222\. Where then may this be, or what is the name of the place? \"Where
I am\" \[he says\], that is, in the bosom and arms of the Father, where
all the angels must run to, and lift us up and carry us, without having
a name, and cannot be shown with fingers, nor painted, but must be
grasped in the word by faith.

Therefore we should let this saying be our main feeling and featherbed
for our souls, and with a joyful heart ride on it, when the dear little
hour is here, that we, freed from sin and all misfortune, and taken from
the world and the devil\'s power, shall be brought to eternal rest and
joy.

But it is said above 83, 101, 138.) It is often said whom Christ means
by these words, \"which thou hast given me,\" namely, that they apply to
us and are a great comfort to those who hold fast to his word,
especially in troubles and trials, when the world reviles and persecutes
us for it, takes away our goods, honor, body and life; that we should
boldly accept such a promise and not doubt that Christ wants to take us
to his glory, even though we are still sinners, weak and infirm. For
these words are spoken to us, who 1) live on earth in the flesh and
blood, not to the angels in heaven or to the dead saints. And especially
mark the word, that he saith, \"I will,\" and speaketh so well with the
Father, as he that wills it without fail, that the promise is sure and
steadfast, as he that cannot lie nor deceive. All because he awakens us,
who are so lazy and weak to believe, that we may not doubt or waver, but
hold it as sure as if we saw it now before our eyes.

1\) Thus the Latin and the Jena in the margin. In the editions: like.

**That they may see the glory you have given me.**

\(225\) Then let them come, my dear Christians, that they may not only
be with me, but also come into a clear and bright vision of my glory, of
which he said just before \[v. 22\] in other words: \"I have given them
the glory that you gave me. For now on earth we have and do recognize it
by faith, but we do not see it without (as St. Paul says in 1 Cor.
13:12) a mirror, and in the dark word, namely, that we hear it preached,
and take it into our hearts that Christ has risen from the dead,
ascended into heaven, and is seated in the glory and majesty of the
Father, as one mighty Lord over all creatures. But it is still a dark
knowledge, as a thick cloud drawn before the bright sun. For it enters
into no man\'s heart, nor can any understanding comprehend that the
glory is so great, especially because Christ now sets himself up in his
Christians in such a contradictory way. But there another light will
shine, because 2) we will no longer believe it, nor preach it, nor
recite it in the Word, but will see it most brightly and presently
before our eyes and behold it with unspeakable, eternal joy.

226 There is now the great consolation, that if a man could believe it
to be true, he should not ask much about this temporal life, and all the
world\'s goods and honor, yea, gladly forgive himself all that is on
earth. For what harm is it that the world can do us, if it has taken
away our goods, our honor, our body and our life? without it only
promoting us to come to Christ and see the glory, whereas all its goods
and glory are nothing. But we are too cold and heavy to believe such
things, that we do not feel the comfort, juice, and power that the words
have. For this also the glory of the thing is too great, that \[it\] (as
said) entereth not into our heart. For it is too far from the senses,
and too high above the understanding of men, that our poor, stinking
sack of maggots should come to see such wonderful, divine glory
eternally and always before our eyes, and that even through such glory
my heart should not be able to feel it.

2\) Wittenberg and Erlangen: that. Latin: udi.

840 **Eri. so, SSI-sss.** Sermon on Joh. 17, 24. 25. **W. VIII,
797-799.** 841

and your body, rotten in the earth and eaten by worms, will become much
clearer and brighter than the sun and the stars. For all these things
bring with them such a vision of glory, and all that we are to have and
enjoy in eternal life and blessedness, which no man can speak of, nor
attain by thought \[Isa. 64:4, 1 Cor. 2:9\].

**For you loved me before the foundation of the world.**

227\. They shall see the glory, as I am your Son; not only as sent into
the world, and born of the virgin, but also from eternity, as your only
Son, beloved before the world began, that is, as I am the same, only God
be with you, born from eternity. For he cannot love him more highly
without giving him equal eternal Godhead. Such things are now preached
and believed, but they are still covered up and do not appear; therefore
they must be explained and always driven by the word (as he has done
until now), until we see them before our eyes without cover or curtain.

**V. 25. Righteous Father, the world does not know you.**

This is a necessary addition and a significant saying, so that he may
turn his eyes to the world and say from a fervent heart: \"Oh, dear
Father, how you do not let the world say or preach so that it may also
recognize it.

229 But why does he only here at the end begin to praise the Father with
such a title that he calls him: \"Righteous Father\", and not so much
more: Kind or merciful, or, as above \[v. 11\]: \"Holy Father\"; or what
great thing is it that he preaches about it, and makes so many tests
about it; 1) who does not know that before? Answer: He has (as I said)
burned for this hour in his heart, and looked back on the world, which
neither wants to hear the word nor suffer it, but the more it is
preached, the more senseless it becomes, so that it should walk
barefoot, yes, crawl on its knees until the end of the world. And one
carries it to her for nothing, yes, in addition, for great, mighty vice,
so that she may be vainly angry.

1\) to make much fuss - to make a big fuss, much noise, many words.
Latin: tot vorba xrotnnäit.

and eternal punishment deserved; and moreover he shall not accept it,
nor give thanks for it, but persecute, blaspheme, and profane it to the
utmost, that he may boast and say, Thou art ever a righteous God, doest
well and justly, that thou makest such a distinction between those who
are of the world, and those whom thou hast given me, namely, that thou
peelest these out, and bringest them to me, that they may abide where I
am, and lettest the others go where they belong, as they are not to be
counselled nor helped.

230\. For so we ourselves must finally boast against the world, because
we have presented the gospel so clearly and abundantly, and have done
everything that belongs to us, and have omitted nothing that might help
to convert them, with preaching, admonishing, loving, serving, carrying,
warning, frightening and threatening, in addition to all kinds of
suffering, forgiving, and praying for them, and in sum, tempted in all
kinds of ways, with our sour, heavy toil and labor, food and danger; and
now get nothing in reward but ingratitude, contempt, blasphemy,
persecution of the public and known truth. What else can anyone say here
but that it is right for God to punish and pay for such horrendous,
obstinate iniquity and blasphemy with pestilence, war, Turks, devils and
all kinds of plagues, without ceasing, because all goodness is lost in
it, and no goodness nor mercy will help? For he is too highly tempted
and overpowered that he cannot see through his fingers, because he pours
himself out and gives us all goods and his most precious, dearest and
highest treasure, and for this he must suffer the world to reject him,
even to spit in his face and trample on his word.

Therefore he concludes and says: \"Dear Father, the world does not know
you and does not want to know you, even though it is preached to it
publicly and presented so clearly that it meets its eyes and cannot deny
that it is the truth. I preach and tell them everything that is the
right knowledge of God, namely, that nothing is valid before you but the
mere confidence of your grace and goodness, freely given, and as they
must have everything through me; so they will neither see nor hear me
and my word, all shall be nothing, and their thing, wisdom,
righteousness, and

842 Erl. so, 2SS-SSS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
7SS-803. 843

The work alone shall be valid and shall accomplish everything. Therefore
you are right to let them go to their father, the devil, in their
stubborn blindness, so that they do not have to see anything of my
glory, neither in the word and knowledge of faith, nor in the future
present sight.

**But I know you, and these know that you have sent me.**

That is, I know that I preach your word and only from you (as the one,
right God), as you want to be kept and believed, that one honors you and
praises you of your goodness and grace, which the world does not accept,
but condemns, and gives to the sorry 1) devil. But these my Christians,
whom thou hast given me to accept, they also know thee, that is, \"that
thou hast sent me,\" in which (as has been said throughout this whole
chapter) the knowledge of the Father stands together.

**V. 26. And I have made known to them your name, and will make it known
to them.**

I have given them this word, by which your name was made known to them,
what your name is and what you are, so that they may know how to keep
you and honor you. It has been said enough that to know the Father is
not only to know how he created heaven and earth, to help the righteous
and to punish the wicked, but that he sent the Son into the world and
gave him to us to take away sin and death, to purchase and give the
Father\'s favor and grace. This is the right name of God, which shows us
what he has in mind, and excludes his fatherly heart, will, thoughts and
good pleasure. He who does not know Him thus does not know Him rightly,
nor does he know how to serve or honor Him. For pagans, Jews and Turks
also believe that there is one God who created heaven and earth, and
they also want to serve the right God alone; but they do not believe and
do not know that this is the one and only thought, will and pleasure of
God, that Christ should be recognized as sent and offered by Him for our
redemption; since neither 2) the papacy, nor any other

1\) \"leidigen\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Thus taken over by us from the old Aus

We must quarrel, argue and fight with them, and with the devil as well,
without ceasing, as over our one main piece and summa of the whole of
Christianity.

234 And notice that he does not only say, \"I have made your name known
to them,\" but adds, \"I will make it known to them,\" that is, I will
not only begin it and leave it there, but always continue it, and do the
same without ceasing, both by word and spirit, so that one does not seek
anything else or higher, but only has to do with it, so that one always
grasps it better and stronger. For there lies the power to know the
Father well through faith, so that the heart stands before him with
comfort and joyful confidence of all graces, and fears no wrath. And of
course there is no more difficult art in heaven and earth. Let no one
think it is a thing to be learned as soon as he hears it once or twice,
as our unintelligent clever ones and conceited ones dream.

**That love, that thou mayest love me, may be in them, and I in them.**

\(235\) This is what has now been said, that all things must be done to
know the Father\'s will and heart, now presented through the Word, and
then to see publicly in that life how he loved us, and still loves us
forever, through his Son Jesus Christ alone. If we have this, we have
the highest treasure of our salvation and comfort; so we abide in him,
and he in us, that we all cling to one another in one; of which s§ 205
ff. above\]. has been dealt with according to length.

Christ our Lord, 3) keep and strengthen us in such pure knowledge and
unity of faith until the day of His glorious future; to Him be praise,
honor and glory with God the Father and the Holy Spirit 4) forever and
ever. 5) Amen.

would be Walch\'s. In the other German editions: \"noch weder.\" Latin:
nsqno - noqns.

3\) Wittenberger: \"our dear HErr and faithful shepherd of our souls,
receive\" 2c. In the Latin edition this and the following addition is
not.

4\) \"and Holy Spirit\" is missing in the Jena.

5\) Here the Wittenberg has the addition: \"To this all speak who know
and love Christ from the heart\".

844 Sermons on John 18. 19. 20. w. vm, 802-8ot. 845

**M. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the eighteenth and
nineteenth, also a piece of the twentieth chapter of St. John,**

of the Passion, Passion, Death and Resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ.\*)

Preached Anno 1528. (. 5) 152S.

**Preface.**

> To all devout Christians I wish Niclas von Amsdorf God\'s grace,
> understanding, spirit and wisdom, that they may remain steadfast and
> persevere in the pure doctrine of the Holy Gospel until their end,
> Amen.

After many beautiful and splendid sermons on some chapters of the two
evangelists, John and Matthew, by the holy, dear man, Doctor Martin
Luther, of blessed memory, by the worthy and well-respected gentleman,
Georg Rörer, from the same mouth, and by another faithfully, diligently,
and to the best of one\'s ability and ability, put on paper, and made
into print, (and although they are not equal to the other writings that
he himself made and had printed, they are nevertheless now, at this
last, dangerous time, when all kinds of error and heresies again
frequently arise and come forth, very necessary, useful and comforting
to guard against them and to resist them): The Serene, Highborn Princes
and Lords, Mr. Johann Friedrich, Mr. Johann Wilhelm, and Mr. Johann

Frederick the Younger, Brothers, Dukes of Saxony, Landgraves of
Thuringia and Margraves of Meissen, my most gracious Princes and Lords,
have specially ordered and commanded the printing of these Sermons or
Homilies (out of special desire and love, which they bear and have for
the Holy Scriptures, that it be brought to light according to its pure,
natural and right understanding), specially ordered and commanded to be
printed, wherein many articles of our holy Christian faith, according to
the content of the pure doctrine of the holy Gospel, are acted upon and
explained.

Your Princely Graces, for moving and considerable reasons, have also
published D. Martin Luther\'s special Confessiones, that is, their
glorious and Christian Confessions, along with the above-mentioned
sermons. Martin Luther\'s special Confessiones, that is, their glorious
and Christian confessions, along with the above-mentioned sermons.

From this all pious and sorrowful hearts, who in like case are
challenged under the cross they bear, are to take a comforting example
and exemplification, that they too may keep their faith in such a way.

Luther preached these sermons, as well as the previous ones, for
Bugenhagen, while he was absent from Wittenberg in 1528 and 1529, in
order to organize the church system according to the teachings of the
Gospel in Brunswick and (from the end of September 1528) in Hamburg.
\"After the Easter holidays of the 1529th year\" Bugenhagen returned to
Wittenberg, as is reported at the end of the sermons. Ll. Georg Rörer
had, as Amsdorf says in his preface, copied these sermons, but they were
not published until 1557 by Ll. Andreas Poach, Pfarrherrn zun
Augustinern zu Erfurt (about Poach see St. Louis edition, vol. XIII,
preface, Col. VI) and provided by Nicolaus von Amsdorf with a preface.
The first edition was published in Jena in 1557 under the title: \"Das
18. und 19. Capitel, und ein Stück aus dem zwanzigsten St. Johannis, von
dein Leiden, Sterben und Auferstehung unsers HErrn JEsu Christi.
Preached and interpreted by D. Mart. Luth. Anno 1528 and 29, never
before gone out in print and now brought together for the very first
time.\" Another single edition \"newly overlooked and increased by LI.
Andr. Poach\" was published in Erfurt in 1566. In the Saminlungen, this
interpretation is found: in the Eisleben one, vol. I, p. 428; in the
Altenburg one, vol. IV, p. 644; in the Leipzig one, vol. X, p. 241 and
in the Erlangen one, vol. 50, p. 266. Amsdorf\'s preface is reprinted
only in the Leipzig edition and by Walch. Walch, as he notes in the
preface to the 8th volume, p. 8b, \"previously held and improved the
copy which has been printed here according to the two touched editions
of 1557 and 1566.\" Therefore, we reproduce the text according to the
old edition, comparing the Erlanger, which printed the text from the
Eisleben collection. Probably these sermons belong entirely to the
Passion period of the year 1529 au, because in § III of the
interpretation of the 18th chapter Luther alludes to his writing \"von
heimlichen und gestohlenen Briesen\", which went out New Year\'s Day
1529. Compare the notes to § 1 and § 111 of the 18th chapter of this
interpretation.

846 Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin, 8\<u-8v7. 847

joyfully and constantly confess how the laudable Elector, of Christian
memory, in his custodia has confessed his faith fearlessly, yet with
utmost patience and humility.

For he did not insist on, nor did he harass, the imperial majesty or the
same councillors who urged him to accept the interim, neither did he
despise it, nor did he give useless words, but with due honor and
reverence he humbly and humbly asked for it, and yet he also indicated
that he could not in good conscience have accepted such an interim, nor
might he have accepted it; as everyone will see and read in this
confession of his.

Likewise, everyone can see and notice from the confession of D. Martin
Luther that he does not agree with any sect, group or fanatic, but
condemns and rejects all of them, even those who arose after his
Christian departure from this world, as they are called, interimists,
adiaphorists or majorists. For this reason, they call themselves D. M.
L. unfairly and impudently; they shout, write, and boast that Doctor
Martinus taught and wrote as they write and teach, when the
contradiction is publicly found in his books, namely, that I am
indicating the one, worst, most necessary, and most dangerous piece: All
who teach that good works are necessary for salvation, teach and write
strongly against Luther, yes, against themselves. For Luther, of blessed
and holy memory, writes everywhere, and especially in Galatians, that
good works are not only unnecessary, but also harmful to salvation. For
these are his words:

If one looks at it in the light and in the reason, then it is certain
and can be found that such teaching and driving on the works, as
necessary for salvation, does more and greater harm than no human reason
can ever comprehend or understand. For not only is the knowledge of
grace obscured by it, but Christ with all his benefits is snatched away
by it, and the whole gospel, as St. Paul shows here, is perverted.

So they themselves write and cry out that we attain forgiveness of sins
and eternal blessedness by pure grace, without our work and merit,
purely for nothing. If then such their own confession is true, how could
our good works, contrary to their own self-confession, lead to salvation
(which we already have by grace for nothing, before all

good works, as they themselves confess to have attained) be necessary?

For this reason, I ask all Christians for God\'s sake to diligently read
and take to heart these sermons of Luther, together with the two
confessions, so that they will feel and take certain comfort, strength
and power from them, so that they will persevere and remain in the pure
teaching of the Gospel, and avoid and condemn all adiaphoristic and
majoristic teachings. And this is highly necessary at this time. For one
wants to take it upon oneself to make a convention with the Zwinglians,
that we should get along with them, unite and compare. Since this is
impossible without harming religion and our conscience, just as little
as we can get along or compare ourselves with the papists or
adiaphorists:

So all conventions, colloquia or discussions are in vain and in vain.
For there can be no settlement or agreement in this matter; but as soon
as an action or colloquia is undertaken, it has already happened that
truth perishes and lies low. For the persuasibilia verba humanae
sapientiae (which are nothing more than words and feathers) nevertheless
keep the prize and lie above, that they and their dreams keep the field.

As I have not only read in historiis and chronicis, but have also seen
and experienced in our colloquiis, where I have been. Therefore, there
is nothing better or more certain than to stick to the pure word without
all gloss, interpretation and interpretation of human reason, as the
holy man of God has presented and given to us in these sermons and other
writings of his, and also in this his last confession. Thus we are sure
and certain that we cannot err or be mistaken.

God from heaven, the Father of all mercy, helps us to stay with the pure
word without all gloss, interpretation and human interpretation.

For as soon as we depart from the word and follow the interpretation and
interpretation of the adiaphorists, we are already lost and eternally
lost. For Christ does not want to be preached persuasibilibus verbis
humanae sapientiae, as Paul says; he does not want his church to be
built, planted and watered by the learned, but by fishermen and
unlearned, who have a right faith, be they as lowly and despised on
earth as they like.

848 **Erl. 5\", 266-268. Sermon on Joh. 18, 1**. **W. VIII, 808-813.**
849

**The eighteenth chapter.**

\(1\) Saint John begins to describe the Passion, or history of the
suffering and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the eighteenth chapter
of his Gospel, which we will take before us from piece to piece,
speaking and acting on it as much as he gives us grace to do so. For you
know that we have set down the long sermon (since in the papacy the
Passion was preached for seven or eight hours on Holy Friday) and have
thus transformed and changed it so that we preach it at the appropriate
time 1) in the year, so that one may have the benefit and power of our
dear Lord Christ\'s suffering and death.

Now we all know the passion or history of the suffering of Christ,
because we hear it preached every year. But this is the main thing to
look at and to pay attention to, what benefit it should create in us.
The last work of our Lord Christ on earth is his prayer John 17, so that
he gives the last to his disciples. After he has finished the prayer, he
becomes a priest and offers the right sacrifice, namely himself, on the
wood of the cross. This is the Passion, which St. John describes
somewhat differently than the other evangelists, adds what the other
evangelists have omitted, and also actually shows the place, person and
hour, as he soon tells in the beginning of this chapter of the Lord\'s
entrance into the garden; item, how Judas got there. He did this so that
we might consider the Passion or history of the Passion of Christ all
the more diligently and with greater seriousness.

**When Jesus had spoken these things, he went out with his disciples
across the brook Kidron.**

The evangelist John makes, as it were, a preface to the passion or
history of the suffering of our Lord Jesus Christ. It seems to be
unnecessary that he calls the brook Kidron, that Christ passed over it.

1\) \"At a convenient time,\" by which the Passion period is to be
understood. According to these words, together with Luther\'s statement
in § 111 of this chapter, there is hardly any doubt that these sermons
were preached during the Passion period of the year 1529.

into the garden, but he did this so that he could make us believe in the
best and most subtle way that Christ wanted to take the right path to
death and die. After that the evangelist also wanted to practice his own
devotion with it, he thought of the brook Kidron in this way, as if he
should say: I mean, the Lord has walked right over the brook Kidron. The
pagans called it omina,^2^ ) evil indications, movements or outward
signs of a future thing, when everything sends itself to the work. In
this opinion, the evangelist indicates this brook as an omen and
foreshadowing of the prison and death of Christ. As if he wanted to say:
I mean, he came to the right brook Kidron. For John the Evangelist has
many such things in his Gospel, so that he shows how often both place
and name rhyme with the matter.

We call Kidron in German a black or dark brook; and if the brook Kidron
lies near the city of Jerusalem, it is not large, but when it rains it
pours out; it has the name Kidron because it lies so deep and dark, and
is bushy and haggard, that one can hardly see the water in front of it,
Ke- dar: pullatus, tenebricosus, denigratus, pale, dark and black. So
the evangelist wants to say that Christ went over the right dark brook:
I mean, he went over the black brook. He is silent about the Oelberg and
the beautiful funny place, and remembers this dark brook, as it rhymes
best with this matter of the song and death of Christ.

**There was a garden where Jesus and his disciples went.**

5\. this is the garden, which the other evangelists call Gethsemane,
vallis pinguis, fat valley \[Matth. 26, 36. Marc. 14, 32.\], will have
been the valley, so between the

2\) Erlanger: \"orasn\" and the translation also in the singular. In
this writing, because it did not come from Luther\'s own pen, we will
further indicate the variants only if they have an influence on the
meaning.

[850 Eri. so, 2M-27I. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
sis-sis. 851]{.underline}

Oelberge and the city of Jerusalem is located. In the evening Christ
went out of the city, toward the morning or the setting of the sun. It
will have been a fertile, delicious meadow, a beautiful, cheerful garden
and delicious plants in it, therefore the place is called: Gethsemane,
in German: fettes Thal, Schmalzthal or Schmalzgrube; as one is used to
say: This is a fat, fertile Schmalzgrube.

\(6\) Why does the evangelist write that the brook Kidron and the garden
are so actually mentioned? First, he does it to show that Christ was so
poor on earth, that he had no house or chamber of his own on earth, even
though he was King and Lord, both of the Jewish people and of all the
world. The greatest husks, knaves and worst enemies of God have houses
and bedchambers in Jerusalem, locked and sealed; but the Son of God must
have his lodging and bedchamber outside the gate, in the field, under a
tree. As He Himself says in Matthew 8:20: \"The foxes have holes, and
the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay
His head.\"

7 Secondly, it has always been the Lord\'s custom and way: when he
stayed in Jerusalem until evening, he went out of the city in the
evening, either to this garden or to Bethany, and did not stay in the
city overnight. There were such pious children in Jerusalem that they
could not accommodate the Lord for a single night, nor did he want to
stay with them \[Luc. 21, 37. Joh. 11, 54.\]. He did this very often.

**V. 2. Judas, who betrayed Him, also knew the place, for Jesus often
gathered there with His disciples.**

8 For this cause saith the evangelist, lest any man think or say, How
knew Judas that Christ was without the city in the garden? or, Why fled
he not? Answer: He did not want to flee the cross, otherwise he could
have traveled a mile or two from the city; but he went straight after
his death, yet did not seek the cross itself. He went in his ordinary
way, after his ordinary manner.

This is a common teaching, that one should neither seek nor flee the
cross. God has given us the body, with food, house 2c., also wants to
have it honored. He did not give the body to anyone to hurt or harm him,
otherwise he would not have created a healthy body; but for this reason
he created it healthy, that it should work, have its food and rest. God
says of this in the third commandment, Exodus 20:10: \"On the seventh
day is the Sabbath of the LORD your God. Thou shalt do no work there,
neither thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy manservant, nor thy
maidservant.\"

God did not create his creatures to destroy, but to enjoy. Just as the
servant whom we are commanded to work must work, and yet have his food,
clothing and rest, so that he may work; so also our body must have its
work, food, clothing and rest. The body shall be chastened, lest it
become too lecherous and wanton \[1 Cor. 9:27\], but it shall not be
damaged or corrupted. So the teaching in this place is that one should
not seek out misfortune and evil oneself; God has planted and formed
such things in our hearts by nature, so that man may flee and avoid
misfortune and harm. Again, if God sends you an evil or misfortune, you
should suffer it and not flee from it. If God sends you a sick body
without your advice, do not grumble against God, but suffer it; just as
here Christ neither seeks nor flees his cross.

**V. 3 When Judas had taken the multitude and the servants of the chief
priests and Pharisees, he came with torches and lamps and weapons.**

\(11\) The entrance of Christ into the garden was known, therefore Judas
had the Lord Christ in that place. But Judas was very careful. When
trouble comes, it is bound to come. He takes two armies with him: first,
the Roman host, that is, the governor Pilate\'s horsemen and servants;
and second, the servants of the chief priests and Pharisees. With such
an army, the rogue takes great care that he is not called a rebel. That
is why he does not take only the clergy,

852 **Erl. so, S7I-S7S. Sermon on Joh. 18, 3. W. VIII, 8I6-8IS.** 853

The Jews did not want it any other way, because the blood or neck
judgment was taken away from them by the Romans. The Jews did not want
it any other way, because the blood or neck judgment was taken away from
them by the Romans, as follows in the history.

012 Therefore the Pharisees and scribes are very prudent, adding their
servants to Pilate\'s judges and servants; so bring them up. The chief
priests, Pharisees and scribes would not have been so bold for
themselves that they would have caught the Lord, because Pilate would
have soon thrown the mob on their heads, as happened several times (when
Theudas stood up together with his followers; item, Judas from Galilee,
Apost. 5, 36. 37.). Therefore they keep themselves safe, both from the
Romans and from the people. For if they had caught Christ without
Pilate\'s soldiers, the mob that clung to him and went with him on the
day of the palm tree \[Matt. 21:8\] would have been aroused; therefore
remember: Because we have Pilate and his people with us, that is, the
Roman soldiers and soldiers, the city will sit quietly. It has cost the
chief priests enough money. So, if there is to be an uproar, it must be
at the highest level.

Here Christ is abandoned by the angels, by all worldly and human power;
his enemies, the chief priests and scribes, 2c. are strengthened to the
utmost, since the Romans fall to them, the people also fall to them, and
finally all the disciples also abandoned him and fled. How it was
reversed here. When Christ was preaching in Jerusalem, no one was
allowed to attack him \[Luc. 20, 19\], but now the people fall away from
him, as well as the authorities.

\(14\) So it shall be, if there be any vexation against Christ or his
own, that they shall go away, and be forsaken of all, as the 8th Psalm,
v. 6, saith, \"Thou shalt let him be forsaken of God for a little
season. If our sovereign were to be invaded and Wittenberg besieged, we
would see which ones would be true Christians. Truly, those who now want
to be the best evangelicals would fall into the ranks of the wicked and
leave the sovereign, just as everything fell into the hands of the chief
priests and Pharisees.

\(15\) If any man therefore will be a true Christian, let him seek such
help and strength, that he may be so minded and equipped as to need no
man, but be strong in himself, that in time of need he may not look
about him, seeking the help of others. Truly Christ is to be our
example, that we may learn and know that our strength is in us through
his grace. David tried this; therefore he says Ps. 142:5: \"Look to your
right hand, and behold, no one will know me. I cannot escape; no one
takes care of my soul.\" This is how it is with Christians at all times,
that they are abandoned and left alone. Those who want to do it, to help
and assist, are despondent and cannot do it; but those who should and
could do it, fall away, become the worst enemies; therefore we must have
our strength in ourselves, not in other people \[Ps. 146:3\]. The Lord
has seen this before, therefore he says to his disciples Joh. 16, 31.
32: \"Now you believe. Behold, the hour cometh, and is already come,
that ye should be scattered every man into his own, and leave me alone.
But I am not alone, for the Father is with me.\" St. Paul also
experienced what help and support of men do when it comes to a meeting,
as the words 2 Tim. 4:16, 17 testify: \"In my first responsibility no
one stood with me, but they all forsook me; it was not imputed to them.
But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me.\"

16 You must not rely on the kindness of your sovereign, nor think: I am
in a city, therefore there is no need; as Muenzer did at Mulhouse. And
that I say of myself, what would I do if our sovereign were to fall
away? Or what would I do if you did in deed as you think in heart? As
long as the people were devoted to Christ. In spite of the chief priests
and Pharisees, that they had harmed a hair of Christ\'s head; but when
the people withdrew, and Christ was left alone, the trouble began. Yet
he said, \"I am not alone, but the Father is with me.\" So a Christian
should also say, \"I am as forsaken as my Lord Christ, whom both the
people and the authorities and his own disciples forsook; yet I am not
alone.

854 **Eri. so, S7g-S7ö.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 8IS-822.** 855

We are now also in the midst of the enemy, but we are not alone. One
should learn such strength throughout life. If Johann Pommer preached
differently than I did, I should still say: I remain with the one I
know, who is Christ. For as the Father is with Christ, and hath not left
him alone, so is Christ with every Christian. In death it must truly be
that we have our strength in ourselves; for there no one helps us,
neither ruler, nor wife, nor child. This is the first part of the
Passion, that we learn to be left alone and abandoned by all men.

\(18\) The prophet Elisha knew this art very well. The king of Syria
besieged the city of Dothan \[2 Kings 6:8 ff\], where the prophet was;
and the prophet\'s son Gehazi saw this, and was afraid, and said, v. 15:
\"Arve, my lord, how shall we do now? we are in the hands of the
enemy.\" But to the prophet such things were as nothing; he passed
through the midst of the enemies as through a forest, and was not
afraid, and said to the lad, v. 16: \"There are more of them that are
with us, than of them that are with them.\" Where were they from? There
was a great army force around the city. Wowarsie? V. 17: \"The prophet
prayed that the Lord would open the boy\'s eyes, and the boy saw many
thousands of angels in chariots and chariots of fire.\" Such things are
to be learned well. If the Elector of Saxony, even you, should fall away
from me, I would know for myself to hold fast to Christ. If he is with
us, it is just as much if the Elector of Saxony or even the emperor
falls away, as if a hair falls from my head; for Christ is with us with
his whole host of holy angels.

19 We should learn and remember this example of the Lord Christ, because
Christian suffering begins with loneliness \[Matth. 4, 1\]. It will and
must happen that you are left alone; if it does not happen in this life,
it will happen in death. Therefore every Christian should prepare
himself and keep this strength, that he may have it with him, which is
Christ, our only comfort and help, as he promised John 14:18: \"I will
not leave you orphans, I will come to you.\"

**V. 4. 5. When Jesus therefore knew all that he should meet with, he
went out, and said unto them: Whom seek ye? They answered him, JEsum of
Nazareth. JEsus saith unto them: It is I.**

20 This piece also belongs to the preface which the evangelist sets
before the story of Christ\'s suffering. Shortly before, he touched a
little on the suffering of Christ, namely, that Christ was forsaken by
all and remained alone, which is called a truly Christian suffering.
With this, Christ, our head, wanted to prepare us so that we, according
to his example, should also send ourselves to loneliness and learn to
have our strength with and in ourselves, and not rely on others or
foreign help.

\(21\) Now that the Passion may be the better understood, the evangelist
here sets forth more things which also rhyme with the preface, namely,
that he tells what kind of person is suffering here. Which he indicates
with these words, when Jesus asks the crowd and the servants, \"Whom do
you seek?\" and they answer, \"Jesus of Nazareth\"; and he then says,
\"It is I.\" Let us be moved by this word: \"It is I\".

\(22\) The words and works of God are such that they are passed over,
not moved nor considered; but the worldly men can present their things
in such a way as to add a penny or two of words, not knowing
sufficiently how to speak of little things in words. St. John and the
other evangelists do not describe the Gospel and the Passion with
glorious, splendid words, but poorly and simplistically. The words of
Moses are also somewhat glorious, but the words of the Lord Jesus are
the least, the worst and the most simple; for in the Old Testament Moses
and the prophets spoke with glorious, glorious words, but in the New
Testament Christ and the evangelists speak very badly and simply
\[Matth. 13, 34. 1 Cor. 2, 1\]. The reason for this is that the
evangelists saw that even though the gospel of Christ is preached, sung
and written in the most glorious way, it does little good in the eyes of
the blinded and hardened world.

856 **Erl. so, 27S-27S. Sermon on Joh. 18, 4. 5. W. VIII, 822-821.** 857

The blessed move with all earnestness and diligence, even if the words
are not glorious nor splendid, but bad and simple. But with the blinded,
stubborn and careless, as he says, no words help, no matter how splendid
and glorious they may be.

\(23\) Christians therefore, when they hear this word, \"I am,\" ought
to consider well, quis, qualis, et quantus Christus, who, what his will,
or how he is minded, and how great Christ is, who was imprisoned by the
Jews, crucified, and killed; and ad quid, why Christ suffered and died
these things. This serves to make a distinction between Christ\'s
sufferings and those of all other saints. For where this distinction is
made, then the sufferings of the Lord of all the prophets, apostles,
martyrs 2c. are valid and superior. But if you ask who Christ is, you
must know that it is the man who just before in the previous chapter,
John 17:10, says: \"Father, all that is mine is yours, and all that is
yours is mine.\" For this person must be exalted and painted above all
other saints.

\(24\) Therefore, diligently consider the person betrayed by Judah,
condemned and judged by Pilate to death on the cross, that he is the man
who was clear with the Father before the world was. We should take and
consider this with the utmost diligence. For it moves godly people
excellently and goes deeply to their hearts when they consider the
majesty of this person. It moves and goes to the heart when a bad, lowly
person is hanged; rather, it moves and goes to the heart when an
innocent person is hanged as the worst thief. How should it move and go
to the heart if a mayor\'s son is innocently hanged? Yes, what is more,
if a prince\'s or emperor\'s son were hanged without cause? All the
world would be displeased at this, would cry out about such great
injustice and say: O, should one suffer this? But if all this is put
together in one heap, and it is said: This one is born so high, is
innocent 2c., but what is it against the suffering of the Lord Christ?
who is creator of heaven and earth, against whom everything on earth, be
it the son of a king or emperor, is to be counted

as a drop of water against a great sea.

\(25\) If these things are rightly moved and considered, they do not go
without fruit, but create and cause a man to be ashamed in his heart of
his suffering, yes, of all the sorrow and suffering that can befall the
whole world. For what is all injustice, outrage, violence, which may
befall a king or emperor, compared to the suffering of this person, who
is the creator of heaven and earth? If you are already deprived of your
dearest bodily treasure, wife and children, what is more to him? Look at
Christ, who suffers and dies here. Summa, with the word quis? who? all
our suffering is laid down, and patience, which grows out of it, if it
would already be praised righteously and fully, that it would
nevertheless have to be ashamed. For here the Creator and Lord of heaven
and earth suffers and dies, against whom all men on earth, however high
they may be, are a mere stick, even nothing, Isa. 40:15 ff. This should
be considered in all aspects of Christ\'s suffering; when he is mocked,
reviled, scourged, beaten, crowned, crucified, every pious heart should
think: Compared to this suffering, the suffering of all men on earth is
only a mere child\'s play, yes, a mere nothing. It is very moving to see
such a great person suffer.

\(26\) Secondly, let it be seriously considered, qualis et quantus
Christus, what kind and how great Christ is, that is, by what means he
deserves such suffering; whether he is kind, pious or wicked, whether he
has done evil or good. Now his works testify of him how kind,
benevolent, and highly deserving he is. For just as he, according to his
person, is a true, essential God, so his works, healing the sick,
raising the dead, 2c., are also divine; nevertheless, such a high,
benevolent person, well deserved by everyone, is condemned by the world,
yes, by his own people, to whom he was promised. But all this is still
the least. Much greater works are that he enlightens the hearts of men,
destroys the work of the devil, and redeems them from his power 2c.

\(27\) Now consider what kind of person is suffering here. It is more
pitiful when an un-

858 **Erl. so, 278-28°.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 824-827.** 859

I will remain silent when he suffers because he has shown such great
kindness to his friends. If a prince gave his subjects large sums of
money and property, and they all became so rich from him that they
themselves had to confess and say that there was no such kind, mild
prince on earth, and yet afterwards they themselves hanged their own
prince and lord on the gallows, how much do you think they would be
scolded in all the world? It would also serve them right; for they would
not only be worthy of reproach, but also of the most horrible punishment
2c. But this is nothing against this person, that Christ, as true God,
gives body and soul, eyes, ears and all limbs to all the world.

Over these temporal goods, which no creature can give, he also gives his
blessed word and understanding of the holy Scriptures, so that God may
be known; these heavenly goods surpass a thousand times all money and
goods on earth. Summa, they are all unspeakable works and benefits in
Christ. Nevertheless, this high, benevolent person must endure such
suffering that he dies an ignominious death on the cross, the like of
which befalls no man on earth 2c. This obedience, suffering, and death
of his should justly put down all our sufferings and work right patience
in us; for what are all men on earth compared to this person? What are
all our works and benefits compared to the works and benefits of Christ?

29 The third thing to consider is, why Christ suffers all these things,
or what is the cause? There are two causes: one is that the Jews are so
poisonous and angry with Christ, and cannot stand him, even though he
does them the greatest good. This we have now touched upon in the other
piece, that Christ is killed for the sake of his unspeakable works and
benefits. The other reason why Christ suffers is in Christ Himself, that
He bears such great love for us men, and suffers for our sins, that He
may save us from death, hell, and the devil. St. Paul touched on this to
Romans on the 5th, v. 6. 7. 8: \"Christ, when we were yet weak after the
time, died for us ungodly. Now hardly dies

someone for the sake of right, for the sake of something good, perhaps
someone should die. Therefore praise God for His love toward us, that
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.\" \"For the sake of
something good,\" says St. Paul, \"someone might die\"; for someone
would love a thing so much that he would risk his life over it; how many
risk their lives for the sake of money, for the sake of a kingdom, yes,
even sometimes for the sake of a wicked whore; for the sake of justice
few are found who desire to die. A murderer, even if he is guilty of
dying by right, nevertheless dies unwillingly. But Christ does not die
for the sake of something good. For that he dies for us, he does not do
so that he may gain great benefit and piety for himself in us. Neither
does he die for the sake of justice, for he is neither obliged nor
obligated to die either for us or for himself; but he dies for our sins,
that we may be saved; his great infinite love, which he has for us,
moves him to die for us.

\(30\) There shall be water for the sufferings of all saints, prophets
and martyrs. For no arch-father, prophet, apostle or saint, be he what
he may, may say to me: I have suffered this for your sake, unless there
is a great condition attached to it, as St. Paul stipulates when he says
Eph. 3:13: \"My tribulations, if I suffer for you, are a glory to you.\"
But no one may say that he suffered for our sins. Nor may we say to any
saint, Petre or Paule, I rely on your suffering.

So Christ dies, as St. Paul says, \"not for anything good, not for what
is right,\" but because I and you are sinners. Who can sufficiently
obtain this unspeakable love, grace and good deed with words? The
evangelists, as I said above \[§ 22\], run across it, indicating it only
with bad, simple words. For it 1) wants to consider the suffering of
Christ rightly, to have the heart completely, so think about it
diligently. The evangelists also recognize and see this, therefore they
think: If we already speak with high words,

1\) In the old edition: \"he\". The meaning is: The right contemplation
of the suffering of Christ wants 2c.

860 **Erl. SS, \[sa-sss. Sermon on Joh. 18, 4. ö. W. VIII, 827-8S0.**
861

If the words used to describe this suffering were splendid and glorious,
they would not help those who do not think about it; but to those who do
think about it, the words cannot be too bad or too little, they still
have power, juice, strength and comfort from it in their hearts.

32 This, then, is the sum of it, that Christ, such a high and excellent
person, innocent in addition, and full of good and excellent works, Son
of God and Lord of all the earth, suffers and dies, to which nothing
else moves him, but that I and you are drowned and lost in sinful,
damnable blood and flesh, the devil\'s own and condemned to hell. If you
consider this well and diligently, you will be quite ashamed; for here
you must confess and say, O Lord, I have never done no good. For we men,
like peacocks, are wont to reflect ourselves in our works, to make
ourselves think we are beautiful and holy; but this person\'s suffering
will give another sight into your heart, if you consider it with
diligence and earnestness, so that you will say, \"If I have given a
poor man a skirt, Christ has laid down his life for me; and yet do not
boast of these things to me, nor do you impress them upon me, as I boast
of my good deeds to my neighbor, and impress them upon him. Here a godly
man should truly be ashamed, if he thinks about it rightly.

In the papacy, the poor people who were led to the gallows were
comforted in this way: Dear man, suffer this shameful death willingly
and gladly, for this shameful and ignominious death of yours will wash
away all your sin. But how would we come to this? Christ suffers the
punishment of sins for the sake of our sins, and for this reason allows
Himself to be crucified: if then the Lord has cast all our sins upon Him
\[Isa. 53:6\], and He Himself has sacrificed them in His body 2c. \[How
can we say that a thief condemned to the gallows can atone for his sin
and wash it away by his shameful death?

34\. let all the saints stand and see if they have a speck of such
suffering that they suffer for our sin; they will all throw off their
crowns and put on Christ \[Revelation 4:10\], as the one who alone
suffered the most shameful death on the cross for the sin of the world.

suffers. In Revelation John 5:2 and following, it is written that a
strong angel preaches with a loud voice, saying, \"Who is worthy to open
the book and to break its seals? And when no man in heaven, nor in
earth, nor under the earth, was able to open the book, nor to look into
it, and I was grieved therefore, and wept greatly, one of the elders
saith unto me, Weep not. Behold, the lion that is of the seed of Judah,
the root of David, hath overcome to open the book, and to break the
seven seals thereof. And in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts, and in the midst of the elders stood a lamb like one slain,
which came and took the book. \"2c. \"Then the four beasts, and the four
and twenty elders, fell before the Lamb, having every one harps and
golden vials of incense, which are the prayers of the saints, and sang a
new song, saying: Thou art worthy to receive the book, and to seal the
seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast bought us with thy blood
out of all kindreds, and tongues, and people, and nations.\" All bishops
and teachers unanimously confess that Christ, the Lamb of God, alone
should have the glory of washing away sin. As if they should say to
Christ, the Lamb: Be merciful to us, and let us enjoy your suffering.
This preaching is to be done daily, as Christ commands us in His Supper,
\"Do this in remembrance of Me.\" But in the priesthood we have put on
ourselves this crown, and called Christ to take the harps and the
censers in his hand; but we have put ourselves in Christ\'s place,
selling our merit to other people. This is contrary to the faith,
confession and example of all the saints, as St. John\'s Revelation
teaches.

35 If any man therefore will rightly read the passion of Christ, let him
not be angry with Judah and the Jews, but let him look upon this person,
who saith, I am he. If then all the arch-fathers, prophets, Peter, Paul,
and all the saints stood up, they would not boast of their suffering.
Thou shalt do likewise: all that thou doest thou shalt not rely upon,
but thy trust shall be in Christ\'s sufferings alone. When it comes to
pass, and thou hast long since boasted, Lord, I have suffered so much;
another also boasts, I have suffered so much.

862 Erl. so, SM-WS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
830-833. 863

If you have given alms, you must still say and confess: Though I have
done this and that, yet am I the son of Adam \[Ps. 51:7\], a child of
wrath by nature \[Eph. 2:3\]. But Christ, on the other hand, says: I am
the Son of God. God protect us from such rights, and let us see that we
have this glory, that Christ suffered for us. The unbelievers have this
preached and taught, but do not consider it; but the Christians consider
it diligently, but cannot consider it sufficiently. Let this be of the
preface, which concerns Christians, that they diligently move: Who, what
and why.

**V. 5, 6: And Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them. When
Jesus said to them: It is I, they drew back and fell to the ground.**

\(36\) In the history of the suffering of Christ, we should pay the most
attention, as stated \[§25, 26\], to the person whose suffering is
described. For the suffering of the Lord Christ is not such a suffering
as the suffering of other saints; for the person is far different from
all other saints, however great they may be. This is what St. John
showed diligently before other evangelists, and first of all he actually
presented the person who suffers, so that no other evangelist has taken
the trouble to present the person as St. John did. For which reason also
this little word: \"It is I\", was taken by John alone with such
seriousness, on which little word: \"It is I\", they recoiled and fell
to the ground; which no other evangelist reported, except John alone. As
if to say, It is almost upon the words that the Lord says, \"I am.\" Now
therefore let it be observed which is the person that saith, \"It is
I.\"

\(37\) But to prove who the same person is, the evangelist introduces
this history, showing the same, and rightly illustrating it, saying,
\"Judas stood with them. When Jesus therefore said unto them: It is I,
they drew back and fell to the ground.\" John did not want to conceal
this, so that he would show with certainty by deed and work who this
person was, so that no one would think that he was a bad person, but
such a person, who with seven letters, \"I am he,\" throws them all back
to the ground, both the crowd and the people.

the servants of the high priests, and also Judam the betrayer.

\(38\) This, I say, was indicated by St. John alone, first of all, that
he might give us cause and instruction to consider what kind of person
he is who suffers for us, so that we might not be ungrateful, lazy, or
lazy to consider such great and high things. For the holy evangelists
have well seen that the suffering of the Lord Christ would be small,
insignificant and contemptible in the world afterwards, as we have
experienced with our great damage, that it was regarded in the least,
and still today it is regarded as insignificant, just as if it were a
history of the king from Hungary, slain by the Turk. The devil helps a
lot that one does not consider the suffering of the Lord Christ worthy
enough. That is why the sufferings of other saints have been considered
more glorious than the sufferings of the Lord Christ, and we too have
placed our works far above Christ\'s sufferings. We have insisted on St.
Christopher\'s suffering far more than on Christ\'s suffering. Another
has honored the sufferings of Sebastian, Catharine, and Margaret; and
almost every one has fallen into a special suffering of the saints.
About this we have preached our own sermons: If you are enrolled in our
brotherhood, you will share in all our works, chastisements and
sufferings; although, if one wants to look at the suffering, a
lansquenet in the field suffers much more than a whole such brotherhood.
Thus we have not only kept our suffering equal to the suffering of
Christ, but have also raised it far above it.

39 For this reason I say that St. John should not be so overrun, but
when he writes that Christ said, \"It is I,\" and proves this \"It is
I\" by the fact that the crowd retreats and falls to the ground, let all
the saints be ashamed before this \"I,\" and say, \"We will gladly be
silent about our suffering, and let this one who says, \"It is I,\" have
the preeminence alone with his suffering. For these are not so cold
words as we have looked upon them.

40\. in the pontificate, as \[§ 33\] said, when one has to judge a
murderer, and a

[864 **Erl. so, S8S-SS7. Sermon On Joh. 18, 5. 6. W. VIII, WS-8SS.**
865]{.underline}

The monks comforted the poor people when they led the thief to the
gallows and said: \"Dear man, accept the shameful, ignominious death
with patience and willingly on your neck, and your sins will be
forgiven. The suffering of a thief and a murderer was higher and greater
than the innocent suffering and death of the Lord Christ. The reason for
this was that they did not diligently consider what kind of text it is
that is written here. In the same way, the monks put on the monk\'s caps
of many kings and princes and said that they would go up to heaven in
the cap.

\(41\) The evangelists saw that it would happen that the suffering of
Christ would be despised, and that the suffering of others would be
regarded as great and high. I have known many who thought more highly of
Francis\' wounds and Catharine\'s suffering than of Christ\'s wounds and
suffering. Therefore St. John wants to indicate that the person of the
Lord Christ is so great, high and glorious that all other persons are
nothing compared to it, since Christ with one word pushes so great a
multitude of the crowd and the servants to the ground. This should be a
reminder to us, as a sure sign, put up by the evangelist, as if he
should say to us: I do not preach to you about a bad man who suffers,
but about such a great, high person, who pushes down all his enemies
with one word, so that if he had not wanted to suffer willingly, they
would not have been able to bend a hair on him.

Secondly, Christ wanted to open and reveal his heart with this deed and
show that he does not suffer such things out of necessity or compulsion,
but that he suffers willingly and gladly. For if with one word he can
strike down the armored and armed men, the servants of Pilate and the
Pharisees, what could he have done if he had wanted to use his fist? As
if he were to say to them, \"If I would not do it, nor suffer willingly
and gladly, you should leave me unchained and unbound. Therefore his
willing heart is to be seen, that he gives himself obediently to the
Father and kindly to us. There his heart is not hidden, but goes out
freely,

public love toward us, and in willing obedience to His heavenly Father
\[Phil. 2:8.\]

\(43\) As it happens, we can also learn here what an abominable thing it
is for a hardened man, that we may learn to keep ourselves in the fear
of God. These are all armed and armored, spiritual and temporal
authorities are together, and Christ overthrows them in their great
presumption, so that if he had not addressed them again, they would have
remained lying on the ground. Shouldn\'t one of them have left his
armor, desisted from such presumption, and run away as if the devil were
chasing him? They feel that they retreat with the body and fall to the
ground; yet they do not depart in heart from their mind and evil
intentions, are not moved, that they have ceased from their raving.
These are hearts of vain steel and demant.

\(44\) And Judas the prankster, saith the evangelist, stood also by, and
is so stubborn and hard, and draweth back with the rest, and falleth to
the ground; yet is he not moved to think, Dear, cease from raging
against him that with one word thrusteth us all back. He does not do
this, but continues blindly and obstinately, although he has not only
seen this great sign that they are struck to the ground, but has also
often seen before that Christ has done many and great miracles. So it is
with all the hardened that they do not cease until they are cast into
the abyss of hell. Even if heaven and earth were created anew before
such people and the greatest miracles were performed, it would still not
help. It is no wonder that today our bishops and princes are so hard and
obdurate, and persist in their raving, although these ten years, and
therefore a hundred counsels which they have given against Christ and
his gospel, have gone back, that they have often had to give way with
their bodies; yet their hearts have remained firmer than no diamond.
Therefore we should not be angry if Christ pushes them back and it does
not help, but we should say: If it happened to Christ himself in the
garden, why should it not happen to us?

866 Erl. 60, SS7-SSS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
8SS-8S8. 867

\(45\) By the grace of God, we have done so much with our gospel that
they have not even fallen back alone with their raging and shouting; yet
they still go on with their heads, not thinking that the cause of the
gospel, against which they rage, is of God. These two groups, Jews and
Gentiles, the servants of Pilate and the high priest, have thus thought:
That we thus fall back will be magic. Therefore they despised such a
great miracle and such an excellent warning, which Christ did before
them. We should ask God to protect us from a hardened heart, because
when it comes to that with a person, there is no more counsel.

**V. 7, 8, 9 Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said:
JEsum of Nazareth. Jesus answered: I told you that I was he. If then ye
seek me, let these go. That the word might be fulfilled which he said, I
have lost none of those whom thou gavest me.**

They were prostrate and lying on the ground, and if Christ had not
addressed them again, they would still be lying there to this day. The
word \"It is I\" strikes them all to the ground. But Christ does not
leave it at that; but does another sign, saying, \"If ye then seek me,
let these go.\" Christ can strike his enemies and defend his disciples
with one word, and he did this when he was weak and wanted to suffer:
what should and could he do now that he is exalted at the right hand of
God? and what will he do at the last day? Let the disciples go, he says;
for the word, says the evangelist, had to be fulfilled, which he had
said before in prayer to his heavenly Father, John 17:12: \"Those you
have given me I have kept, and none of them is lost\" 2c. So Christ said
to the multitude and to the servants, \"Let the disciples go. With these
words he thus gave his disciples liberty, that none of them should be
taken, though Peter and John went into the high priest\'s house.

Here the evangelist indicates that Christ is speaking of temporal
perdition in these words. But above, in chapter 17,

In v. 12, the text makes it clear that the Lord is speaking of eternal
loss. But these things are not almost contrary to one another, though
they seem to be contrary to one another; for if the disciples had been
caught this time, they would also have been eternally lost in body and
soul. Then Christ is their protector with the word, \"It is I\"; and
that he says to the multitude, \"Let these go.\" With these words he
preserves them, so that they will not be lost either temporally or
eternally; they will also remain eternally undestroyed in their souls,
even though in his time they will have to endure after their bodies and
praise God with their deaths. With this, the evangelist, as stated \[§
37\], wanted to describe Christ, that he, in his greatest weakness, was
nevertheless so strong and powerful to strike his enemies to the ground
and to free his disciples.

48 But the words of the Lord Christ, \"I have not lost the one you have
given me,\" are very comforting. When people accept Christ and his word,
they are given to Christ. Thus Christ Himself interprets it, as we heard
above John 17:6, where He says, \"They were thine, and thou gavest them
unto me, and they have kept thy word.\" There it is: He that keepeth the
word of God, believeth, and receiveth Christ therein, is given to
Christ, and abideth not. So this is our comfort from this text, that we
see that Christ is as weak as he wants to be, yet he has such wisdom,
power and authority that he can strike his enemies to the ground, so
that they can do nothing, unless he wants to. So he can also protect and
defend his own, so that no harm may befall them on earth. The little
word \"I am\" has the twofold power to strike down the enemies and to
save those who belong to Christ. With this we should strengthen and
comfort ourselves in our time.

49 But these things seem nothing to our eyes. For on the other side,
which is against us, are so many bishops, princes, and the devil
himself, that it cannot be seen otherwise than that the waters shall
pass over the baskets; yet these words remain: \"Let these go\"; and,
\"I have lost none that thou hast given me. Job 14:5 is written, \"Thou
hast set a goal.

[868 **Erl. so, WS-SSS. Sermon on Joh. 18, 7-11. W. VIII, SS8-84I.**
869]{.underline}

he will not pass over it.\" Just as God has set a goal and a shore for
the sea that rages and rages, over which it will not pass, so God speaks
to a tyrant: Do you hear, you great iron-eater, go here and no further.

50 This is how it is written here, that the enemies retreat, so that we
may learn to be secure in Christ, and know that not only the tyrants
cannot do what they want, but also that we may be finely satisfied and
secure under Christ\'s protection \[John 10:39\]. Our soul is
undestroyed if we are given to Christ, that is, if we hold fast to his
word and believe it. Our body is also safe and preserved if our enemies
attack us before the time appointed by God, even if it has to suffer
according to God\'s will in its own time. Such happened to Petro and
John, whether they followed in the house of the high priest. Christ only
speaks the word: \"Let these go\". With this he says that the enemies
have to deal with him and do him wrong, and the disciples forget about
it.

51 In this text we have that Christ with one word, when he says: \"I
am\", pushes all his enemies to the ground, the servants of Pilate and
the high priests, as well as the traitor Judah. This is so that Christ
and his followers will not suffer because they have to suffer, but
because they want to suffer. Otherwise Christ and his would have enough
strength and power against his adversaries; even if all hell and all
power would work together, they would still not be able to harm Christ
and his. But Christ and His own willingly and gladly want to suffer.

**V.10. 11. Then Simon Peter had a sword, and drew it, and smote the
servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear; and the
servant\'s name was Malchus. Then said JEsus unto Petro, Put up thy
sword into the sheath. Shall I not drink the cup which my father hath
given me?**

52 The evangelists and the Holy Spirit have considered it best that this
piece, that Peter uses the sword without command and order, does harm,
and that the high priest is not to be blamed for it.

The fact that the priest\'s servant cut off his right ear was not
concealed. St. Lucas \[Cap. 22, 51\] reports that Christ again cut off
the servant\'s ear and healed it, and punished all the disciples.
Matthew writes Cap. 26, 52 that the Lord preached a strong sermon on
this, and St. John also summarizes such a sermon. But this is a
necessary text, which stands there, and should stand there. Christ well
saw that it would happen that his own, who bear the Christian name,
would take up the sword. For men are easily moved to take up the sword,
and to take up a good appearance before them, saying, \"These people are
wronged in the sight of God and the world, and therefore we must strike
them down and save them. When such an appearance is present, everyone
wants to draw the sword. No sermon can express how powerful the devil is
in our hearts, who wants to rule the world in such a way that everyone
draws the sword. Then he brings such necessary cause and great equity,
that the sword may be wielded cheaply.

\(53\) Against such doctrine and appearance, let this example of Peter
be set, and let it be said that there is a great difference between him
to whom a thing is commanded and him to whom it is not commanded. To
whom a thing is not commanded, let him not submit to the same thing. For
what God wants, He has sufficiently commanded and ordered. GOD does not
sleep \[Pf. 121, 4.\], neither is he a fool; he knows very well how to
govern. Therefore, what you are not commanded to do, you go aside and
leave the sword.

\(54\) But against this goes the great pretense of saying, They do
violence and injustice, they do not govern rightly; we are obliged to
help the cause. When the mob hears this, it falls on it from the start
and concludes: Well, let us do it. For the old Adam is such a great fool
that he falls to doing what is commanded and refrains from doing what is
not commanded. What moved the coiner other than this, that he thought:
one does not rule right, therefore we must do it so that it goes
Christian? These are the bellows that blow out the heart and set it on
fire. Therefore, when one hears this word,

870 Eri. so, 29S-S94. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vni,
Ai-sn. 871

Justice, injustice, no one remembers: \"My dear, are you also commanded?
You are not the man who should establish justice and punish injustice.
If there is injustice in my house, and my nearest neighbor wants to fall
into my house and do justice inside, what would I say?

55 Therefore it is not enough that there be right and wrong, but there
must also be a man who is commanded to do right. What questionest thou
how another man in his company shall breed his servants? Or, what does
another ask about how you breed your servants in your house? One should
plead and admonish when things go wrong, but to strike with one\'s fist
without a command is devilish. Nevertheless the whole world holds it
thus, that everyone says: It is right, therefore one may do it well. But
see thou first, whether it be commanded thee also, that thou smite with
thy fist, that thou smite not cream, as Peter did here. I did not want
to take a hundred thousand world, that I wanted to grab a bishop without
order into his office. But because I am a doctor of the Holy Scriptures,
it is my duty to do so, for I have sworn to teach the truth, otherwise I
would not touch a hair on a bishop\'s head.

\(56\) Therefore there is a great difference between one who does what
he is commanded to do and one who does what he is not commanded to do.
Cause, because it has such an excellent appearance, reason and cause
that one should resist injustice. This is why the Passion had to come
about, so that one might see not only what is right and what is wrong,
but also what is commanded and what is not commanded. Peter is pious,
and nothing drives him to such presumption except his great love and
loyalty to his master. The intention and opinion is very good and
delicious, that Peter thinks, my Lord is in danger, I am sworn to him,
therefore I do not have to suffer this injustice. The whole world would
not be able to punish the work, but Christ punishes it. For there is a
proper authority from Jerusalem, who want to seize Christ; they have the
sword in their hand, they are commanded to do it. Sayest thou, But such
violence doeth wrong; Peter hath the right. To whom shall I fall here?
Answer: To him who has the power, even though he does wrong. For

if you could raise the dead, yet you have no command to wield the sword
without proper authority. For here stands the word, saying unto thee,
Put up the sword into his place.\"

57\. say you: Nevertheless, it is also true that one should defend an
innocent man \[Prov. 24:11\]. Answer: Peter also had the best thoughts,
wants to defend the innocent Christ against the guilty and raging Jews.
But let the jurists argue about what is right or wrong; see if he who
wields the sword and wants to defend others has a command to do so or
not.

58\. I will say one more thing: God\'s word is God\'s word, and there is
nothing better on earth than God\'s word; yet God has commanded that no
one should preach unless he is called to do so. God will not let His
word go out except through him who is called to it. Accordingly, this is
also true: If God did not receive the command over right and wrong,
everything would come to nothing. For Peter, with his example, would
give any man room and place to wield the sword. Who then would defend
against such evil? What would become of it if everyone wanted to wield
the sword without any command, even if he were already right, as Peter
did here? Therefore, so that this may be prevented, Peter is defended
here. And Christ will not suffer Peter to put up his sword before God\'s
order is disrupted and destroyed.

59\. God would rather suffer the authorities who do wrong than the
rabble who do right. Reason is this: For when Mr. Omnes wields the sword
and gets it, under the title and appearance that he does right, then it
goes badly. For a prince should remain a prince; then he will not cut
off the heads of all, even though he often does wrong and cuts off the
heads of some. For he must have some around him; he must also have
subjects under him if he is to be and remain a prince. It is not
possible for him to have all his subjects as enemies. But if you want to
be lord, and another also wants to be lord, then the heads all go away,
and virgins and women are defiled. In order that this might happen,
Christ says that Peter is wrong in his best appearance of righteousness;
and again that

872 **Erl. so, 294-297. Sermon on Joh. 18, 10. 11. W. VIII, 844-84.\"**
873

Pilate, and the godless Pharisees, are right in their evil, unrighteous
presumption.

\(60\) It was a great appearance that the peasants had in the uproar.
For they said, \"Who wants to suffer this? But they could not come to
that point that they would have thought: Are we also commanded to punish
the princes for their wrongs? And yet every peasant has such things in
his own house. For even though a peasant does wrong in his own house, he
still cannot suffer a servant to come and defend the peasant\'s wife and
child against him, no matter how wrong he may be. Anyone can see that
the servant is not commanded to punish the wrong done to his master in
the house. But when it concerns another, everyone thinks it is right and
good to take up the sword, so that one may not suffer. We are fine
fellows like that: If we do it to others, it shall be right; but if
others play the same right with us, it must be wrong.

\(61\) Therefore the high and holy apostle is set before us here as an
example, that we do nothing unless we are commanded. Therefore, if you
see your neighbor doing wrong, admonish and punish him with words, as
Christ taught, but keep your fist still and your sword in its sheath.
For here it is not for thee to say: I mean well in my heart, my devotion
is good, the matter is right; but it is, Is it commanded thee, or is it
not? Good cause, good opinion and the like do not help, but you must
come to know whether it is also commanded you. But in the world it
happens that it is completely the other way around. Those who have good
opinion do not have the right, and those who have the right lack good
opinion.

62 The evangelist says: \"Peter struck at the servant of the high
priest. This seems to be a good work, but because there is no command,
it is quite criminal and good for nothing. This is especially written
for the pope, because he is not commanded to use the sword. But Christ
clearly says, \"Put up thy sword into the sheath,\" indicating that he
is not speaking of the sword of violence, which violence is ordered by
God, but of the sword that one can use without a command.

arrogates authority and command. Summa, it should be a proverb against
everything that one dares to do without command. If a preacher presumes
to preach when he has neither profession nor command, it is said, Put up
thy sword into the sheath. If another wants to rule and establish
justice, since he is not commanded, then it is also said: Put your sword
in the scabbard. And so on. It is said against all those who want to
start something without a profession or command; and it teaches that one
should not be busy or forward in a foreign regiment.

**And the servant\'s name was Malchus.**

St. John used to put his allegories and interpretation. The work on him
is forbidden (for Christ holds Peter back and puts down the sword he had
drawn), but the interpretation is right. Malchus was the surname of the
servant, and had been the servant of the high priest Caiphä, who is a
figure and model of the people in the Old Testament. The people of the
old priesthood, although it was appointed by God Himself, was
nevertheless not a childlike, but a servant-like people, who did not
serve God willingly nor from the heart, but out of compulsion and
driving the law. The servant is a figure of all those who serve in the
Old Testament; they have lost the right ear, and unless Christ looks at
their right ear and heals it, it is done with them; they can do nothing
but pursue the gospel. But Malchus means: a royal, therefore the
nobility of the Turks today are called Mammelucken, that is, royals. So
Malchus means: regius, a royal. For the people of the law deal in works,
and all saints of works boast, are vain kings and princes, and must be
called Malchus. Summa, the allegory and interpretation of this servant
is of the people of the Law, and of the people of the Gospel, or of the
Law and Gospel.

64\) But the example of the apostle Peter, as 53) is said, teaches us
that it is not enough for you to say, \"Here is the right (even if it
were God\'s word), therefore I will do so, but you must also see if you
have a command to do so. Have you not

874 Erl. so, 2S7-SSS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
848-849. 875

Command, sheathe your sword. If you do not, the sword shall strike you
on the head. And this is a clear lesson for all of us, that no one
should dare to do anything unless he has a certain command, and that he
should not consider how great the right or the wrong is. For with this
Christ wants to have warned his Christians that they do not punish
injustice without a divine command; otherwise he would have justified
Peter in his work and approved of his actions. Summa Summarum: Each one
should do what he is commanded to do and refrain from doing what he is
not commanded to do. And if each one has respect for his command, he
will find his hands full of what he is commanded to do, so that he may
not be troubled with what he is not commanded to do. And if there were
no other commandment, yet the ten commandments concern all men, that if
he will keep them as he ought, he shall find plenty to do.

\(65\) But the children of men are so minded, that every man leaves
undone that which he is commanded to do, and does again that which he is
not commanded to do. This was done especially by the pope, who thought
it was his duty to depose kings and emperors and to use the sword as he
pleased.

**V. 12: And the multitude, and the chief captain, and the servants of
the Jews, received Jesus, and bound him.**

St. John sets two pieces that are left out by the other evangelists. The
first, that Christ is led captive and bound to Annas at first. The
other, that he actually expresses that Caiphas, Annas\' brother-in-law,
was the high priest of the year. Thus the evangelist says: The soldiers
of the Romans and the servants of the Jews took Jesus and bound him.
This is to be understood thus: After Christ had put Peter\'s sword into
the scabbard and said that he was not commanded to judge such violence
and injustice of the Jews, he surrendered into their hands from that
time on, without any protest, and left the fellowship of his disciples.

\(67\) Let each one be given into his own heart, and commanded to
consider how they have dealt with Jesus, especially because

It was such people with whom there was no mercy. There is no doubt that
it will have been unkind and cruel enough. For everyone, as is to be
remembered, wanted to be the best in this game, and to court and serve
the high priests and the centurion. 1) The evangelists are silent about
this, and badly and simplistically indicate that Jesus was captured and
bound. But whoever wants to interpret Christ\'s suffering from piece to
piece, and according to all circumstances, cannot avoid this, but must
also indicate that they dealt with him uncleanly soon in the beginning
of his imprisonment.

This suffering makes the majesty and greatness of the person all the
greater and higher. When we look at the person of the Lord Christ, it is
the highest, greatest, and most excellent example, which should justly
provoke and awaken us to compassion. For he who is imprisoned and bound
here is God\'s only Son, who throughout his life has done no harm to
anyone, but has shown all good to the whole world.

\(69\) But our shameful heart is so cold and ungrateful that we do not
consider it nor think about it. If we considered it rightly and
worthily, this example would truly set us on fire, that such an innocent
sheep comes under such cruel and ravenous wolves, which tear and devour
the sheep without any mercy \[Ps. 22, 17\]. If Christ were only a pure
and honest man, we should still love him and be surprised that he
allowed himself to be captured and bound for our sake, so righteously,
piously and without all sin, and again gladly do everything for his sake
that we owe him to do. How many a merchant and tradesman suffers heat
and frost, thunderstorms, and all kinds of unpleasantness of ripening,
and puts himself in danger of life and limb for the sake of perishable
goods. Yes, many a man suffers and risks life and limb for the sake of a
shameful, cursed whore. But for the sake of Christ, no one wants to
suffer or dare anything, nor to love such a pious, innocent Christ, who
has served everyone in the highest love and kindness. If he alone, I
say, were a pure man, one should love him for the sake of his innocence
and good deeds,

1\) to love - to flatter.

876 **Erl. so, 299-son Sermon on Joh. 18, 12. 13. w. VIII, 84S-8S2.**
877

that he is so pious, just, and indeed innocent, and has shown us such
great goodness and benevolence: But what will it become that Christ is
not only man, not only innocent, not only beneficent, but also the
Savior of us all, who came down from heaven for our salvation, to lead
us out of sin and the prison of death; yes, above all this, that he is
the God and Lord of us all. Should we not love such a Savior and God,
and for his sake do everything that he demands of us?

\(70\) Such things belong to pious and Christian hearts, that they may
consider them, that, when they hear the name of Jesus, that he was bound
without all mercy, and that he acted so abominably, they may consider
who he is that was thus bound and acted. A man is often moved to pity
when he sees a thief being hanged on the gallows, whether his just due
is done to him. But what is this, if you hold it against this innocent,
kind JEsum? who is the Son of God and the Lord and Savior of us all, and
yet is so shamefully caught and bound by the wicked. Therefore the
greatness of the person makes this suffering great and glorious. When
this suffering of Jesus comes, the suffering of all men is nothing; for
no one is so pious, no one suffers so innocently, as this Jesus; no one
is also so great and high, as this Jesus.

**V.13. They led him first to Annas, who was Caiphas\' brother-in-law.**

First we have to deal with the history. Annas was the old priest,
Caiphas the young priest; and John says that he was high priest that
year. With this he wants to give to understand that Caiphas had not been
high priest all the time. Josephus writes \[Antiq. lib. 19. cap. 6^1^ ),
§ 2\] that the two, Alexander and Simon, divided the high priesthood
between them, and therefore they were divided so that one was high
priest for the other. As there are three mayors in a city, ruling one
year after another, so they have divided the priesthood among
themselves, contrary to God\'s order.

1\) In the marginal gloss erroneously: oap. 5.

For also St. Lucas gives to understand that Annas and Caiphas led the
high priesthood one after the other, Luc. 3, 1. 2: \"When Tiberius was
emperor, and Pontius Pilate governor in Judea, and Herod a tetrarch in
Galilee\" 2c. \"When Annas and Caiphas were high priests, the command
came to John the son of Zachariah in the wilderness\" 2c. Therefore John
does not say in vain: \"Caiaphas was the high priest of the year\";
because in God\'s people it was so ordered that Aaron should be high
priest for and for, and when Aaron died, his son Eleazar should be high
priest; and so from then on, each one as long as he lived \[Ex. 29, 9.
29. f.\]. But they made a mischief and a fraud of it, that one was high
priest for another, and they alternated the priesthood one for another.
And the Romans took money, and suffered Annas to be high priest this
year, and Caiphas another year.

\(72\) Although they practiced such evil in the priesthood, the
priesthood was of God, instituted and ordered by God, and not evil nor
to be rejected, although evil men presided over it; without any doubt
they were also of the priestly stock, as can be seen from Luke. Just as
the emperorship is not unjust nor to be rejected, even though the
emperor\'s governor is a rogue and the emperor a pagan. Thus the
priesthood was also holy and ordained by God, even though the priests
played around with it. Christ remains Christ and the Son of God, and
therefore does not become a prankster, even if his crucifiers played
around him. The common rule is thus: Abusus non perdit substantiam rei,
abuse, and divine rank or office, are two different things; and even if
one abuses one\'s rank, the rank itself still remains right. Gold is
good and precious, even if a whore wears it around her neck. Thus the
priesthood was right, even though Annas and Caiphas were knaves, and
abused the right high priesthood, and crucified Christ.

73 Annas had a daughter, whom he gave in marriage to Caiphas, and she,
the daughter of Annas and the wife of Caiphas, is the chief woman of
Jerusalem. Caiphas was the great Hans, and at the time of the high\...

[878 Erl. so, MI-sos. Interpretations on the evangelist John. W. VIII,
8SL-WS. 879]{.underline}

priest. It has been a noble, high thing about the office of the high
priest. I would rather be Caiaphas or Annas at Jerusalem than Pope at
Rome, for the sake of securing the position; for the office of the high
priest at Jerusalem has been gloriously confirmed. The whole third book
of Moses comes out of it; and not only the third book, but also the
whole Moses throughout all his books. Verily he that sat on Caipha\'s
throne was able to do more with one finger than Caesar. For whoever
revolted against the high priest was put to death, Ex 22:28, Acts 23:5.
23, 5: that the high priest\'s throne was well established.

But I will come to the theology and doctrine. We are to learn from this
that no one should trust people, whether they are already in such a
state that God has ordained. If we are not to believe or trust Hanna and
Caiphä, how are we to believe or trust the devil, the Pope of Rome, the
monks in monasteries, or the godless bishops? God does not want us to
trust any man, nor should we trust those who are in the highest, best
and most secure position. For there is no estate from earth so
gloriously confirmed as the estate of Annas and Caiphas. That Annas and
Caiphas become peelers in their order and rank, which is the highest
from earth, you shall learn thereby, that you regard no man because of
his rank or chair. The pope\'s lawyers have exalted their pope and said:
Non est praesumendum, quod tantae altitudinis apex possit errare: It is
not to be assumed that the pope could err in such high rank. Against
this I put this: Annas and Caiphas sit in a better height and on a
greater throne than the pope and emperor, yet they not only err, but are
also scoundrels and knaves, and the worst scoundrels and knaves that
have come from earth, who crucify the Son of God. Now we have these
things from their evil works \[Matth. 7, 2O\], which they have practiced
against Christ, that we hold them in contempt when we call them. But we
are to know that they were the highest people according to the order of
God, and their status the holiest and highest that ever was. Therefore,
I shall always pull down the robe\...

and say: I do not have to rely on it, if already the pope or a cardinal,
or the emperor says something; because also the highest people can err
and miss.

\(75\) Sayest thou now, Whom then shall one trust and believe? Read the
first commandment: \"I, the LORD your God, am a zealous God\" \[Exodus
20:5\], where it says whom you should trust, namely God the LORD alone.
If the Pope says something, I am not obliged to keep it, because he
certainly brings God\'s word. For God says that we should only fear Him
and trust Him, even if He speaks to us through a donkey. Therefore, you
should say, \"Dear Father, you are high, holy and learned, but I do not
believe that you should err because of this. Yes, they say, do you think
that the Concilia can err? Speak thou against it: Have you not read of
two men, Hannah and Caipha, who were peelers? Now if such excellent
people, in such a high, holy state, ordered and established by God, have
fallen to crucifying God\'s Son, it follows that other people can also
fall and err. Annas and Caiphas were much more learned and wise, and
their obedience was much greater than that of the Pabst. This can be
seen in the fact that even though all the other Jewish people heard
Christ\'s sermon and saw his miracles, no one was allowed to confess it
publicly, nor to follow him publicly \[John 12:42\], and when Christ was
captured, no one was allowed to be noticed, because the high priest\'s
reputation and obedience was so great among all the people.

\(76\) Therefore, you must remember this word that John says, \"Caiphas
was the high priest of the year,\" and yet the same high priest can be
such a rascal and a knave that he crucifies the Son of God. The office
of high priest was the highest office and the most glorious name, yet
the worst scoundrels hold this office and this name. Because the high
priests have done this, no man shall henceforth be believed to bring the
bright and clear word of God. St. Paul 1 Cor. 4, 2. says: \"Nothing more
is looked for in stewards, except that they be found faithful.\" This is
what one should look for to see if one is faithful. For in a preacher or
bishop

[880 **Erl. so, sos-sos. Sermon on Joh. 18, 13. 14. W. VIII, 8SS-8S7.**
881]{.underline}

The Christian church may suffer from all kinds of shortcomings, but it
cannot and should not suffer from unfaithfulness. Our bishops today cry
out without ceasing that the Christian church cannot err; against this
you say: It is true, the Christian church cannot err; but do you hear,
dear friend, let us pay attention to which is the right Christian
church. They say that the pope is the head of the church, and yet they
cannot deny, but must confess without thanksgiving, that the pope is
grievously mistaken. If then the head errs, the body easily follows. All
that the popes dream must be with them the holy Christian church. But
against this, take this text, and say, He that believeth in Christ
cannot err; he that believeth not in Christ must err, even if he were
more than a pope. Should not the pope err because these two, Annas and
Caiphas, who are more gloriously appointed by God than any pope, have
not only erred, but have also shamefully fallen to condemning God\'s Son
to death?

The high priests had the glory that the people were commanded to accept
everything the high priest said. The pope has no such glory. If you want
to conclude here that the judgment of the chief priests is to be
accepted; Annas and Caiphas are high priests among the people, and judge
and conclude that Christ is to be killed; therefore you should accept
such a judgment of the chief priests, then you are already deceived.
Therefore the Holy Spirit has taught this against it, that Annas and
Caiphas were high priests at that time, and yet Christ is condemned to
death by their judgment, so that no man may be trusted, however high and
holy he may be.

Bishops, cardinals and the whole clergy of the pope stand from it: The
Christian church cannot err; therefore the pope cannot err either,
because he is the head of the church. Against this be thou armed, and
say: Pope to, Pope to; if Caiphas can err, so can the Pope. And this he
proves by deed. For the pope denies Christ and kills him, just as those
high priests denied Christ and delivered him up to death. It should not
be so

that the chief priests Annas and Caiphas crucified Christ, but it should
read: Barrabas crucified Christ. But the evangelist says: Christ was led
bound, first to Annas, then to Caiphas, who was the high priest of that
year, so that he might show this strange and wonderful thing, that the
highest and holiest on earth are often God\'s worst enemies. Therefore,
no man should be trusted, even if he is already in high office and great
glory.

**V.14. It was Caiphas who advised the Jews that it was good for a man
to be put to death for the people.**

St. John cannot forget the advice of Caiphas; no evangelist has
indicated this, except John alone. Caiphas gave this advice for the very
first time. For when the chief priests and Pharisees went together and
held a council, saying, \"What do we do? This man does many signs. Let
us therefore leave him, and they shall all believe on him. So the Romans
will come and take our land and our people. Then Caiaphas stepped
forward and, seeing that his place had been made with such words, said,
\"You know nothing and think nothing; you always say that a riot will
happen and that there will be great danger, and yet your concern is
nothing. \"It is better that one man should die for the people, than
that the whole nation should perish\" \[John 11:47 ff\]. Is this not one
of his counsels? He could not have made it more evil and poisonous. If a
riot should come out of it, he says, or if something evil should happen
to us, it is better that a man die 2c. A clever, cunning plot it is.

80\] And this attack so annoyed St. John that he could not forget it,
but again incited him, and made the advice so useful to him that he also
gave it a spiritual interpretation, and said: the Holy Spirit had spoken
through Caiphas, as God had spoken before through Balaam\'s ass \[Deut.
22. 28.\]. Caiphas did not mean it, but St. John takes it from his mouth
and interprets it from his way. Just as if someone said, \"This one is
pretending,

882 Erl. so, sos-sos. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
8S7-SS0. 883

that the bread and wine of the Lord\'s supper are evil, hath spoken of
the spirit: for the fakers boast of the spirit, and say that it is of
the spirit, when they say that the Lord\'s supper is evil bread and
wine: and I affirm this, saying, Verily it is spoken of the spirit, but
not of a good spirit, but of the evil spirit. Such would be fine and
rightly spoken. But it all depends on a right interpreter and
interpreter. Caipha\'s advice is a poisonous, evil advice, but St. John
gives it a good interpretation and interpretation, and says: The advice
came from God from heaven. And with this counsel he puts all the
blame 1) on Caiphas; as if he should say: If Caiphas had not given this
counsel, Christ would not have been killed yet. With this word, that
Caiphas says: It would be good for a man to be put to death 2c., he has
begun to crucify Christ and to become his slayer.

The pope is doing the same now. Shall we suffer the danger, they say,
that our chair will be weakened and our sanctity will fall? That need
not be; it is better that the gospel should lie in the mire, than that
our majesty and honor should fall to the ground. The chief priests had
also devised such a counsel, that they might keep their land. But they
failed in their prudent plot, and the contradiction happened to them.
For when a wicked man makes a plot for his own good, he must succeed to
his own evil \[Proverbs 10:11, 11:5\]. The chief priests of the Jews
could not have done more harm, nor could they have lost their land and
their people, but by this very counsel. This is what happens to all the
wicked: by trying to get through, they get in. So it will also happen to
our bishops and princes; so that the pope now sprays and strangles the
people, that is how he will perish.

82\] This is a common doctrine: The counsel of the wicked shall fall
upon his head, his own devices shall slay him; as also the 37th Psalm,
vv. 14, 15, says: \"The wicked draw out the sword, and draw their bow,
that they may cut down the wretched and the poor,

1\) Erlanger: Sin.

and slay the pious. But their sword shall go into their heart, and their
bow shall break.\" Now they draw out the sword and want to kill the
Christians, but their sword and attacks will go out over their heads.
When the Jews had killed Christ and thought they were safe from the
Romans because of him, just after thirty years the Romans came and took
away their kingdom, priesthood, land and people, and everything they
had. What a piece of advice that was, that all the world laughs and
mocks at the Jews today. This is the reward of human and worldly wisdom,
which strives against God\'s counsel. If one does not want to believe
it, then one tries and experiences it. Our nobles want to try it badly
and not believe, therefore it will also happen to them that they will
all perish, and the gospel will remain.

The most important thing in this place is that you learn not to look at
emperor or pope, but the first commandment, and trust in God alone. For
all that is in the world may be lacking; only God and His word are not
lacking. If Annas and Caiphas can be missing, much more can a pope be
missing.

**V. 15-18. Simon Peter followed Jesus, and another disciple. The same
disciple was known to the high priest, and went with JEsu into the high
priest\'s palace. Peter stood outside the door. Then the other disciple,
who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper,
and led Peter in. Then said the maid, the doorkeeper, unto Peter, Art
not thou also this man\'s disciple? He said: I am not. And the servants
and the attendants stood, having made a fire of cabbage, because it was
cold; and they warmed themselves. And Peter stood with them, warming
himself.**

\(84\) The history of this text we will leave to the scholars, whether
Peter did his three denials in the house of the high priest Annas, or
whether he did them in the house of the high priest Caiphä. For here the
text says that Jesus was first led to Annas, and then it follows that
Peter denied the Lord for the first time.

[884 **Erl. so, sos-S10. Sermon on John 18:15-18. W. VIII, 880-883.**
885]{.underline}

in the text that Annas sent Jesus bound to Caiphas the high priest. From
this it seems that Peter denied Christ once in the house of Hannah; then
that he denied Him twice in the house of Caiphas. The other evangelists
all agree that all three denials happened in Caipha\'s house. But John
alone makes a confusion here, that he says: Jesus was first led to
Annas; soon after Peter denied the Lord once; after that Annas sent
JEsum bound to Caiphas. A useless spirit should scold the evangelists
about this. But one does not go to heaven or to hell because of this,
although it is considered that all three denials happened in Caiphas\'
house. Nothing else happened in the house of Hanna, except that Jesus
was led there, as to the oldest high priest, to worship him with this
prisoner.

85 It is noticeable in John that he names no high priest except the one
who was the high priest of the year, namely Caipham, as he himself
indicates that he calls no one high priest in his gospel except Caipham
alone. Marcus, it seems, calls them both high priests, Hannam and
Caipham, Marc. 14, 53: \"And they led Jesus to the high priest, where
all the high priests had come together\" 2c. To the high priest,
understand Hanna, as John clearly testifies. And soon after this Marcus
speaks, v. 54: \"Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of
the high priest\", understand Caiphä. It also seems from Mark that there
were four high priests at that time, but that the office was bypassed,
and that one came to the other. John, however, calls only the high
priest who was the high priest of the year.

86 And if one pays attention to this, it is clear from this text that
Peter denied the Lord in Caipha\'s house. For when John the Evangelist
says, \"Simon Peter followed Jesus, and another disciple; the same
disciple was known to the high priest,\" you must understand Caipham the
high priest. Likewise, when he says, \"The disciple went with JEsu into
the palace of the high priest,\" you must understand also that

Peter and the disciple did not go into Hanna\'s palace, but into the
high priest Caipha\'s palace with Jesus. That therefore John by the word
\"high priest\" understands no other than Caipham, who was in office
that year. But that it follows in the text that Jesus was sent bound to
the high priest Caipha, is to be understood that John repeats what he
omitted before. For when he begins to describe the denial of Peter, he
soon breaks off the same piece, and interposes how Jesus is asked in
Caipha\'s house, as before the court, about his teaching and disciples.
But when he comes again to the case of Peter, he repeats it on the one
he should have put before, and says: \"Annas sent JEsum bound to Caiphas
the high priest. We do not want to look sharply for such clever
questions and subtle opiniones and delusions; one should have most
respect in this place for the great, exuberant consolation of sinners.
That is why all the evangelists have most diligently described the fall
of Peter, and clearly indicated all his three denials. Truly, I believe
that in the whole Passion no thing is so diligently described and
depicted as the denial of Peter, which also rhymes best with the
Passion. For no article of faith is more difficult to believe than the
article that says: I believe forgiveness of sins. The reason is that the
other articles are all outside of us, and do not come into experience
with us, nor do they affect us. As that we believe that God, Creator of
heaven and earth, is our Father; item, that Jesus Christ, Son of God,
suffered and died; and so on, as the symbolum or child faith holds: all
this goes to meet another. For each one remembers, that applies to St.
Petro and St. Paulo; who knows if it applies to me? But forgiveness of
sins applies to me and to you.

\(88\) What do I gain from the fact that God created heaven and earth,
if I do not believe in the forgiveness of sins? Yes, that is more, what
do I gain from the fact that Christ died and the Holy Spirit came, if I
do not believe in the forgiveness of sins? Therefore I say, the other
articles meet another, do not come into the experience with us. Shall

[886 Erl. so, SI0-S1S. Interpretations on the evangelist John. W. VIII,
8S3-SS6. 887]{.underline}

but they come into experience with us and meet us, so in this article
they must come into experience with us and meet us, that we all, I for
myself, you for yourself, and each for himself, believe forgiveness of
sin. But the article: I believe forgiveness of sin, meets us and comes
into experience with us, and makes the other articles also meet us and
come into experience with us. Therefore, it is the most difficult
article to believe.

The other articles are more difficult to speak and understand. As that
we should believe that the bread in the Lord\'s Supper is Christ\'s
body, and the cup or wine is Christ\'s blood; item, that the Holy Spirit
is given in holy baptism, this is difficult to understand and
comprehend. But in this article: I believe forgiveness of sins, is the
most difficult, that one should not only speak of it and understand such
an article, but also that each one should be sure of it for himself.
Since this article is more difficult to understand, and man is so
terrified of hell, of God\'s wrath and judgment, this article,
Forgiveness of Sins, must be presented in Petro, so that everyone may
take comfort in it.

The highest and finest apostle, Peter, falls more shamefully than the
other apostles, and yet comes again. If I could copy or paint Peter, I
would write on every little hair on his head: [Forgiveness of
sins]{.underline}; because he is an example of this article of
forgiveness of sins. And so the evangelists paint it; for no part of the
whole Passion is described in so many words as the fall of Peter.
Everything that happened to Christ is described in short words by the
evangelists, and so is the case; but Peter is so disgracefully cut up
that they cannot speak enough of his fall, and especially John the
evangelist, as if to say, \"The fruit and benefit of Christ\'s suffering
is this, that in it you may have forgiveness of sins.

91 Therefore these two come together, the holy man Peter and the
murderer and the avenger. Peter falls down into the abyss of the

Hell. Again, the thief is in the belly of the devil and comes into the
bosom of Christ. Therefore the fruit and power of Christ\'s suffering is
that it may be remembered as the forgiveness of sins, so that everyone
may know that Christ\'s kingdom is nothing else but the forgiveness of
sins. And this consolation is set against the greatest sin of all, which
is called despair. If Peter did not stand with his example and say, \"I
also have sinned,\" we would all have to despair and despair in our
sins.

\(92\) It was necessary for us that such a thing should be prescribed
for us, for we are the thief, and are in hell; and this example is
prescribed for us, that we may not despair, but know that in Christ\'s
kingdom there is forgiveness of sins. So this story serves us, and is
prescribed for our teaching and comfort.

After this, it was also necessary for Peter to be humbled for his own
sake. For Peter was to come to be full of the gifts of the Holy Spirit.
It would have been impossible for him not to become hopeful and
presumptuous and finally descend with the devil into the abyss of hell.
Therefore God lets him fall, so that he remains humble and must take off
his little hat, not only before the Virgin Mary, but also before me and
you. For as great a sinner as he may be, if he looks at Peter, he will
not find such a sin, except hardenedness and presumption, which is a sin
unto death \[1 John 5:16\]. So this example is useful, both to me and to
Peter himself, who otherwise would have been too hopeful.

94 We are told that Peter denied Christ and conspired that he would not
be saved if he knew this man. For God has also acted in this way with
us; He has let us go in our blindness and crucify Christ through the
Pabst\'s mass. If God were to count such our sin, we would have to
despair. Such sin, that we crucified Christ in the priesthood with our
masses, was good and necessary for us preachers, so that we would be
humbled. For it is not a small thing to preach the gospel \[2 Cor.
5:20\]. Therefore, the example of Peter should be well remembered, that
it is both, the sinners

[888 **Erl. so, SIS-SIS.** Sermon On John 18:15-24. **W. VIII,
8S8-87I.** 889]{.underline}

and the saints, is profitable and good; to sinners, that they despair
not; to saints, that they be not presumptuous nor proud.

**V. 19-24 But the high priest asked Jesus about his disciples and his
teaching. JEsus answered him: I have spoken freely before the world. I
have always taught in the synagogue and in the temple, where all the
Jews come together, and have spoken nothing in secret. What do you ask
me about it? Ask those who have heard what I have said to them. Behold,
they know what I have said. And as he spake these things, the servant
gave JEsu a blow on the cheek to one of them that stood by, saying,
Answerest thou the high priest thus? JEsus answered, If I have spoken
evil, prove it to be evil: but if I have spoken right, why smiteest thou
me? And Annas sent him bound unto Caiphas the high priest.**

95\. 86s I have indicated above that I believe that this question, when
the high priest asks Christ about his disciples and teaching, happened
in the house of Caipheh. For John calls him the high priest of the same
year.

96 St. John therefore leaves out what the other evangelists say, how
they blinded and blinded Christ\'s face, and spit upon him, and smote
him with their fists, saying, Tell us, O Christ, who is he that smote
thee? John leaves all this out, and adds one thing that the other
evangelists have not written, namely, that he was asked by the high
priest. This was the question: what disciples did he have, and what
teaching did he give?

This text has been sufficiently dealt with by many, and also by us
elsewhere; but because it comes again, and the time and order demand
that we must speak of it, let us look at it further. This text has two
nodes. First, Christ confesses before the high priest that he did not
speak anything secretly or in a corner, but taught freely in public, in
the synagogue of the Jews and also in the temple, and thus directs the
high priest to the audience. There the question arises: How

Christ did not teach anything secretly, because he himself says Matth.
10, 27: \"What I tell you in darkness, speak in light, and what you hear
in the ear, preach on the housetops\"? And Marc. 10, 10. says that
Christ told his disciples many things at home, which they then preached
to the people; but here the opposite seems to be the case.

This knot is thus resolved, that in this place Christ answers the
question of the high priest. The high priest does not ask what Christ
taught secretly, but asks about his teaching, which in truth was a
public sermon. But the fact that Christ sometimes taught the disciples
something secretly does not concern the teaching office and public
preaching; the teaching office is public, because he preached and taught
publicly in the ship, in the country, on the mountains, in the schools
and in the temple. In addition, he also taught his disciples secretly
and specially. So both are true, that Christ taught both publicly and
secretly, but in such a way that the secret teaching also became public,
and nothing remained in the corner, nor in secret. But because the high
priest asks about the teaching in general, and does not ask in
particular whether the teaching was done secretly or publicly, Christ
also answers about the teaching in general, and says: \"There is nothing
in my teaching of which I am ashamed, neither before you nor before the
whole world: for your majesty\'s sake I am not ashamed of my teaching,
but I appeal to the hearers \[Rom. 1:16\].

99 The other knot is that Christ answers the servant, \"If I have spoken
evil, prove it. For Christ\'s pointing the high priest to the audience
is a little proud, and upsets the priest and the priest\'s servant;
therefore the servant gives Christ a blow in the cheek, but Christ
refutes it, saying, \"If I have spoken evil, prove it; but if I have
spoken right, why dost thou smite me?\" This text has been used as a
basis for making counsels out of the commandments of God. Christ speaks
thus, Matth. 5, 39. ff.: \"If someone gives you a blow on the right
cheek, offer him the other also; and if someone wants to be right with
you and take your skirt, let him have the coat also; and if someone
wants to take your skirt, let him have the coat also.

890 Erl. so, SIS-S1S. Interpretations About the Evangelist John. W.
VIII, 871-871. 891

If anyone requires you to go one mile, go with him two. These are vain
commandments. The gospel also commands us to resist no evil, not to take
revenge, not to repay evil with evil \[Rom. 12:17\], to do good even to
the adversary, to depart from our right, and to let all things go.

\(100\) But the holy pokers, 1) the monks in the monasteries, and the
learned doctors in the universities and high schools, have interpreted
it thus, saying: it is not a commandment, but a counsel and good
opinion; he who has a desire for it may keep it, he who has no desire
for it may leave it; it is a good, faithful counsel, and not a necessary
commandment. Through such glosses and false interpretation, worldly rule
has become vain in Christendom, and the gospel has perished. But in
order to confirm their gloss and interpretation, they misused this text
and said: Christ himself did not give the other cheek, but punished the
servant who hit him; therefore it is not a commandment that Christ says
Matth. 5, 39, otherwise he would have given the other cheek as well and
done himself what he taught. So they make do with this text, and get off
lightly, and thereby take away the whole of Christianity and divine
life.

\(101\) But this is not well interpreted, but is inordinately
misinterpreted. How could Christ give counsel and contradict it with his
own works? Christ must be left in a high and perfect state. He counseled
virginity \[Matth. 19, 12\], and he truly kept it. So he let go of his
robe and cloak, and proved it himself by deed. But this is the way to
honor my Lord Christ, that one should reproach him in his Christianity,
as if he had spoken something and not done it himself. Verily this shall
not be done; but thus shall it be said, If he hath counseled and
commanded, he must not have done contrary. Therefore, everything that
the monks in the monasteries and the scholars in their high schools have
taught about this matter is false and wrong.

1\) Schllrlinge - shorn, plate carriers.

But ye hear that we teach that there are two kingdoms, the temporal
kingdom and the spiritual kingdom. The temporal kingdom is over the
scoundrels and the wicked: the spiritual kingdom is over the Christians
and the children of God. The emperor is a rascal, for he has in his
kingdom and house vain wretches and knaves. Again, Christ is a king of
the pious, who has in his kingdom all Christians \[Acts 13:39\]. For
though wicked men are included in the outward fellowship of Christians,
yet the wicked and hypocrites have nothing of Christ\'s kingdom but the
mere name, and are not true, living members of Christ\'s kingdom, but
belong under Caesar. For Christ will have none in his kingdom, except he
be godly of his own free will. Ps. 110:3: For he hath nothing but the
word to govern men, neither wheel nor sword; but the temporal
authorities have vain peelers among them, for they do no good, but are
compelled with blows. And if it were not for this, no one could be safe
in his own house; the children would be called custos virgam. And it
belongs to this temporal power not to suffer evil but to punish it, for
it has under it the wicked and the disobedient. If anyone does evil
worthy of the sword, the executioner shall be there to cut off his head.

\(103\) Therefore, when Christ says Matt. 5:39.If anyone strikes you on
your right cheek, offer him the other also,\" he means to say: My
teaching does not concern Caesar, but those who want to be godly and
called children of God, to them I give this teaching: \"If anyone
strikes you from the right cheek, offer him the other also; and if
anyone takes your skirt, let him have your coat also; and if anyone
urges you a mile, go with him two.\" This means in German, to overcome
evil with good. And this is not advice, but a necessary commandment; and
Christians must do this if they want to be Christians otherwise. Those
who are true Christians suffer this gladly, and say: \"If it cannot be
otherwise, you beat me, take away my skirt; always take away, I will not
avenge myself, but command God to take revenge.

104 Therefore, this is a commandment, and not

892 Erl. so, S18-SS0. Sermon on Joh. 18, 19-24. W. VIII,-M-87S. 893

a good counsel. It may be good counsel for Caesar and for the world, but
in the government called Christ\'s kingdom it is a pure commandment. And
the Lord is not blamed here, as if he himself had not done what he had
advised; for he has kept such a commandment well. Yes, they say, where
has he done it? He does not hand over the other cheek, but says, \"Why
do you strike me?\" Answer: You must read the text more carefully.
Christ does not say, \"I will not offer the other cheek. For since he
holds out the whole body, it is easy to think that he does not refuse to
hold out the cheek. Not only has he been struck on the cheek, but his
whole body has been smashed. Therefore you should say, \"Christ turned
the other cheek when he was beaten all night, and was finally crucified.

105\) But when he saith unto the servant, If I have spoken evil, prove
it: so understand thou that there is a great difference between these
two things, to turn the other cheek, and to punish with words him that
smiteth us. Christ is to suffer, but nevertheless the word is put in his
mouth to speak and to punish what is wrong. If anyone gives me a blow in
court, I must confess the truth. And even if I receive ten blows, I
should not depart from the truth. So that I give an example: If a
murderer stripped me in the woods and took my skirt, saying to me, \"I
am doing you justice because the skirt is mine,\" I should not say
\"yes\" to that, nor approve of such wrong, or I would take his guilt
upon myself and become a murderer above my own right.

\(106\) Therefore I shall separate the mouth and the hand. I shall not
give the mouth to condone injustice, but the hand shall be silent and
not avenge itself. This is what this text wants. If the world condemns
our doctrine and takes our life over it, what shall we do in such
matters? We should do what Christ does here. We should not only let
ourselves be beaten on the cheeks, but also let ourselves be burned for
the sake of the truth. That I

but at that time he should say to the judge: Dear judge, you do right
and well to burn me; that would be to betray Christ, and to deny all
that for which I die. But I am to say, Judge, you do me wrong. So does
Christ also against the high priest\'s servant. The wicked man seeks to
please his master, and he strikes Christ, seeking thereby that Christ
may speak: I have done wrong in answering the high priest thus; you high
priests are in the right; you are right, I am wrong. No, not so; but
Christ says, \"Why do you strike me?\" and confidently drives the wrong
away from himself onto the servant, and is therefore ready to wait for
the other stroke also.

\(107\) And if you look at the text of Matthew, you will find that
Christ does not say that you should call or warn the one who strikes you
on the cheek to strike you on the other cheek as well. They would have
liked to interpret it that way, but Christ does not speak that way. For
why should I do wrong to a peeler and a knave? Why should I say to the
thief, \"Come and steal my skirt\"? This is not what Christ means, but
Christ says, \"If anyone gives you a blow on your right cheek, offer him
the other also.\" This is what is said: If someone wants to hit you, do
not fight back, do not avenge yourself, do not pay evil with evil.
Neither saith Christ, If any man trouble thee one mile, trouble him to
trouble thee two miles: but saith Christ, If any man trouble thee one
mile, go with him two miles.

Furthermore, they have also perverted St. Augustine\'s beautiful gloss
and interpretation and said: One should offer the other cheeks, and let
the coat go after the skirt, only secundum praeparationem animi, that
is, one should be ready for it in the heart, but it is not necessary to
yield such outwardly with the deed; have said to this, one may resist
the evil with all honor, and strike back, it hits whoever it wants, even
if it hits the emperor himself. This is also wrong. For Christ commands
that one should also offer the other cheek, that is, that one should be
ready and willing for the other blow, that one should be ready and
willing for the other blow, that one should be ready and willing for the
other blow, that one should be ready and willing for the other blow.

89\. 4 Eri. so, \[so-sss. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W.
VIII, 876-879. 895

not avenge, nor pay evil with evil, but suffer; as Christ does. He
suffers as he taught and commanded, does not avenge himself, does not
repay evil with evil 2c. But above all this, though you suffer evil, and
do not avenge yourself, and pray for your enemy, you are also guilty of
confessing what is right, and of punishing what is wrong. For thou shalt
not approve the sin of thine adversary, but shalt warn and punish him.
This is a great mercy done in the midst of evil, namely, to denounce the
enemy\'s sin. Thus thou shalt save thy conscience: and yet there is no
revenge, but a pure good deed.

So this text in John is not against the sayings of Matth. 5, 39, but
rather this example of Christ confirms the previous teaching, as he puts
Matth. 5, 39. But Christ\'s chastisement of the servant blinded the pope
with his own. Now Christ does not punish with the fist, but with the
mouth and the word, and drives the servant\'s conscience. So I should
also do: If I am wronged, I should not approve of the wrong, but say to
my offender: You are wronged. If I do this, it is good, and I have done
wrong. No one believes what harm this text has done in Christianity
because of the false glosses. For if this text had not done so, monks
and priests would not have sat so securely. But by this they have
delivered themselves, that they have sat more securely than all the
kings of the earth, in that they have said: Christ himself did not keep
what he had counseled. Then they have made of the commandment an
arbitrary counsel. Summa, the devil and death came out of this saying
because of the wrong interpretation. Therefore it will be reversed in
time to come, and the contradiction will be dealt with them according to
their own law and according to their own doctrine.

110 Let us conclude this text with this, and pay attention to the
teaching and examples that Christ gives us in it. I have said that the
words which Christ gives to the high priest in answer are even, as
hopeful and proud; and yet it is impossible that Christ should be
accused of some hopefulness. For St. Peter

1 Ep. 2, 22. says: \"Christ has not committed any sin, nor is any deceit
found in his mouth. He says, \"I have spoken nothing in the corner, why
askest thou me therefore? Ask those about it who have heard what I have
said to them.\" Does this not sound as if he were saying, \"I am not
looking at you to give you an answer? Then he says to the servant, \"If
I have spoken evil, prove that it is wrong; but if I have spoken right,
why do you strike me?\" This also reads almost proudly and haughtily.
But, as I have said, this person cannot and should not be accused of
pride nor of some sin; therefore there is neither pride nor haughtiness
in these words, but a fine and constant earnestness, prescribed for us
as an example and comfort, that we may be constant and serious in the
same case.

The proud priest, Squire Caiphas, is puffed up and does not know how to
stand before great arrogance against Christ. He knows very well what
Christ has taught; yet he asks as if he knew nothing about it, and as if
he had heard nothing of Christ\'s teaching and preaching all his life,
for the sole reason that he is waiting for the Lord, whether he might
catch him in his answer. For just as our adversaries lie in wait for us,
seeking to get some secret letter from us written to a good friend, 1)
and then hold it against us to frighten us, so the chief priests lay in
wait for the Lord. And the latter will cool his temper with him, and
affright him, saying, What hast thou taught? What disciples have you?
And he thinks that the Lord Christ will melt with fear because of these
words, humble himself, and give good, sweet words, and thus say: \"If I
have not done well with my teachings, I will correct them; if I have
punished too harshly (as he shortly before cried woe over the chief
priests, scribes and Pharisees \[Matth. 23, 13. ff.\]), I will revoke
them. Since Christ now realizes that the

1\) Compare Luther\'s writing \"von heimlichen und gestohlenen
Briefen\", Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XIX, 518, which came out New
Year\'s Day 1529. This passage proves that this sermon belongs to the
year 1529, so perhaps our entire interpretation is to be placed in the
year 1529.

896 **Eri. so, SSS-S2\". Sermon On John 18:19-27. W. VHI, 879-882.** 897

High priest holds up his doctrine to him so pointedly, and mocks him
with his disciples, he answers with earnestness and constancy; as if to
say, Not yet melted, nor feared to death, dear Caipha! thou makest it
almost pointed and terrible; but I cannot so soon be frightened nor
melted at thy pointed words, but my doctrine hath me no secret.

\(112\) So we should also answer with defiant courage, and be glad, not
only against our chief priests and Caiphas, but also against the devil
himself, saying: \"Dear devil, we see your defiance, but we are not yet
afraid of your defiance; my teaching has no secret for me. So Christ
says to Caipha, \"Ask them therefore that have heard what I have said
unto them.\" In German it is said as much as if one spoke with a steady,
cheerful earnestness, \"My doctrine has no secret nor shyness in me;
what I have spoken, that I testify. So one defiance goes against
another. Satan defies through the high priest Caiphas; Christ also
defies, and says: \"As for my person, I will gladly suffer, I am bound;
but as for my doctrine, I am undaunted and glad to testify to it before
all the world. So this is an example, that we should be bold, and
confidently hold to the doctrine, that a Christian says: Let the
executioner be my master, as he will, nevertheless my doctrine is right;
as St. Paul says 2 Tim. 2, 9: \"Above my gospel I suffer myself to the
bonds, as an evildoer; but God\'s word is not bound.\"

\(113\) Therefore, as Christ answered the high priest steadily and
joyfully, so he also answered the servant with a right steadfast
earnestness, \"If I have spoken evil, prove it.\" This is what a man
should say when he stands before a tyrant. And this grieves the devil,
and stings him greatly. For all his striving is to weaken the teaching.
It is not enough for him to make our fingers bleed, but he also tries to
make us despondent, and to make one of us speak more stupidly, and to
consider how he should speak, so that he does not anger the nobles. But
the more pointed the devil is against the doctrine, the firmer we should
stand, and the firmer we should be.

to hold more steadfastly over the doctrine. And this answer of Christ
the Lord hurt the chief priests as if he had won them half a hell.
Therefore the servant of the high priest also strikes him, as such an
answer also hurts him. The devil would have liked Christ to answer: \"If
only I had not punished you, the chief priests and scribes, so severely!
What have I done? I want to change it. He would have liked to hear that.
But Christ cannot and will not humble himself before the devil \[2 Cor.
6:15\].

Truly Christ is weak here, and an unequal Christ to the Christ who a
short time before raised the dead, healed the sick, and taught
powerfully before all the people. But behold, what a defiant answer he
gives in such his weakness, since he holds to the teaching with all
seriousness and excellent consistency. So shall we also do. For if the
doctrine is confessed by us with earnestness and constancy, we cannot
hurt our adversaries. For that is what they like to hear from us: Oh, I
have done too much to him. But not so, yes, not by a hair\'s breadth
slackened npch stepped back, thou feiest even as weakly as thou always
wouldest. For Christ here gives us all an example, when in his weakness
before the high priest he answered his teaching with all earnestness and
cheerful constancy, that we should hold fast to the word which we have
once received and taught, however weak and infirm we may be. But such
fine, comforting teaching has lain under the pew in the Pabstry, and
this text and beautiful examples of our dear Lord JEsu Christ, with
great noticeable harm to all Christendom, must serve as if a Christian
man were not guilty of suffering violence and injustice.

**V. 25, 26, 27: And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. Then said
they unto him, Art not thou one of his disciples? He denied and said: I
am not. One of the servants of the high priest, a friend of the one
whose ear Peter had cut off, said, Did I not see you in the garden with
him? Then Peter denied again, and straightway the cock crowed.**

Of these three denials of Peter we have heard above 84 ff.\] heard. The
others

[898 Eri. so, SSS-S27. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
882-88S. 899]{.underline}

Evangelists thus describe it as having happened in the house of Caiphas;
but John describes it as if the first denial had happened in the house
of Annas, as his words read: \"Annas sent JEsum bound to Caiphas the
high priest.\" This text reads the same as if the first denial had
happened in the house of Annas. To unite such things I command the
perceptive, as I have also said above \[§ 84\]. It may well be that John
did not keep the order of speech so precisely and evenly; but no more of
this now.

**V. 28. Then they brought JEsum before the judgment house. And it was
early, and they went not into the judgment house, lest they should be
defiled, but should eat at Easter.**

\(116\) In this text there are two parts, the first concerning the Jews,
the other the Gentiles, and this is the sum of them: The wicked, who
persecute the word of the gospel, must make it so gross, that both they
themselves feel it, and also the other wicked understand that it is
unjust. For Christ did not want to die so secretly, but so that all
creatures would have to say that he was wronged; so that the persecutors
of his gospel would not be able to keep up a pretense, nor would they be
able to stand, but that they would all have to say that they had done
wrong. And this is right.

117 John says about the first part concerning the Jews: \"The Jews have
made themselves so holy that they did not want to go into Pilate\'s
house, so that they would not become unclean, but would eat the good
Easter food. For if they had gone into the house of a Gentile, and
especially into the judgment house, they would have become unclean.
There they make them narrow consciences, and consider it great
unholiness; but that they crucify the Son of God, that is no sin with
them, but pure holiness. The Jews have been portrayed in a very fine
way.

\(118\) So does 1) a false hypocrite, who shall pretend a little bit of
holiness, and after that tear through all the commandments of God, and
ask for none. So does the Pharisee \[Luc. 18, 12\] and says: \"I fast.

1\) Erlanger: shall do.

twenty a week, and give tithes of all that I have; I am not like other
people.\" He was a very pious servant, was pure, and yet in such purity
he committed the great sin that no sinner ever commits, namely, that he
misses himself and despises other people. Of such hypocrites Christ
himself says Matth. 23, 23: \"Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, you
hypocrites, who pay scorn to the mint, dill and caraway, and leave
behind the heaviest things in the law, namely judgment, mercy and
faith.\" These were also such excellent, holy people, who were able to
tithe, made them narrow consciences in small pieces; but the great
pieces in the law they passed over without all conscience. Of them the
Lord gives this likeness, saying, v. 24: \"You blinded leaders, who are
gnats and swallow camels. There are fine, pure seers, who have a narrow
sieve in their church, where they sieve themselves so pure that no
little sticks pass through; but that a whole camel is swallowed, they do
not respect. Moses writes of a beast called the ostrich \[Deut. 11, 16.
Deut. 14, 15.\] that when it gets under a branch, it barely covers its
head and knows no other way than to cover its whole body. So are these
hypocrites, the desperate betrayers and evil-doers.

\(119\) Our bishops, princes, and the whole clergy of the pope are well
able to do this art out of measure; they practice the greatest folly and
mischievousness, and then they present themselves and adorn themselves
like ostriches, tithe the money, and are then praiseworthy princes and
bishops. It is true that all men are guilty of adorning themselves with
a small piece, and yet they are great husks within, but the hypocrites
can do this art before others. Then it must not be said to the dear
nobles that they are full of all the evil that can be sought and
conceived; they are much too pure for this that it must not be said to
them, they are much too high seated with their holiness.

120 Now this is what St. John says: \"The Jews did not go into the
judgment house, lest they should become unclean.\" So it should be that
false jacks are in both regiments,

900 Eri. so, SS7-SS\". Sermon on John 18:28. W. viii, 88S-W7. 901

both spiritual and secular. In the secular regiment it is thus that the
greatest boys are the most distinguished people; and again, the most
distinguished people are the greatest boys and peelers. In the spiritual
regime, too, the worst preachers are the best; and again, those who are
supposed to be the best are the worst. And yet they are all pure and
holy. But if you look at it in the light, it is nothing else but such
holiness, not wanting to go into the judgment house, as these Jews do;
they are in murder and manslaughter, and shed innocent blood, and yet do
not want to become unclean, not wanting to go into the judgment house.
Let me and you take care that we do not become like such saints.

121 It is not without reason nor forgiveness that Christ says of such
saints in the Gospel Matt. 21:31, 32: \"Truly I say to you, the tax
collectors and harlots will enter the kingdom of heaven before you. John
came to you and turned you to the right way, and you did not believe
him, but the publicans and harlots believed him. And though ye saw it,
yet repented ye not, that afterward ye believed him also.\" For such
holy people are great scoundrels, from whom the devil cannot beware.
This is said to us for comfort, that when we have to have such fretful
saints beside and around us, we do not become impatient, but are of good
cheer, and know that neither John the Baptist, nor Christ Himself, have
been overtaken by such perverse saints.

This then is the opinion of it: False saints shall have the appearance
that they are holy before the world, and yet are knaves in skin. Beware
of those who pretend to be pious and holy, and yet are the greatest
scoundrels. These desperate wretches want to cover and adorn their
wickedness; but the Holy Spirit exposes them here and makes them
manifest to us. The wicked come here before the judgment house, and
bring JEphum there also, and yet have no cause of death against him, as
Pilate reproaches them three times; yet they will be holy, and not go
into the judgment house, lest they be defiled.

123\. this is written to the shame of our

High priests and elders, bishops and princes, who make a nose at the
world as if they were holy and faithful, and yet drive the devout and
God-fearing Christians and preachers out of their country. Who, in the
name of the devil, has given them power to judge the doctrine of the
gospel? They do not ask anything about the Gospel, but only look for
causes to catch and rob people, and still want to be great saints. Woe
to them!

Up to now, I have interpreted this piece by those who make it crude, so
that people notice and grasp it, as Pilate understands and notices this
holiness of the Jews. Now we want to come to a more subtle piece; when
the devil begins to practice this piece with us, it is a swift,
poisonous challenge. If he finds a poor conscience that would like to be
pious, he challenges it with this piece. As, among us evangelicals,
there is no one who does not have great, strong sins and infirmities,
as, doubting and faltering in faith, and other great knots. But such
great sins and great knots the devil shall let stand, and with a small
piece put upon us, that one hath spoken any word, or laughed at any
thing, and make a great thing of it, and plague and bruise the
conscience.

\(125\) This is the purpose of this text, not only to frighten our
adversaries and enemies, but also to comfort us when we are stupid and
distressed, saying, \"If our Lord God can be patient with me, because I
do not firmly believe in him, but often falter and doubt, why do you
afflict me, you devil, with other minor sins and trespasses? I know your
art and wickedness well; you do this because of it, the great sins and
gross knots you cover up, so that I do not respect them, make no
conscience of them, nor desire forgiveness for them, and in the meantime
worry myself with other small and easy things, coward gnats, and devour
camellias.

126\] And this is also the devil\'s way and right color, that one should
know him sEph. 6, 11\...\] He is such a villain that he can make great
sin small, so that it should not be seen, and again, make small sin
great, so that one bites himself with it, breaks-

[902 Erl. so, \[ss-ssi. Interpretations about the evangelist John. W.
vm, \"sv-Mo. 903]{.underline}

torture and kill himself. Therefore a Christian should learn not to let
an evil conscience be easily made for him; but if he believes in Christ,
and would gladly be pious, contends against sin as much as he can, yet
he sometimes stumbles and stumbles: Let not such stumbling spoil his
good conscience, but say, Let this error and stumbling pass away with
other my infirmities and sins, which I must bring into the article of
faith, I believe forgiveness of sins, and the fifth petition of the
Lord\'s Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses.

This is how this text should serve us: First, against the traitors and
evil-doers who adorn themselves with false holiness, to frighten them.
Secondly, to comfort the weak consciences, so that we may learn to take
the middle road and say, \"I am a poor sinner, I know of no holiness nor
comfort; my holiness and comfort is Christ alone. But the ungodly and
false saints shall walk in such holiness as is not worth a damn; under
it they shall shine, and yet be full of great and abominable sins, which
they neither see nor know. Just as the pope\'s holy servants consider
great holiness, that they wear chasubles and choir robes; but besides
this they condemn God\'s word, and kill the martyrs. Mark me these
fellows, they are called by their name, \"They went not into the
judgment house, lest they should be defiled.\" Such saints were also the
high priests and Jews, the desperate traitors and evil-doers, who wanted
to do a little justice, so that their great sin should not be seen or
noticed.

**V.29. Then Pilate approached them and said, \"Why are you complaining
about this man?**

In order that the Jews and persecutors of Christ may not only be
convinced in their conscience, but also that other people may understand
such wickedness, Pilate the Gentile must also convince them. The
judgment must not pass sooner upon a Christian, unless the culprits who
persecute Christians know beforehand in themselves that they do wrong to
Christians; yea, that even the rude and unintelligent may understand
such wickedness.

They understand this and say, \"You are unjustly condemned. Pilate is a
pagan, and had the neck judgment, stands there as a worldly judge, who
has the sword of God; around him it stinks and clicks, 1) to reckon
against the spiritual ruler, as there were high priests and Pharisees,
because he is a pagan, in addition he deals with blood and neck
judgments; but this pagan, as a wise judge, must excuse Christ here. Is
it not a sin and a disgrace that such a heathen, who knows nothing of
God, and who stinks of worldly matters and blood judgments, should
surpass the Jews who sit in spiritual government? The Jews have God\'s
word and the prophets, that they may conclude rightly without the
knowledge of the Gentiles; yet they lack rightness, and wilfully do not
understand as much as Pilate. And not only that, but also the Gentile,
who is far inferior to the Jews, must condemn them, the Jews.

This is what is happening today to the enemies and persecutors of the
gospel. The pope with his godless bishops and prelates see well that he
is doing wrong; nevertheless they go through with their heads. Well, if
they do not want to do right in God\'s name, they will one day have to
suffer evil for it in the name of all the devils; they also defy as much
as they want, but it will still not help them. Our comfort is this:
Christ and the gospel will be revealed to the world in such a way that
all will have to grasp that we are being wronged. I did not want to take
the defiance for ten Turkish emperors. How could the Holy Spirit make us
more confident and bold, but to be comforted by our adversaries acting
against their own conscience? Therefore our doctrine remains that their
own conscience bears witness to us, just as Pilate bears witness here,
and must justify Christ, to the shame of all Jews and false saints, who,
if they had a drop of blood in their bodies, should bow down their heads
and be ashamed, even if they hear the name Pilate mentioned. Such
Pilates are many in our time, who publicly confess and say that there is
no lack of our doctrine, without the bishops and princes not wanting
such doctrine. But

1\) click - to blot, smear, be unclean.

904 Eri.so,ssi-s\[4. sermon on John 18:29-32. W. vin, Mv-Ws. 905

Bishops or no bishops; truly, one must respect God more than all
bishops, emperors and princes. Apost. 5, 29.

\(130\) Now we see from this text, first of all, how the false saints
become ashamed, who respect small things and let great things go; as
happened in the papacy. If a priest did not keep his seven times 1)
right, that was a great sin that could hardly be forgiven; but if he
took away a husband\'s wife, that was a small and quite futile sin. This
is a false, perverse holiness. It is vexatious, but it is written to
comfort us and to terrify them. Secondly, that even Pilate, the pagan
and judge of blood, bears witness to Christ, excusing him and confessing
that he was wronged.

**V. 30 They answered and said unto him, If this man were not an
evildoer, we would not have delivered him unto thee.**

\(131\) This long conversation and lengthy deal, which took place before
Pilate the governor, is described by the evangelists so that the Lord\'s
innocence and confession, which he made before Pilate the judge, might
be made known, and the guilt of the Jews, who act against their own
conscience and so rudely that stone and wood might cry out against them,
might be made known to us as an example, so that we might also judge our
affairs in such a way that our innocence, and the guilt and injustice of
our adversaries, might be revealed.

When the Jews heard that Pilate asked them what accusation they were
making against Jesus, their consciences were troubled, for they did not
like to make their accusation public, because they were not allowed to
do so in the square. So do our adversaries who oppose the truth and
write and cry out against us. If they were to answer us rightly, and the
matter were to be heard rightly and in a Christian way, our innocence
would come to light, and on the other hand their great wickedness, how
unfairly they deal with us. They defend us with all diligence, so that
no free Christian concilium will take place, and the cause of the gospel
will not be heard.

133 So here. The Jews probably feel that

1\) d. i. the nors8 osiioiiioss.

they cannot stand with their complaint, so they request and demand that
Jesus be secretly sentenced to death before he is interrogated. But
Pilate does not want it. They say, \"If this man were not an evildoer,
we would not have delivered him to you. As if to say, \"Look at us and
see what kind of people we are. Do you think that we holy fathers, chief
priests, scribes want to accuse or condemn one unjustly? But Pilate is
not at all satisfied with such words, but speaks, as follows:

**V. 31. So receive him and judge him according to your law.**

\(134\) This is spoken in Roman, as if to say, If ye will be judges, be
ye also executioners over him; receive him, because ye know the
complaint and the cause of death, and have your law to teach you how ye
ought to proceed in such matters; but I, because I should not know the
complaint and the cause of death, cannot judge any man without
interrogation.

**Then the Jews said to him, \"We must not kill anyone.**

\(135\) This is well known, as if they should say, If we could kill any
man, we would not tarry so long, neither would we trouble thee about it.
The Romans now had the neck court in their possession; if the Romans had
not taken the neck court away from the Jews, they would soon have killed
Jesus, as they themselves confess here. So these murderers are
convinced, both inwardly in their own conscience, and outwardly before
all reason, that they are evildoers and murderers. This is how honestly
this people acts: they cannot do anything with the truth, but only rebel
against it; nevertheless they are poisonous and evil, and cannot stop
until they have put the innocent to death.

**V.32. That the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke when
he foretold the death he would die.**

John puts another reason why the Jews and Pilate confer with each other,
namely, \"that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he said to
signify what death he would die. This word, of which the Evan-

906 He,, so, \[st-sss. Interpretations about the evangelist John. W.
vin,M. 907

The message of Jesus to His disciples is Luc. 18, 32. 33.: \"The Son of
Man will be delivered to the Gentiles, and He will be mocked and reviled
and spit upon, and they will scourge Him and put Him to death\"; and
Matth. 20, 18.\"Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall
be delivered unto the chief priests and unto the scribes, and they shall
condemn him to death, and shall deliver him up to the Gentiles to be
mocked, and to be scourged, and to be crucified: and the third day he
shall rise again.\"

137 The Lord Himself indicates that He will die this death, that the
Jews will condemn Him to death, but the Gentiles will execute and carry
out the sentence and judgment of condemnation. The Jews make the first
attack, seize Jesus, and deliver him to death: the Gentiles mock him,
revile him, spit upon him, scourge him, and kill him. For the Gentiles
were to be the servants of the Jews, that the Gentiles should not boast
against the Jews, that the Jews had killed their Messiah, but that both
Jews and Gentiles were guilty of the death of the Lord Jesus, according
to the common saying, If one is good, they are all good. Therefore the
Jews also had to lose the judgment of blood and come under the authority
of the Romans, and the Gentiles had to crucify the Son of God, so that
no one could boast or speak: This glory, that we are God\'s children and
are saved, comes from our own merit or work, but that both Jews and
Gentiles praise God\'s grace and mercy.

**V. 33. Then Pilate went again into the judgment house, 2c. called
JEsu, and said unto him, Art thou the King of the Jews?**

This is the accusation. St. John does not indicate how the Jews accused
Jesus before Pilate, without it being possible to understand from
Pilate\'s words what the accusation was. But St. Lucas shows it in Cap.
23, 1. ff. and says: \"The whole multitude arose, and brought him before
Pilate, and began to accuse him, saying: This is the one we find turning
away the people, and bequeathing the bosom to Caesar, saying:

Let him be Christ, a king.\" Then Pilate asks Jesus: \"Are you the king
of the Jews? But the accusation is that Jesus is a rebel against Caesar;
he must bear the title and the guilt. Therefore Pilate accepts no other
accusation than this. Even though they accuse him of stirring up the
people by teaching throughout the whole Jewish land, beginning in
Galilee, Luc. 23:5, Pilate does not accept this. But that they accused
him of being the king of the Jews was a serious accusation, according to
the words.

\(139\) The arch-peelers and desperate wretches could not have brought
up a more grievous complaint against Christ than to accuse him, saying
that he is the king of the Jews. Just as in our day our adversaries
cannot more grievously complain and revile our gospel than to say it is
seditious. Now the peelers knew well that it was not true that Christ
should be a king; for \"when they would have taken him, and made him
king, he departed into the mountain by himself,\" John 6:15; and when he
was asked, whether interest should be given to Caesar, or not, he said,
\"Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar\'s, and unto God the
things that are God\'s.\" \[Matthew 22:21\]. They knew all this very
well, but because they know that this complaint has a standing before
Pilate, they insist on this complaint most vehemently.

140 This is written for our comfort, that Christ, our Head, had to
suffer these things and be called a rebel for the word\'s sake. So do
our adversaries. When they can go no further, they say we are rebels,
and with that title we are burned. The other complaints and other guilt
they lay on Jesus will not stick; but this complaint sticks, because
sedition is a very evil thing. The Gentiles called it crimen laesae
Majestatis, such a vice as offending against majesty. Therefore the Jews
could not have laid a more poisonous charge against Christ than to say
that he was the king of the Jews. The king of the Jews was the emperor,
who had set his governors at Jerusalem; therefore the Jews think: If
Pilate accepts this accusation against him, then we have won.

[908 **Erl. so, \[se-sss. Sermon on John 18:34-36. W. VIII, 895-898.**
909]{.underline}

**V. 34. Jesus answered, \"Do you say this about yourself, or did others
say it to you about me?**

This is the answer of the Lord to the accusation of the Jews. But he
answered for two things; or, that I may say it more clearly, he acts two
things in his responsibility. One is that he excuses himself because of
the accusation. The other is that he makes his confession before the
governor Pilato. Both of these, the apology and the confession, concern
us as an example.

First, he apologizes: \"Are you saying this about yourself, or did
others say it to you about me? Now this seems to be a proud answer; but
it is not a proud answer, but a very necessary excuse. For if a person
is accused of something wrong, he should not let it remain on him, nor
say, \"I will gladly suffer this for God\'s sake and let it remain on
me,\" but should freely declare his innocence. Therefore the Lord casts
away the guilt and false accusation that the Jews lay on him and says:
\"You, Pilate, ask me if I am the king of the Jews, which is as much as
if I am a rebel against Caesar. Again, I call your own conscience to
witness, whether or not you blame it on yourself. Truly, you will not
say such things about me from yourself. Let your conscience answer you,
yes, let your own eyes answer you. Thou seest me standing before thee,
captive and bound; I am not taken up in any tumult, neither is there a
multitude of people about me to take up arms, but I bear the appearance
of a captive and bound man. Therefore I cannot be accused of any
rebellion against the emperor. So the Lord offers his innocence to the
false accusation of the Jews, and takes both conscience and eyes of the
judge as witness.

**V. 35 Pilate answered, \"Am I a Jew? Your people and the chief priests
have handed you over to me; what have you done?**

143\) Pilatum is a little annoyed that the Lord gives him such an
arrogant answer, although, as has been said, it is not an arrogant but a
necessary excuse. For so shall every man answer before Caesar (when he
is accused of being a rebel) and say:

Does your imperial majesty say that about herself? Your Majesty\'s eyes
see what appearance and form of a king is on me 2c. But even if the
answer is necessary, Pilatum still dislikes it and says: \"Am I a Jew?
As if he were to say, \"I know nothing of your Jewish laws and dealings,
whether you want to be a king or not; nor do I say this of myself, but
you are thus accused before me; therefore say how it happened that you
wanted to be a king against Caesar.

**Jesus answered, \"My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were
of this world, my servants would fight to keep me from being delivered
to the Jews. But now my kingdom is not from hence.**

Then the Lord answers and apologizes again in the clearest and finest
way. My kingdom, he says, does no harm to you, Pilate, or to the
emperor; I am not a rebel against the emperor, for you see nothing in me
with your eyes that resembles rebellion, so the Jews cannot prove such
against me. With this he shows his innocence and convinces that he is
falsely accused by the Jews.

This is presented to us as an example. For a Christian shall suffer all
manner of things, even that which is lied against him; but he shall not
be silent thereunto. If you are accused of being a heretic, you are
obliged to answer, and before the judge who accuses you, to bear
witness, so that it may be understood that you say no to it, so that you
may not be guilty of other people\'s sins, nor let the evil of which you
are innocent lie upon you. For as the temporal authorities should punish
with the sword, so a Christian should punish lies with his tongue.
Therefore it is to be noted that the Lord does not remain silent when he
is accused as if he were a rebel against Caesar, but rejects the
accusation of which he is not guilty. Thus I prove,\" he says, \"that I
have no kingdom against Caesar, for if I were a rebel and wanted to set
up a kingdom against Caesar, I would have servants around me who would
help me and prevent me from being handed over to the Jews.

910 Eri. so, \[sg-s \"i. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vm,
\[ss-sou 911

146 And this is the other part of his responsibility, namely the
confession he makes before the governor Pilato. There he also leaves his
life and limb above the word that he preached. St. Paul praises such a
confession of the Lord in 1 Tim. 6, 13. 14: \"I command you before God,
who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who testified
under Pontius Pilate, that you keep the commandment without spot and
blameless until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. But it is an
equally dangerous confession that he says he is not the king of the
Jews, and yet he confesses that he has a kingdom; that is, he confesses
that he wants to stir up a great rebellion in the world, and yet he is
not a rebel against Caesar. But it is spoken according to the gospel,
and according to the manner of the kingdom of Christ. For the gospel
does not depart without a riot, as it is written Luc. 12:49 ff: \"I am
come to kindle a fire upon the earth: what would I rather, for it
burneth already? But I must first be baptized with baptism; and how
anxious am I until it is accomplished? Do you think that I have come to
bring peace on earth? I say no, but discord. For from now on there will
be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
The father shall be against the son, and the son against the father; the
mother against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother; the
inlaws against the cords, and the cords against the inlaws.

147 We see this going on in our time, and we are also such rebels, and
yet we preach that everyone should be subject and obedient to his
authorities and his lord. We are peaceable people, live and keep peace,
teach peace and ask for peace \[Matt. 5:9\], but our gospel does not go
without rebellion. One must distinguish between the two. There are two
kingdoms, God\'s kingdom and the emperor\'s kingdom. So there are also
two kinds of rebellion; a physical rebellion, which goes against proper
authority; and a spiritual rebellion, which does no harm to the temporal
government. We help the emperor to his kingdom, but we rumble into it,
because it is higher than the emperor\'s kingdom, so that a

Let another mind be in the hearts of men. Hands, body, goods we let go
in their obedience under the proper authority, as is fitting, but the
hearts of men we lead to God, that they may go in obedience to God.

This is how it goes: we preach the gospel, which divides the hearts of
one another, since the emperor does not have to rule. Then there is a
rebellion, because the father has a different faith from the son, and
the son a different faith from the father; and yet the father and the
son remain in their houses, and each in his office and station according
to the body, as the Lord also says, \"I am come to kindle a fire on the
earth,\" not that the houses should fall, but that they should remain.
In one house there will be dissension, he says, five will be divided in
one house, and yet the house will remain standing. This will happen, not
that the children will disobey their parents, nor the subjects their
authorities, but that one will believe differently from the other.

This does not happen in the worldly turmoil, but one house devastates
another. That is why the Lord keeps saying that he is a king, but not a
worldly king. The gospel is his regiment, which stirs up sedition; not
worldly sedition, but spiritual sedition, so that hearts believe
otherwise. We, who believe differently, do not kill anyone, but teach
that everyone should be obedient in his position; and yet hearts are
divided concerning the faith. I would that there were such commotion in
every house, for thus the gospel increases and becomes strong.

**V. 37 Pilate said to him, \"Are you still a king? Jesus answered,
\"You say it, yes, I am a king. I was born and came into the world to be
a witness of the truth.**

150 Thou sayest it; that is, thou hast plainly guessed it. It is a
peculiar way for the Lord to say, \"You say it,\" that is, you have hit
it. Further he says to Pilato: \"My kingdom is to preach the truth\";
for \"to bear witness\" means

[912 **Eri. so, sti-siz. Sermon on John 18:37. W. vm, svi-go4.**
913]{.underline}

preach, as St. John needs it several times, and the Lord shows with it
recently what kind of kingdom he has. My royal office, he says, is not
to ride great and glorious cabals 1) and horses, and to wield the sword,
but to preach the oral word; with this I lead my kingdom. A long sermon
would have to be preached on this; indeed, the single word \"truth\"
might well be a sermon of its own, to show what truth comprehends in
itself. But I will now take no more before me than that Christ confesses
the truth before Pilate, and over it leaves life and limb.

151 But \"truth\" understands the virtue and power of his word, and
against it the iniquity and sin of the Jews, and wants to say to Christ:
This persecution, that I stand imprisoned and bound before the court,
comes nowhere else, but that I have punished and condemned the lies, and
against it have publicly preached and testified the truth. If I had let
the Jews remain in their idolatry and in their false, lying nature, I
would not have come to this place of judgment; but because I testify to
the truth, and punish and expose the lies, I must die over it. But
before I will leave it, I will die before.

At this time we are also like this: If we keep silent about the truth
and do not punish lies, then we would remain well; but because we open
our mouths, confess the truth and condemn lies, everyone wants us. We
preach nothing else but Christ, that no one may be saved by himself; if
we could have been saved by ourselves, it would not have been necessary
for God to send His Son; but since God had to send His Son, it certainly
follows that we are not able to be saved by ourselves; this is our
preaching and the truth to which we bear witness. Again, that which the
pope and the bishops preach about the merit of the saints and the
worthiness of human works is a vain lie; this I condemn in them. This is
now our fault, why they are hostile to us and why they want us dead.
They say we forbid good works, we are disobedient to the emperor; but in
essence

1\) \"Lballns a poetic word for horse.

there is nothing else, but that we testify to the truth.

But Christ does not call the oral word and the preaching of the gospel
truth in vain or in vain, for the gospel of Christ makes a righteous man
before God through Christ. The word of the priest is not truth, for it
makes false men and hypocrites, as is said above \[§ 117 ff.\] of such
false saints, that the Jews will not go into the judgment house, that
they may eat the pascha; make their consciences therein narrow, and yet
shed innocent blood without timidity and conscience.

This is the testimony of the Lord Christ before Pilate, that he says: O
Pilate, all that I have preached is the truth, for to this I was born.
It shall be my royal office to preach the truth. From this you see what
kind of lords preachers and teachers are, namely, that they have a royal
office and preach the truth \[1 Pet 2:9\]. But because they have to lead
such a royal office, it is the same for them as it is for Christ. It is
the same for us now. Because we testify to the truth, we are reproached
as if we forbid good works; item, as if we are rebels. So we say: The
righteousness that you obeyed Caesar dies with you; therefore you must
have another righteousness after this life, which is, as St. Paul says
in 1 Cor. 1:30: \"God made Christ for wisdom, for righteousness, for
sanctification, and for redemption.\" This is our confession, and so we
must and shall do before kings and princes, saying: Dear lords, make of
us what you will, our preaching is the truth; he who wants to be saved
by himself is condemned; but they do not want such preaching, and say
that they are interfering with the pope, that is not to be suffered.

**He who is of the truth hears my voice.**

Christ confessed his ministry before Pilate, that he was a king, and
that his royal ministry was to preach the gospel. Who then are his
disciples? This is what he says now: My disciples are those who hear my
voice. My disciples,\" he says, \"are not Pharisees, Benedictines,
barefooted men, women, priests, or men of the cloth.

914 Eri. so, S4S-S4S. Interpretations on the evangelist John. W.
vni,\<m-8os. 915

2c. who fast and pray, but who are of the truth, and hear my voice, are
my disciples, and subjects of my kingdom, and obedient. Again, they that
are not of the truth, nor hear my voice, are not my disciples.

156 There is also much to be said about his saying clearly, \"He who is
of the truth hears my voice. Christ\'s voice is that he preaches how we
are to be saved; Moses\' voice is that he teaches how to do good works.
But Christ teaches something higher, how and by what we shall be saved.
With the word he excludes a great multitude of Carthusians and others
who are troubled with Christ\'s voice, for he takes his kingdom before
him, that is his care, that he may go about day and night. My voice, he
says, that is, my word of the gospel, must be grasped with heart and
faith, and whoever grasps such is of the truth, and my disciple.

157 But notice that Christ testifies to the truth before Pilate, and
over such testimony he is crucified. So it is with us, and this is the
devil\'s work, that he does not celebrate that he has come to this. He
may well suffer thee to be pious, but if thou wilt be a Christian, and
confess the truth, thou must be called a rebel, and let down thy neck.
This is his way of killing you and putting you to death; the devil
cannot stand the word of truth, nor the world, nor the flesh.

Christ is judged in this way, that he has no other guilt than that he
confessed the truth before Pilate; this is the reason why God\'s Son
should die and be crucified; there should be no sin in him, but the
highest virtue, that he was born to testify to the truth, and because he
wants to testify to it, he should die, and die an ignominious death;
there should be no other guilt in him. This is called a Christian death,
that he dies not for robbery or theft, but for the truth, so that
neither devil nor man can suffer his word and work \[1 Pet. 4:15\]. This
then is the summa of Christ\'s saying to Pilate, \"I have excused myself
that I am not the king of this world, but of my kingdom I take.

me to testify to the truth; do what you will to me about it. I preach
the truth; he who hears the truth is my disciple.

**V. 38. Pilate said to him, \"What is truth?**

159 I do not know whether Pilate means it seriously or mockingly, but I
understand it to be a loud mockery and derisive speech, because Pilate
was a wise, prudent pagan, so I do not know whether he meant it
seriously or mockingly.

He despises Christ and says, \"If you want to deal with truth, you are
lost. Willfulness makes friends, truth makes enemies. If you are the man
who deals with truth, it is no wonder that you are led here captive and
bound. If you want to live on earth, you must speak the truth. So I
understand it to be a pagan farce, spoken from an impudent conscience.

160 Nevertheless, it is indicated that the world is run, that one can
not stand the truth. If you want to live in the world, keep silent about
the truth, and cheat, lie and deceive. But if thou wilt bear witness to
the truth, judge thyself to have against thee the devil with his angels,
the world with its wisdom and supreme deceit; yea, to have against thee
thy parents, thy father, thy mother, and thy best friends; there shall
nothing be otherwise. If therefore they all hate thee, and persecute
thee for the truth\'s sake, say, This have I sought, this have I
desired; praise God, it goeth right as it ought. If I were to keep
silent about the truth, all these would be my dear friends and gracious
servants; but because I cannot keep silent about the truth, they are
ungracious and repugnant to me. But our gospel is the truth, God grant,
be angry with whoever will. And beware lest they mock it, as Pilate
does, and say scornfully, \"What is truth?\"

161 Therefore we are to learn from this text that no one should lay a
false charge upon himself, but should lay it upon his adversary. Then
that we confess the truth continually, no matter how we may feel about
it. And lastly, that the truth is nothing else, but the gospel of Christ
Jesus.

916 Erl. so, p46-S48. Sermon on John 18:38-40. W. vm, soe-909. 917

**V. 38-40. And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews,
and saith unto them: I find no fault in him. But ye have a custom, that
I should release one unto you at Easter: will ye then that I release
unto you the king of the Jews? Then they cried out again all together:
Not this one, but Barrabam. But Barrabas was a murderer.**

If anyone has not learned enough from the Lord\'s confession what the
world is, and what the devil\'s kingdom is and does, let him learn it
from the following. The world is, if it does not want to suffer Christ,
may kill Christ, the Son of God, for the sake of truth in the most
shameful way, and reveal itself in such a way that reason takes hold of
it. As Pilate, who has nothing but human reason, confesses here that the
Jews condemn Christ to death for the sake of truth. And not only this,
but the evangelist indicates that the world is so enraged and poisoned
that before it would let the truth go unpunished, it would embrace all
the vices and depravities that may be called on earth.

Therefore, we should learn from the history of Christ\'s suffering what
the world is, so that we do not wonder why the world is so evil and
wicked. It is no wonder that adultery, fornication, theft, murder and
death, and other vices abound in the world. What is the wonder, because
the world is so poisoned and demonized that it may condemn the truth?
and before it would admit the truth, before it would admit all vice and
vice. This is such great and overpowering wickedness that one should not
be surprised that adultery and deaths occur; nor should one be surprised
that God sends pestilence, war and other horrible punishments upon the
world. Not only do they not want to admit the truth, but they also
condemn it; and before they let themselves turn away from such
presumption and turn away, before they accept the devil himself.

Barrabas was a rebel and a murderer, was seized in the riot, and had
committed a murder in the riot; and this was not only just, but also
Barrabas was seized in the act, and put in prison by Pilatum, as by
ordinary force. But Jesus was just and innocent, so that his accusers,
the Jews,

could not bring anything against him. Pilate then concludes from reason:
\"Because this Jesus has done nothing wrong, the Jews will have to ask
that I release him. But again, because Barrabas is a rebel and a
murderer, the Jews will have to ask that I do him justice. Thus Pilate
concludes as a reasonable Gentile. But the devil turns around and says:
\"Not so, but release the rebel and murderer Barrabas; but crucify the
righteous and innocent Jesus.

Thus it shall go, thus it has gone, and thus it still goes. And this is
the custom and course of the world; the nobler the treasure and the good
that God gives, the finer is the world and the devil to such treasure
and good. Gold is the least good, yet the devil cannot suffer that one
needs gold. Orderly violence and physical peace is a fine, beautiful
treasure, but the devil cannot stand such things, but always causes
murder and bloodshed in the world, so that there is nothing else in the
world but always murder. He cannot stand it that man has a natural,
beautiful body, therefore the world is a house of robbers and thieves.
But if you come upon -the high gifts of God, as there are holy
scripture, gospel, divine truth, Christ 2c., if this treasure comes into
the world, so there brings eternal righteousness and life, then it shall
go, as here the text says: Barrabas shall be loosed; Christ shall be
crucified. Before the truth should remain undamned, before all devils
would have to be admitted.

166 And this is done by the dearest disciples, God\'s own people, the
Jews, and those who want to be the best among the Jews, the chief
priests, scribes and elders. Pilate confesses and says: he would gladly
let Christ go, as a preacher of truth; and again, to kill Barrabam, as a
rebel and murderer; but the holy people cry out: let us let Barrabam go,
away with JEsu, crucify him. So it is also in our time. Greater sin is
not with the wicked than our preaching, they have no other cause to us.
For they know well that we are not robbers nor adulterers, but that we
stand against them, beating the truth.

918 Eri. so, st\"-ssi. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin,
sog-sis. 919

and punish their lies and idolatry. Our sin is that we tell people the
truth, that they should trust in nothing, neither in heaven nor on
earth, but in the mere merit and death of our Lord Jesus Christ. This
teaching is our sin.

The life of whores and knaves, which was great in the papacy in former
times, and is still great, made neither monks nor priests enemies of
anyone, but that we now preach Christ, no more wicked people have come
on earth than we. And if they were otherwise vain Barrabas and
murderers, their sin would be nothing compared to our sin, that we
preach and teach the truth of the Gospel. Yes, that is more, they put
such Barrabas in their councils, make great bishops, canons and provosts
out of them, if they can only blaspheme against our doctrine. Is this
not the wretched devil? If I wanted to be a prankster, if I wanted to do
nothing else but act against the gospel, I would still get there and
would have honor and property from it. One should put out one with dogs,
who would not lie nor blaspheme at this time, because it is so done. If
you only blaspheme against the gospel, you will be the greatest and most
honored lord on earth.

But what does our Lord God say and do about this? He says and does as
Solomon says Proverbs 11:8: \"The righteous is delivered out of trouble,
and the wicked is taken in his place. Here the contradiction happens.
The Jews condemn whom they should not condemn, but they release whom
they should not release. But our Lord God will not suffer such things in
the long run, but will save the righteous whom they condemn from the
misery, and again, put the wicked whom they release in his place. For
the righteous must go up, and the wicked and evil-doer must come down.

But this shows how the gospel is in the world, and all those who live
evangelically. If thou wilt be in the world, learn the saying, Barrabas
shall be loosed, Christ the Savior be damned. What is it that thy
neighbor doeth thee violence and wrong, against whom Christ the Savior
is condemned? If therefore violence and injustice be done unto thee,
say, This is the government of the world: if thou wilt live in the
world,

You must wait for this; if you want to make it happen differently than
it happened to Christ, you will not get it \[2 Tim. 3:12, 1 Pet. 2:21\].
If you want to be with both wolves, you must howl with them. We serve
here in a house, where the devil is master, and the world is housewife,
and all kinds of evil lusts are the household; and all these, master,
housewife and household, are enemies and adversaries of the gospel.

If your money is stolen, if your honor is dishonored, remember that this
is how it is in this house. It will not come to pass that all that is
ours shall be in peace and safety, but all that we have shall stand in
the way. And this is our consolation and defiance: because Christ is not
guilty of anything, because he preached the truth, and yet is counted as
the worst of men and the most mischievous, we are to be confident if the
same happens to us; for we shall not fare any differently in the world
than Christ himself fared; as he himself says John 15:20: \"Remember my
word which I said unto you: The servant is not greater than his lord. If
they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept
my word, they will keep yours also.\"

But it is terrible and horrible that the world prefers murder,
rebellion, adultery, vice, cunning, lies and deceit to the truth, which
saves from sin and death; these are especially pious children; before
they accept the truth, they would rather have the whole world swollen in
blood. This is what our nobles, the bishops and ecclesiastical prelates,
and their crowd are doing in our time. This is written for our comfort,
so that we know that this is how things are in the world. If it were not
written, we would think: Who would like to stay with the teaching of the
Gospel? Why does God stand so foolishly by His word? If it were right,
and God\'s word, God would probably do otherwise, would not suffer that
everyone opposed it. Therefore notice that Jesus is condemned, but
Barrabas is set free. For the prankster shall be taken for a pious man,
and the pious shall be taken for a prankster. So shall it be in the
world: and when it is so, remember that it is written in the Passion.

920 Erl. \"o, \[si-sss. Sermon on John 19, 1. W. vm, si3-sis. 921

**The nineteenth chapter.**

1 Pilate is delaying the deal for a long time and does not hurry to
judgment with Jesus, even though the Jews are pressing him hard. Because
he publicly sees that the Jews are foolish and foolish, and yet cannot
bring any blame on Christ, he acts as a reasonable man and does not want
to hurry with the matter. Of course, he had to be afraid of the Romans,
who had a strict law and did not joke when someone acted badly.

\(2\) Now it was the law and the way of the Romans that no man should be
put to death or put to death, unless he were first tried and accused,
and the blame laid upon him, and he also gave his answer. Thus we read
in the stories of the apostles Cap. 25, 16, that Portius Festus does not
want to kill Paul, even though the Jews sought it from him, but says, v.
16: \"It is not the way of the Romans that a man should be put to death
before the accused has his accusers present and has room to answer the
accusation. And this is the natural law, and the law of Moses. The
nature and all peoples right gives, that one hears the other part also;
as one says: Audiatur altera pars. And Moses teaches: Nemo morietur, uno
adversus se dicente testimonium; 4 Mos. 35, 30.: \"A witness shall not
answer over a soul unto death.\" So the Romans were wise and right also,
and about this they held firm. Because Pilate had to fear, as a subject
of the Roman empire, that he would not act against Caesar, he was so
long opposed to Christ, especially because the Jews could not bring
anything to him, but everything they claimed became water under their
hands.

**V. 1. Pilate took Jesus and scourged him.**

Here again Pilate, as a reasonable man and wise Gentile and Roman, does:
Because the Jews cannot be satisfied in any way, he tries this way and
has Jesus scourged. The beating or scourging was a common punishment
among the Romans, as with us the severe justification is in the

Urgicht. 1) This can be seen in Acts Cap. 22, 24, where the centurion
has the imprisoned Paul \"beaten and inquired, that he might know for
what cause the Jews cried out against him\". So Pilate also has Jesus
scourged and inquires whether he would satisfy the Jews with it. As if
to say, \"I will try to satisfy their raging envy; I will have him
chastised and justified, whether they will be satisfied with it.

But the Jews are not satisfied with the scourging, but cry: Crucify,
crucify. That is still a larger piece, because the next was to paint the
beautiful, dear world. In the previous chapter we heard that the Jews
would rather give up the murderer Barrabam than the innocent Jesus. This
is the world: First, it does not want to suffer the righteous and
innocent. Secondly, it would rather have the rebel and murderer,
Barrabam, than Christ, the preacher of truth. These are hard and rough
knots. But the third is much more gross, that the good, dear world is
not satisfied nor satiated, although the truth is punished to some
extent. The Jews are not satisfied, nor do they cease to press for
Pilatum, and to cry out about Jesus, whether Jesus, the preacher of
truth, is already being chastised and scourged.

\(5\) One asks: Why is God angry and sends upon the world a flood of
sin, fire and conflagration, pestilence, war and other punishments? It
would be no wonder that God would let the world perish and perish
completely in an instant. For is this not great, unheard-of wickedness,
worthy of divine wrath and punishment, that the world does not want to
suffer the truth; yes, that is more, that it cannot be satisfied in any
way, and does not stop raging before Christ, the Son of God, is even
eradicated and destroyed? Wherever an evildoer deserves justice, he
often receives mercy, so that he can be put to the sword; often he is
also completely released, as here with Barraba.

1\) Confession, especially on torture.

922 Erl. so, SW-SS6. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
\"18-821. 923

happens to you. This often happens in the world. But here it happens
that those who pursue the truth cannot punish their enemies enough to
satisfy them. Is this not a devilish envy and outrageous wickedness? If
Pilate had gouged out the eyes of the Lord Christ, the Jews would not
have been satisfied with any plague and torture, but out of great
rashness and devilish malice they would have cried out and screamed:
Out, out with him, that not a stump of his memory remain \[Ps. 137:7\].

\(6\) The same thing is not done to any other villain or offender. If an
offender is condemned to death and is led out to do him justice, people
will take pity on him and have compassion on him; they will let his
skirt be something. But if anyone preaches the truth, he is to be held
in such a way that one cries out over him: \"Be done with him, be done
with him, be done with him, and with all that is in him! And the longer
one consumes the punishment, the angrier and madder the world becomes.
So it is with our ministers who persecute the gospel: the longer it is
consumed, the longer the gospel will not soon be eradicated, as they
would like, the more angry they become. This is what the evangelist
meant: Because the Jews could not otherwise be satisfied, Pilate had
Jesus scourged, if he could satisfy them with it; but the Jews are not
satisfied.

**V. 2. 3. And the soldiers wove a crown of domes, and set it upon his
head, and put a purple robe upon him, and said, Hail, dear king of the
Jews; and they gave him cheekstrokes.**

\(7\) By beating and scourging Jesus, the soldiers and servants do more
than they are commanded. The beating was a punishment of the captives
with the Romans, as is said above \[§ 3\]; but over this the soldiers
weave a crown of thorns, and put it on JEsu\'s head, and put a purple
robe on him, and bend the knees, and say, Hail, dear King of the Jews.
Whether they did this out of their own malice or by order of Pilate the
governor is not written.

8 It looks to me as if they did it for the love of the high priests.
Because Christ confessed before Pilate that he was a king, but his
kingdom was not of this world, the soldiers misused such a confession.
As if to say, \"He himself has confessed that he is a king, so let us
adorn him and crown him as a king; therefore, let us dress him in a
carnival garment, put royal robes on him, and crown him with thorns.

\(9\) This was a venomous mockery, as it cannot be excused that they
should mock with such a venomous mockery a man who confesses the truth,
and is scourged, torn and mangled without any fault before, and strike a
crown of thorns in his head, and put an old purple robe on him. This
will have pleased the Jews, high priests and elders gently and well;
nevertheless, their bloodthirsty thirst is not quenched with it. It was
the way of the Romans that their kings and temporal lords wore purple,
which they called trabeam, a red scarlet. But let every man remember
here what an abominable, sharp, devilish mockery this is, that the
soldiers mock Jesus.

10 The gospel is doing the same thing now, as it has always done. Since
there is nothing more to be done, one throws out the most pointed
stings. Yes, they say, it is the gospel, the new gospel 2c. The
blasphemers spout such and such malicious vituperation and words of
shame against the gospel of Christ. Such things hurt very much.
Scourging may be painful, but such scorn and pointed abuse is even more
painful, that God\'s truth is not only so horribly despised, but also so
shamefully defiled with words of shame. If someone is punished severely,
that is still tolerable, no matter how hard and severe the punishment
is; but if one is treated so mockingly and scornfully, that makes the
punishment more severe and unpleasant, as the soldiers here do to
Christ. They pose as if they want to recognize and honor him as a king,
and yet it is vain bitter, poisonous and devilish mockery.

**V. 4. 5. Then Pilate went out again and said to them, \"Look, I am
bringing him out to you, so that you may know that I am not guilty of
anything against him.**

**\
**924 **Erl. so, \[ss-sss. Sermon on John 19:4-6. W. VIII, 821-824.**
925

**find. So Jesus went out wearing a crown of thorns and a purple robe.
And he saith unto them, Behold, what manner of man!**

11 John\'s writing that Jesus went out wearing a crown of thorns and a
purple robe is to be understood as meaning that the soldiers took away
the reed they had put in his hand, as the other evangelists say, and
left him alone, crowned with a crown of thorns and wearing a purple
robe. And Pilate left him for this reason, that the Jews might be
satisfied and satisfied the sooner; as he says, \"Behold, I bring him
forth unto you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.\" As if he
should say, Therefore I bring him forth unto you, that ye may know that
I have scourged him without all cause and guilt, and have done so much
that I might satisfy and satisfy you; but with the Jews there is nothing
else but: Purge yourselves!

This is how the gospel is to be illuminated. Pilate is a pagan and a
real bloodhound; for the pagans, who knew nothing of God, dealt with men
as we deal with swine and sows. Nevertheless, this heathen and
bloodhound is moved, and says, \"Behold, what a man!\" As if to say,
\"Will you not have mercy on him? You see that he has done more evil
than he deserves. But all this is of no use with the Jews. This is a
surpassing testimony to the innocence of Jesus, that Pilate cries out
not once, but twice, three times, even six times, that violence and
injustice be done to him; for with him human reason was decided, that
the Jews had no cause nor blame for Christ.

\(13\) So our gospel is also condemned without all blame; and we should
also conduct our doctrine in this way. As we, praise and thanks be to
God, also do, that our adversaries themselves must speak: The doctrine
would be right, but we do not want to suffer it, because he says so, and
because the doctrine arises in the corner. But let it be our comfort to
preach the suffering of Christ as an example, so that we do not think
that we are finished and lost if they deal with us as they dealt with
Christ.

**V. 6 When the chief priests and the servants saw him, they cried out,
\"Crucify, crucify!**

14 Pilate had Christ scourged, and the soldiers crowned him with a crown
of thorns, put a purple robe on him, and mocked him as a king of the
Jews. In this contemptible, poor and miserable form Pilate lets him be
led out before the judgment house, as the evangelist says: \"Jesus went
out, wearing a crown of thorns and a purple robe.\" Pilate does this to
appease and satisfy the Jews, but the hatred of Christ among the Jews is
too great that it does no good. When Christ was brought out so
miserably, such a voice should have fallen among the Jews: \"Stop it,
Pilate, let it be, he has been beaten enough. But they stand as if he
had never been beheaded, never crowned nor mocked, crying out badly:
Crucify. As if they should say: Pilate, you have beheaded him; but
remember, strangle him, and strangle him so that he dies an ignominious
death on the cross.

\(15\) John, together with the other evangelists, has shown how hatred
and envy of the truth are so great and poisonous, and how Christ is
innocently accused and condemned to death. For the Jews not only falsely
accuse Christ, but also put themselves on trial and pass judgment. Who
ordered them to do this? It is Pilato\'s duty to pass judgment according
to Roman law; but they, the Jews, are both plaintiff and judge.
Everything they bring up in the accusation is ridiculous; but in judging
and passing sentence they cannot be satisfied. They also do not consider
how to punish him according to guilt, so they must leave innocence on
Christ, and yet teach Pilatum how to judge and kill him.

\(16\) This is written so that it may be seen how things are done in the
world in the matters of the gospel. God\'s Son is accused innocently,
and judged much more wickedly and evil, therefore our Lord God had to
take the judgment from the Jews and give it to the Romans, so that the
Jews would be put to shame. And Pilate is God\'s servant and minister
without his knowledge, so that the best and holiest people on earth are
put to shame by him,

926 Eri. SO, \[ss-sso. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
821-S27. 927

and are not only shamefully lacking with their false accusation, but
also with their perverse, courtly judgments and sentences; so that the
innocence of the Lord Christ and the wickedness of the perverse Jews may
come to light the more clearly and better.

**Pilate said to them: Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault
in him.**

17 The Jews cried out, Crucify; but Pilate asked, Quare? Why? There is
no blame that I crucify him. And yet Pilate, with these words, did much
to the hair of the Jews, whether he should have spoken more sharply and
harshly to them. For he says, \"You Jews want me to crucify him, but I
find no fault in him. Now if the Jews had been reasonable people, they
should have been ashamed in their hearts to bring an accusation and say:
This is what he deserves; and the judge cannot find such a complaint and
guilt in the defendant. If I thus acted before our sovereign, Duke John,
and brought an accusation against one, and the prince interrogated the
defendant, and said to me, I find no fault in him; how I would run and
cover my face. For Pilate to say, I find no fault in JEfu, is to say in
plain language, Hannah, Caipha, and ye chief priests and elders, ye lie
as desperate wretches, which have learned neither discipline nor honor,
that ye should speak thus before the Roman emperor\'s governor and
authority. And Pilate should have come and spoken to them in good,
coarse German, but he does it secretly, and speaks it with polite words.

\(18\) Christ stands before us, and might well have been subjected to
such accusations, judgments, and sentences, but for our sake he suffers
them; and that the fruit of Christ\'s suffering may be known, we must
stir this piece a little. The Jews have a hard, insolent forehead, like
a demant, crying out without ceasing: Crucify him, although the judge
Pilate excuses him, saying that he finds no fault in him. guilt in him.
Now Christ, the innocent lamb, stands there and bears the guilt for us,
of which we are guilty; for the false accusation that goes over him goes
over us with truth.

19 It can also be seen here how the best and brightest on earth are
always against Christ. For even though Pilate excuses Christ for a time,
he is also against Christ, has had him beaten, and still holds him
captive until he finally falls and has Christ crucified. Now Pilate was
one of the wisest and cleverest, and had many clever and wise men with
him; the Jews are the most learned and the holiest. Thus it always
happens on earth that the wisest, the most learned and the holiest
become vain devils in Christ and in his gospel: as the Jews here all
work to disgrace the man, Christ, and yet so roughly that the pagan
Pilate notices and understands this. For he gives the Jews enough to
understand that they are nothing but boys, if they would only
understand.

**V. 7. The Jews answered him, \"We have a law, and according to the law
he shall die, for he has made himself the Son of God.**

\(20\) This is such a loose, lazy complaint (especially before Pilate
the judge, who was a Gentile, and knew nothing of the law of the Jews)
that it could not be looser or lazier; and for this reason the
evangelist reported it, showing how the Jews are so very rash 1) in
persecuting Christ, the one truth. They look through a painted glass,
and think what they have in mind, that other people also should be
minded; but it is far from it. So when I think, I have it thus in mind;
now when men shall hear it of me, they also shall be thus minded; there
it is far lacking. \"We have a law,\" they say, \"and by the law he
shall die.\" Here\' Pilate might have answered and said, What is your
law to me? The judgment of blood is now Caesar\'s, and not yours; what
makes you then to say, He shall die according to our law? And to speak
the truth, this has been a great rashness of the Jews. For the emperor
had set Pilatum and Herodem there, and commanded them the neck judgment,
that the Jews thirst no more to kill a man. This they do not consider,
and they speak not at all.

1\) Eislebensche: unversonnen; also gleich folgen.

[928 **Eri. so, \[so-sss. Sermon on Joh. 19, 7. W. VIII, S27-S2S.**
929]{.underline}

prudently with the governor, \"We have a law, and by the law he shall
die.\"

021 But Christ was not to die by the law of the Jews: therefore was he
not judged by the law of the Jews, but for Caesar\'s sake, that he
should make himself king, and be against Caesar. The title testifies to
this, when Pilate had it written, and on the cross JEsu was pinned at
the heads: \"JEsus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. The evangelists wanted
to show how people become mad and foolish when they set themselves
against the truth. This is done so that the truth may come to light more
gloriously, and so that its foolishness may become more apparent. This
is what is happening to the papists in our time; because they go against
the public truth, they become mad about it and write against their own
decree, against the emperor\'s statutes and order, yes, against all
human reason.

22\. \"To make oneself the son of God\" was such a great sin among the
Jews that it could not be greater; therefore also the high priest, when
he heard that Christ confessed that he was the son of God, tore his
clothes and said: \"He has blasphemed God, what further testimony may we
bear? Matth. 26, 65. The Jews had this law, whoever blasphemed God\'s
name should be stoned \[3 Mos. 24, 16\]. Now to blaspheme God\'s name
was not only to curse and desecrate, but also when a man said: I am God.
Although the Lord answered the Jews well for this (that he said, I am
the Son of God), both Matth. 26, 64. where he says: \"I tell you, from
now on it will happen that you will see the Son of Man sitting at the
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven\", and Joh. 8,
28.: \"When you exalt the Son of Man, then you will know that it is me\"
2c., but it did not help with the Jews; he had to bear the guilt as if
he were a blasphemer; because he calls himself the Son of God, he must
die.

23\) But such an accusation of blasphemy against God was nothing with
Pilate, who knew nothing of the law of the Jews; and if the Jews had
contended, and brought with truth upon Christ, that he had blasphemed
against God, Pilate might still have said, Why?

Do you Jews go against your own law? Your law says that a blasphemer
should be stoned, not crucified: But now ye cry that I should crucify
him, when crucifixion is not for blasphemy, even according to your law.
Therefore the Jews are once again mad and foolish, and are imprisoned.
For so it shall be with all the enemies of God, which oppose the truth,
that they shall be taken everywhere in their wickedness.

\(24\) And here we see the great love of the Lord Christ toward us, who
endures such suffering for our sake. One also sees the great honor of
the gospel, that the Lord Christ\'s adversaries can muster nothing
against him, and the more they try to muster something, the more they
become ashamed of it. It is a vain and fickle thing that they pretend in
their manifold accusations and incessant judgments. This is our honor
and the honor of our holy gospel, that we know that because it happened
to the Lord himself, it will not happen to us differently in the world.
That would be a great, excellent art, who could have the suffering of
Christ before his eyes in such a way that he would learn from it how the
dear Church of God and the Gospel of Christ are and will be on earth.

\(25\) Besides, this also is a good doctrine and prophecy unto us, that
Christ should die because he hath made himself the Son of God. For the
law is our death and devil, and is on the neck of all of us who have
made ourselves the son of God. The text of Moses is certainly good:
Whoever makes himself the son of God shall die the death. We human
beings have all made ourselves sons of God; therefore we are all guilty
of death. Christ has redeemed us from the same burden. Therefore it
serves him right in this respect, because he took our place and paid for
us. He is innocent as far as he is concerned, and the law of Moses, that
blasphemers should be put to death, is not his business; but because he
has taken it upon himself to stand in the place of all men, he must also
await punishment.

26\. it is all of us humans who make ourselves sons of God, yes, who
want to be God Himself. Adam has committed such sin

[930 Eri. so, \[ss-sos. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
9M-S3L. 931]{.underline}

He was not satisfied that he was a beautiful creature of God, made in
the image of God, and did not want to remain a man, but also wanted to
be God, and know evil and good; because he followed the old serpent, and
wanted to be like God, he became a devil \[Gen. 3, 1. ff.\] So now we
all follow after our first father Adam. For our wisdom, our money and
our goods shall do it, we rely on that, and do not trust in God\'s
goodness and mercy. Summa, it is the first sin that Adam started, and
that now goes through all of us without ceasing. Adam wanted to be God
himself, and God should be nothing. So do all Adam\'s children.
Therefore it is right and well said: Whoever makes himself the son of
God shall die the death; so that the law goes most of all over him who
makes himself the son of God. That is us.

This sin is the greatest and most serious, from which all other sins
originate. Yes, there is no sin without it, as Sirach Cap. 10, 14. 15.
says: Principium peccati, apostatare a Deo, \"That is where all hope
comes from, when a man falls away from God and his heart departs from
his Creator. Hopefulness drives to all sins.\" The main sin is when a
person wants to be God, that is, when a person trusts in his own works
and righteousness that he will be saved by them. Such a person does not
need forgiveness of sins, nor the help of the Lord Christ. But this is
God\'s work, to forgive sin, to make righteous and blessed; therefore,
whoever attributes these works to himself and to his own worthiness and
righteousness, makes himself God. So also, if a prince is proud, and
relies on his power and authority, he himself wants to be GOD, and GOD
shall be nothing. Now the law says: Whoever is proud and makes himself
the son of God/shall die of death. Therefore Christ comes in our place,
and puts on our person, dying for us who are guilty of death.

Some interpret this text thus: Christ was to die, for he is the Son of
God; and the law prophesied of him that he should die for the sin of the
world. This opinion is not wrong, but good. But

The Jews do not understand that he is the Son of God and that the Son of
God, according to the prophecy of the Law, should die for the sin of the
world. Therefore, they do not say, \"He made himself the Son of God and
died according to the prophecy of the Law,\" but, \"He made himself the
Son of God and died according to the prophecy of the Law: He has made
himself the son of God, therefore he shall die according to the law as a
blasphemer. But the accusation of the Jewish law was not valid before
the governor Pilato, who was a Gentile.

**V. 8. When Pilate heard the word, he was even more afraid.**

29There thou hearest the cause why Christ was crucified. After this
charge Pilate asks nothing, that the Jews say he made himself the son of
God; but the other charge clings to him, that they accused him of making
himself a king. But that the evangelist says, \"Pilate feared still
more,\" is to be understood thus: The Romans had the order that no one
should be delivered to death unless a certain guilt was brought upon
him. Since Pilate finds no guilt in Christ, he does not want to judge
him, even though the Jews insist on it, because he was afraid of the
Romans, so that he would not act against their order and way of
judgment.

\(30\) Now, in addition to fear, there is another fear. When he heard
that he was the son of God, he was even more afraid, not of the Jews,
but also of the Romans. He does not believe that Christ is the Son of
the true, living God, for he knows nothing about God, but thinks that
because the Romans have many and various gods, who knows whether he is
perhaps one of the same gods? For one often hears that in paganism the
gods walked the earth in human form, posing as beggars or other people.
For the poets have written strange things of their gods, just as of men.
I believe that this came about because the great Hansa walked around in
their clothes, and then it was said that the gods had done it. So Pilate
thinks that Christ is such a god of the pagans; now that you are judging
him and sentencing him to death, he should probably come here today or
tomorrow, and

932 **Erl. so, S05-SS7. Sermon On Joh. 19, 8. 9. W. VIII, 9S2-9S\".**
933

show off to the Romans, and make yourself hateful to them.

\(31\) And here again it is seen how the wicked\'s attempts go back when
they should best go away. If Christ had confessed that he was the Son of
God, Pilate would have judged Christ much less. The Jews think to make
the matter evil by accusing Christ as if he had made himself the Son of
God; they think that Pilate should go and kill him from the beginning,
and yet they hinder their cause most severely. These things are written
so that it may be seen how those who go against the word of God must be
put to shame. What the law says about the one who makes himself the Son
of God does not move Pilate at all; but it moves him to think that Jesus
might be one of the pagan gods; therefore he also asks, \"Who are you,
or from where are you? He saith not, What saith the law of the Jews
concerning thee, but rather, From whence art thou?

32 Thus Christ is innocently condemned to death; of this the Gentile
Pilate must bear witness against the most learned and holy men of the
earth, as the chief priests and elders of the Jews; and the sword which
the Jews wield against Christ passes through them, as the 37th Psalm, v.
15, says. I could not only set Christ free before Pilate, but also
before Caesar himself, if I said that he was the Son of God; and the
Jews fall into such foolishness that they think that such an accusation
should count for much on their side against Christ. So shall it be with
all those who set themselves against God and His Son.

Note here that the innocence of the Lord Christ stands for our guilt.
For although he is condemned to death with innocence, he is still guilty
before God according to the law; not for his person, but for our
persons. He stands before Pilate, not as a son of the Virgin Mary, but
as an offender; and that not for himself, but for me and you, for the
cause that he wanted to be God\'s son, that is, that we want to have
God\'s son, that is, to be like God. So then Christ is innocent for
himself, but for us he is guilty, because

He has taken care of us to pay our debt. But the common saying goes:
\"Guarantors should be strangled.

**V. 9 And he entered again into the judgment house, and saith unto
JESUS, Whence art thou?**

034 Then thou hearest that Pilate was under the delusion that Jesus was
a Gentile god; wherefore he feared not that he should act contrary to
the laws of the Jews; but this is the cause of his fear, that he was
afraid he should be joined to the gods of the Gentiles. Therefore he
brings Jesus back to the judgment house, and starts a new question with
him to find out about his arrival, birth and family, and says: \"From
where are you? As if he were to say, \"Because the Jews say that you
proclaim that you are the Son of God, I would like to know which Son of
God you are, so that I may know how to judge you. For he would not have
liked to judge one who was God or God\'s son, especially since he had
already scourged him; so remember, \"If I have scourged a son of the
gods, then I have truly done wrong.

**But JEsus gave him no answer.**

35 Some say that the fact that Christ does not answer Pilate\'s question
is because if he had answered, Pilate would undoubtedly have let him go,
and thus Christ\'s death would have been prevented. We leave such things
to be said by those who wish to do so; who wants to shut everyone\'s
mouth? Pilate was not the man who would have soon believed if he had
already heard of Christ that he was the Son of God for eternity and the
Son of the Virgin on earth. This is the reason why Christ does not
answer here: He gave Pilate a ready answer, which would have been
superfluous if he had wanted to be proven wrong, for he had made his
glorious confession before Pilate, and testified why he had come into
the world, namely, that he should testify to the truth; but Pilate
accepted this mockingly, laughed it off, and mockingly said, \"What is
truth?\" Because Christ realized that Pilate was such a man, who did not
care much about what truth is, he considered him worthless,

934 **Eri. so, SS7-S70.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W.
viii, W-ms. 935

that he should give him further instruction, because in the confession
of the Lord it was sufficiently shown to him who Christ was.

\(36\) Pilate should have seen what Christ preached, and what miraculous
works he had done; he should have regarded the same words and works, and
not have asked, \"Whence art thou?\" For if we get to the point where we
want to know first of all from whence Christ is, which is his coming and
generation, we will be offended and angry with Christ. As it happened to
the others, of whom it is written Matth. 13, 54. 55. 56.: \"When Christ
taught in His Father\'s country, so also that they all deposed
themselves, they nevertheless were vexed at His coming and at His
generation, and said, Whence comes this man such wisdom and power? Is he
not the son of a carpenter? Is not his mother called Mary? and his
brothers, Jacob and Joses, and Simon and Judas? and his sisters, are
they not all with us? Where then did all this come to him?\"

37 Christ answered Pilate: \"I came into this world to bear witness to
the truth. If Pilate had heard the truth from Christ, he would have
known from where Christ came. So Christ also answers the Jews Joh. 8,
25. When they ask and say to him, \"Who are you?\" he says to them,
\"First of all, he who speaks to you\"; that is: I am your preacher; if
ye believe this first, ye shall know who I am. But if you first want to
know who Christ is, whether he is a prince or of great stature and glory
in the world, and then believe for the sake of the person, nothing comes
of it. For if the gospel be measured by the person, it is already lost.
Therefore one should not ask who Christ is or from where he comes, as
Pilate does, but pay attention to what he preaches and teaches; if one
believes his preaching and teaching, then one will understand who Christ
is and from where he comes. Thus the Lord sufficiently showed Pilate and
sufficiently answered his question, but Pilate despised it.

**V. 10 Pilate said to him, \"Are you not talking to me? Do you not know
that I have power**

**have power to crucify you and power to release you?**

\(38\) Pilate is angry that Christ will not speak to him, because he is
the judge who has power, and Christ is a poor beggar, imprisoned and
bound, defying and boasting of his power like a heathen. Our nobles, the
tyrants and enemies of the gospel, do the same in our time; they boast
and brag that they have power in Christendom to install and remove, to
order and change, and to do everything in Christendom that they
themselves desire. Christ Pilato cannot conceal such things; therefore
he answers and says:

**V. 11. You would have no power over me if it were not given to you
from above.**

\(39\) Here someone might ask: Why does Christ speak here, since it
seems that it is not necessary to speak, because Pilate does not ask him
to answer; and above, when Pilate asks and desires an answer, he is
silent? This is easy to answer: Because Christ had previously answered
Pilate sufficiently in his confession, and Pilate despised all this, it
was not necessary for Christ to answer further, whether Pilate asked,
\"From whence art thou? for he had answered enough if he had wanted to
believe; but here, because Pilate goes out and thinks that he is the man
who has authority, it was necessary for Christ to answer and to punish
such defiance on Pilate\'s part, and to make him understand that he
would have no authority over him at all if it were not given to him from
above. And with this Christ indicated and gave us a lesson that one
should not keep silent about the truth to the great merchants and
noblemen, but admonish and punish them for their wrongdoing.

040 But Christ speaketh plainly, saying not, Pilate, thou hast no power
over me: but, Pilate, thou hast power, as thou sayest, that is true; but
there is another thing, that the power is not of thyself, but is given
thee from above. With this he punishes Pilate in his presumption and in
his defiance, and it is not good for him to boast that he has power.

41 So we must also do, our pila-.

936 **Eri. 50, S7V-S7S. Sermon on Joh. 19, 11. W. VIII, 938-940.** 937

tos we shall also confidently punish in their sacrilege and defiance.
But they say, Thou blasphemest and dishonorest the majesty of princes.
To this we answer: We should and will suffer from them what they do to
us; but that we should be silent, and say, Gracious Junker, 1) thou
doest right; this we will not do. For there is a great difference
between these two, to suffer injustice and violence, and to be silent
about it. One should suffer injustice and violence, but one should not
remain silent; for a Christian should bear witness to the truth, and die
for the sake of the truth. If he is to die for the sake of the truth, he
must confess the truth with his mouth and punish the lies. Therefore we
also say, for the truth\'s sake and for the law\'s sake we should and
will die. If then we are to die for the sake of truth and right, we must
freely confess the truth and right in public, and if the other condemns
the truth and right, we must punish such lies. So we suffer violence and
injustice, but we do not remain silent, nor do we approve of violence
and injustice.

\(42\) Just as Christ says that he has come to bear witness to the truth
and to punish the wrongs of Pilate, so we should also do. We should not
say to our tyrants and persecutors of the gospel, \"My lords, you act as
Christian princes and spiritual fathers; go on, you do right;\" but we
should say, \"You act as murderers, even as apostates, enemies of Christ
and his gospel. But then they say: This is blaspheming the majesty. But,
regardless of their wrong judgment, we must confess and say: This is the
truth; whoever speaks against it is against God. Thus Christ testifies
that the authority Pilate has is God\'s order, and that Pilate has such
authority from God. Therefore, he does wrong by presumptuously praising
such power and insisting on it. For injustice should not be kept silent,
and sin should not go unpunished.

**V. 11. Therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath greater sin.**

This is a horrible, terrible sentence and heavy judgment. Although
Christ be-

1\) Grace Junker (Gnadjunker) - gracious Junker.

knows and testifies that Pilate has authority from above, yet he does
not excuse Pilate, but shows him that he is guilty. He means to say:
Pilate, you do wrong, because you act against God and abuse your power
to crucify me, when you find no guilt of death in me. No doubt Pilatum
was severely displeased by this. For princes and great men can well
suffer that the whole world is punished, if only they remain unpunished.
But they must also be punished, and he who is in office is obliged to
tell them where they do wrong and act wrongly, whether they pretend that
punishing great merchants is a cause for rebellion. For how could the
gospel be silent, and the great men unpunished, lest sedition arise
therefrom?

44 But he passes a terrible judgment on the one who delivered him to
Pilate. But who is the same one? It is Caiphas, Annas, Judas, and all
who are in this mob, who captured Christ and delivered him to Pilate.
For this is the way of the holy Scriptures, that they often put the
singular for the plural, and again, the plural for the singular. What
one does, it attributes to the whole multitude; and again, what the
whole house does, it often attributes to one. So also here: \"He that
delivered me unto thee,\" that is, the whole company that did such
things has the greater sin. This may be called a judgment, and therefore
it is written, that the wicked may be offended at it.

\(45\) Is it not a strange word and speech? Caiphas, Annas, Judas, and
the Jews are the man who delivers up Christ, and yet they do not kill
him with their fists. Again, Pilate has him crucified and killed; yet
Christ says, \"He that delivered me unto thee hath greater sin\"; he
that delivers up Christ is a greater sinner than he that committeth the
deed. This is so much speaking: The Jews are worse than the Gentiles;
Annas and Caiphas are worse than Pilate. Who could speak such a judgment
as Christ speaks here? If we now say that the pope is worse than the
Turk, this would be a strange speech for everyone; and yet in truth it
is not true.

938 Erl. so, S7S-S74. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
940-943. 939

he pope is worse than the Turk, just as the Jews are worse than Pilate
the Gentile. For the Turk persecutes and kills Christians with his fist;
the pope delivers them up and deceives them with false teaching. Pilate
has Christ crucified and does this out of fear; there is no hatred or
envy in him, no malice, but only fear, so that he is concerned about the
emperor; but the Jews persecute and deliver up Christ out of pure malice
and hatred against him.

46 You see that Christ judges the work according to the heart, and not
according to outward appearance. Pilate commits sin by having Christ
crucified, in whom he finds no guilt of death. But because his heart is
not as evil as the heart of Caiph and the high priests, his sin is not
as great as the sin of Caiph and the high priests. Where will our nobles
be, who pretend and say that they have done nothing evil, if they betray
innocent blood, and help that the innocent Christians are persecuted? I
think they will have to pay dearly enough. At this time there are many
such people who persecute the gospel, not with their fists, but help it
with cunning attacks and evil practices. Such have their judgment here.
They think that because they do not take the sword, they are not so
wicked; but here it is: although Pilate has Christ scourged, crowned,
mocked, spat upon, and finally crucified, and does all this by deed, he
is not so wicked and evil as the Jews. It is therefore concluded from
this text that those who want to be the most holy and accept the word
are the most wicked. Therefore the pope with his own commits greater sin
than the Turk and all the Gentiles. This is what the text says: \"He who
delivered me to you has done it.

greater sin.\"

\(47\) But here Christ does not excuse Pilate at all, but only makes a
distinction between him and the chief priests. The chief priests and
Jews do it out of pure malice, and if they could do the work, they would
do it worse and more horribly than Pilate. Again, Pilate does it not out
of malice, but out of fear, and if he had been allowed, he would have
released Christ.

have. But with this Pilate is not excused, nor without sin. For he
should have said, \"My nature and reason teach me that I should not harm
anyone for the sake of another. It is not lawful for my neighbor to say,
\"My dear neighbor, I have stolen your cows, neither for my benefit nor
for the benefit of my neighbor, but for the benefit of your enemy.
Neither is it lawful for Pilate knowingly to do wrong for the sake of
the Jews.

48 Nevertheless, Christ makes a distinction between him and the Jews.
For the Jews do it out of a malicious heart, and would gladly do it with
their fists, and force Pilatum to do it; they are therefore guilty, both
for themselves and for Pilatum. Let each one see to it that he does not
minimize his sin, but thinks that he is guilty if he bears envy and
hatred toward his neighbor, even if he does not lay a hand on his
neighbor. For if he could lay a hand on his neighbor, he would not
refrain from doing so. Summa, here one hears that Pilate is better than
Annas and Caiphas.

**V. 12. From that time Pilate sought how he might release him. But the
Jews cried out and said: If you release this man, you are not Caesar\'s
friend, for he who makes himself king is against Caesar.**

49 When Pilate hears that there is no cause of death in Christ, he wants
to become pious and seeks to release him. Pilate is the most holy man on
earth, for he has the mind and will to release Christ. On the other
hand, God\'s people, the Jews, cry out, \"If you release this man, you
are not Caesar\'s friend. This may be a common saying.

50 But the Jews brought the first and the first accusation again. First
they accused him of wanting to be a king and forbidding the emperor to
give interest. But Pilate soon put down this accusation. Then they
accused him of making himself the son of God. The complaint is also
defeated. Now that all the complaint is over, they run back and repeat
the first complaint, that he has made himself king, and make the same
complaint a little stronger, saying, \"If you let this one go, you are
not Caesar\'s friend,

[940 **Eri. so, S74-ST?. Sermon on John 19:12, W. vm, 943-94s.**
941]{.underline}

for he has said that he is the king of the Jews. Let us say, then, that
he who makes himself king is against Caesar; this man makes himself
king, therefore he is a rebel, and wants to lead the people away from
Caesar. If then, Pilate, you release this man who makes himself king and
is against Caesar, it is a sign and a testimony that you are unfaithful
to your lord and emperor and act as an evil-doer. When Pilate hears
this, he passes on. Before this he had answered this charge with great
honor, and knew that Christ was not a king that was against Caesar; but
the word, Thou art not Caesar\'s friend, takes him captive, and casteth
him away.

\(51\) This is how it is in the world; the word, \"You are not Caesar\'s
friend,\" is lifted up so that one falls from the truth like the leaves
from the trees in autumn. For flesh and blood cannot bear that they have
Caesar for an enemy, even as Pilate is blinded by it. For our house, our
court, our wife, our children, and all that we have is under Caesar\'s
protection. If therefore Caesar is our enemy, our house, our court, our
wife, our children, and all that we have is in danger. Therefore, to
have the emperor as an enemy is nothing else than to put life and limb,
property and honor in danger. Now human nature is so minded that it
would rather have the emperor as a friend than as an enemy, so that it
may keep life, limb, property and honor. Therefore it was neither a bad
nor a small blow that Pilate heard that if he let Christ go, he would
not be the emperor\'s friend. It is not a bad, insignificant word when
the devil says to us: \"If you want the gospel, you will be hated by all
men; where will you stay? Christ proclaimed this as a warning, that it
would be so; but the devil uses it up and sharpens it most fiercely, so
that he will make people dislike the gospel. Then Pilate fell and had
the innocent Christ crucified, so that he might remain alive and well
and keep Caesar as a friend.

52 But just as Pilate clings to his body, goods and honor, and keeps
Caesar as a friend, even though he knows that Christ is wronged, so in
our time many people are good evangelicals, but they do not keep the
gospel.

They are not worthy of the gospel, so that they put their life, property
and honor at risk for the sake of the gospel, and so they follow Pilate.
For Pilate has many children on earth, who for the sake of temporal
life, goods and honor, let Christ and his gospel go. This is what the
evangelist has diligently indicated in Pilate. When Pilate hears the
word, he does not question Christ any further, but closes his eyes and
ears and lets the judgment and sentence go over the innocent man. For he
thinks that it is better for one to perish than for me and all of us,
with everything we have, to perish.

\(53\) The Pilate also shows what human holiness and righteousness are
capable of, what their basis is, and how firmly they stand when the body
suffers harm or is in danger. As long as power, honor and good stand and
remain, so long does human righteousness and holiness also remain; but
when honor, good and power fall away and cease, they also fall away
immediately and cease to be human righteousness and holiness. This is
the worldly righteousness, which perishes and comes to an end with those
who have it. For even the heathen who worship such worldly godliness do
not continue, for thus, when life, power, and honor cease, virtue also
ceases. So far have they come, and could come no further; and therefore
it is called a temporal, worldly righteousness.

\(54\) So is the holiness of the monks, which cannot stand in danger,
imprisonment, pestilence, death or other distress. As soon as such
occur, they think they are abandoned by God and man. The best pagans and
the finest philosophers have been deceived that they themselves have
confessed and said: When it comes to the end, it is all uncertainty with
virtue; as Cicero and Demosthenes complain about it. Pilate was pious
and loved worldly justice; but since the world wants to leave him, he
becomes a rogue.

This example of Pilate should be well remembered. For Pilate is a
picture of all the saints who are holy before the world and do not have
God\'s word, faith and Christ. As long as the enjoyment is there, so
long are they\...

942 Erl. so, 377-37\". Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
S4S-S4S. 949

pious; but as soon as enjoyment has an end, piety also has an end. It is
a childish and servile righteousness. For with it one keeps the child
pious, if one stabs it with the rod, or if one gives it apples, pears,
gingerbread, nuts, sugar or other gifts. When the rod stops and the
sugar runs out, piety also stops. So also the servant is pious as long
as one is after him, and as long as he sees the enjoyment; when the
master is gone, and the enjoyment ceases, the servant goes his way.
Therefore I have said that it is a filial, servile, perishable
righteousness.

In our time, it is like this everywhere: because the gospel teaches that
one should do good to all people, without asking for our pleasure, only
in honor of God and for the service and benefit of one\'s neighbor, no
one wants to help or advise the other. Before, under the papacy, one
gave too much and beyond measure. For they said, \"If you give so much,
you will enjoy it so and so. For one has looked at the enjoyment and
reward, and has thus made a worldly righteousness out of it. But now, in
the light of the Gospel, when no more is said about our merit, no one
wants to give or help. These are called Pilate\'s children, and belong
to Pilate\'s kingdom of heaven, and will receive their reward with
Pilate. Every peasant can do this, that he is pious as long as he is
rewarded; but if he has to give and help for nothing, piety will not go
away.

**When Pilate heard the word, he felt JEsum out, and sat down on the
judgment seat in the place called High Pavement, which in Hebrew is
Gabbatha.**

Pilate sat down on the judgment seat and did not question Jesus any
further, as he had done before, because the word, \"If you release
Jesus, you are not Caesar\'s friend,\" frightened him and brought all
his righteousness to the ground. But the evangelist describes very
diligently how Christ was publicly and gloriously judged. Pilate needed
a public judicial glory. The judgment house is located in the front of
the street, and has in front

In the same oriel Pilate sat when he held court, under four pillars, so
that he could be seen by everyone. That is John led out into the
judgment house; not that JEsum was led out onto the gaff outside the
judgment house, but that he was led into the same bay window at the
judgment house. The Germans have taken it from Jews, and call it a
Cavat, 1) or a raised staircase. Summa, the court was held publicly and
magnificently, not in the corner, but before everyone.

**V. 14. Now it was the preparation day at Easter, about the sixth
hour.**

58 The evangelist sets forth the time, the person, the place, and all
the circumstances and occasions, all of which are to be known for the
sake of the Jews, that they may be assured. Jesus was judged at the time
when Pilate was judge, and in the place where the oriel stood, in the
front of the judgment house; and on Easter evening, and about the sixth
hour of the day 2c. The Jews could not pass by, especially those who
lived at that time.

59 These hours are to be understood thus: The Jews had a way of dividing
the day into twelve hours, just as we would count the day from 6 to 6
again, that is, one day in Jewish, as can be seen from the Gospel Matth.
20, 1. ff., where some workers are hired by the father of the house into
his vineyard at the first hour, that is, soon in the morning; some are
hired at the third hour; some at the sixth and ninth hour; some at the
eleventh hour. These are all Jewish hours, into which the Jews have
divided the day.

60 After that, they also divided the day into four quarters. The first
hour is with us at 6 o\'clock; the third hour is with us at 9 o\'clock;
the sixth hour is with us at 12 o\'clock; the ninth hour is with us at 3
o\'clock, at vespers; the eleventh hour is the last, and one hour before
evening. And just as the Jews divided the day into twelve hours, four
quarters, so they also divided the hours into four quarters.

1\) Cavat \-\-- altan-like porch of a house (Dietz). In Grimm we find
the forms: kaffate and kavete.

944 **Erl. 50, 379-381. Sermon on Joh. 19, 14. 15. W. VNI, SIS-SSI.**
945

The night is divided into four quarters, so that everything is finely
arranged. Therefore, we read in the Scriptures that it is often written
about the first night watch, and the other, third and fourth night watch
2c.

61 Therefore the evangelist says that Christ was crucified at the sixth
hour, which was almost 12 o\'clock. Pilate delayed the judgment for a
long time to release Jesus, so that the innocence of the Lord Christ
might come to light and be known. Therefore he had to stand before the
court for five whole hours before he was condemned; Pilate beat away all
the accusations of the Jews, and Christ spent the time confessing before
the governor.

**V. 15 Pilate said to the Jews, \"Behold, this is your king! But they
cried out, Away with him, crucify him.**

62 Then Pilate tried again to see if he could set JEsum free. Before, he
had him scourged and miserably mangled, and brought him out to the
judgment house, to see if the Jews would have mercy on him, and be
satisfied with his miserable appearance, that he was so severely
beheaded and so miserably mangled, and release him; but here he is
trying just that, if he could release him, but in a different way. For
above \[v. 5\] he says, \"Behold, what a man!\" As if he should say,
\"Do not be sorry for him, and are you not satisfied that he is so
miserably wounded? Here he says, \"Behold, this is your king.\" As if he
should say: \"Fie, be ashamed of yourselves that you insist on me to
crucify your king.

So Pilate had two reasons for releasing Jesus: First, whether he could
bring the Jews to have mercy on him. Second, whether he could make them
ashamed, so that they would stop pressing on him. As if to say, \"Are
you not ashamed? If you were pious people, in whom virtue and shame
were, you should run with armor and weapons, and drive me out of the
city with all my people, so that I would crucify your king; but you do
the opposite. You should have protected your king and defended him
against me; so you go to him and override me, so that I kill him when I
would gladly give him up.

64\. all this is prescribed that the un

The guilt of the Lord Christ must be confessed, so that the Pilate\'s
mouth may be an eternal witness to the end of the world that the Jews
have acted abominably, falsely and unjustly. The mouth of the Gentile
Pilate must cry out in the whole world that Christ has been innocently
killed. And this must be done by the judge himself, not by the judge\'s
servant, and must be done against the Jews, who should protect and guard
their king.

This is what is happening to our gospel now: those who should defend the
gospel to the highest degree persecute those who like to hear it. But
what horrible punishment has followed, that the Jews have experienced
and still experience daily. Now where are the Jews who cried out so
vehemently, \"Away with him, crucify him\"? They have now gone more than
a thousand and a half years astray and miserable with hardened hearts,
and have lost their kingdom, priesthood and everything, and their own
conscience testifies against them that God is angry with them and is
hostile to them. If before they could cry out, \"Away with him, crucify
him,\" and accept no excuse, not even from Pilate the judge, God is now
again playing this very game with them; they fast, pray, or do whatever
they want, God will neither hear nor see them.

The same thing happens to us: the stones cry out that our doctrine is
the right, pure gospel, yet the pope, bishops and princes go through
with their heads and condemn our doctrine. But how will such persecutors
of the Gospel finally fare? Just as God did to the Jews, so He will do
to them: they will shout and scream, but neither shouting nor screaming
will help \[Proverbs 1:28\]. Truly, we have experienced a good deal of
such wrath of God in the papacy. How many priests, monks and other
people have worked themselves to death with fasting and praying to
appease God\'s wrath, and yet have achieved nothing? Thus, when one
despises God\'s word, God despises the despisers again \[1 Sam. 2:30\].
Our bishops, monks and priests also have a lot of shouting, praying and
singing, but God does not hear them. When the Turk will come, they will
be tired of praying and pro-.

946 Erl. so, SS1-SS4. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
WI-SS4. 947

They may make more concessions, but they will achieve nothing, except to
further anger God and provoke him to punishment. The example of the Jews
shows enormously what reward the adversaries of the Lord Christ and the
despisers and enemies of His Gospel have to expect.

**V. 15. 16. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your king? The
chief priests answered: We have no king but Caesar. Then he delivered
him up to be crucified.**

67 St. Matthew Cap. 27:24 states that Pilate took water and washed his
hands before the people, saying, \"I am innocent of the blood of this
righteous man, you see\"; and all the people answered, \"His blood is
upon us and upon our children.\" St. John passes over all this, and says
only that Pilate delivered up JEsum. Pilate resisted enough to speak
according to worldly righteousness; and God willed that such outward and
worldly righteousness be stiffly held in the world among many; for,
alas, few are so pious as Pilate. Although such outward righteousness is
small and not enough, as stated above \[§53\]. But the word: \"If you
let this one go, you are not Caesar\'s friend,\" frightens Pilate, so
that he lets the judgment go over the innocent Jesus, and hands him over
to the Jews; not according to the law, for he was innocent, as Pilate
himself confesses, but, as Lucas says: \"According to their will.\"
Pilate then makes himself part of all the sins of the Jews and becomes
guilty of the righteous man\'s blood, even though he has testified to
his innocence and often confessed that there was no guilt of death to be
found in him. But worldly justice does not do otherwise, it lasts as
long as it is without danger.

68\) Here is something to be said about the judgment: Although the
judgment that was passed on Jesus is not expressed, nevertheless it
seems that the judgment was as the title reads, which is pinned on his
cross, namely: Because this Jesus of Nazareth has stood up for a king of
the Jews, and thereby acted against imperial majesty, as a rebel and
rebel, and insulted imperial majesty and crown, I judge that Pi.

latus, and Roman governor, condemned him to the death of the cross, that
he might be punished and hanged on the cross like a rebel. Thus Christ
was condemned and sentenced to death, not because of his doctrine, as a
seducer of the people, but because he was a rebel, a rebel, and guilty
of the majesty and crown of the emperor and the high authorities.

69 The Lord proclaimed this long before, when he said to his disciples,
Matt. 26:18, \"The Son of man shall be delivered unto the Gentiles\";
that is, the Gentile power and authority would kill Christ, because he
had set himself up as king. The Jews accuse him, and say harshly: \"This
man wants to be our king, turns away the people, and begs to give the
bosom to Caesar; but Christ never desired to be the bodily king of the
Jews, nor was he contrary to Caesar; nevertheless he must bear the
guilt. So Christ with his gospel and all those who want to be under his
gospel are condemned as rebels.

\(70\) He then that would be under the gospel, and bear the cross of
Christ, must take heed that he be called a rebel. Nor must he be angry
that the gospel is called rebellious; for the Passion gives Christ this
judgment, that he must die as a rebel, and the Scriptures give the
gospel this name, that it is called a rebellious doctrine of the world,
as St. Paul says in 2 Corinthians 5:5. Paul says 2 Cor. 6, 4. 5: \"Let
us prove ourselves servants of God, in great patience, in tribulations,
in distresses, in beatings, in prisons, in riots\" 2c. The great
countries and cities butted heads over St. Paul\'s teaching, and
considered it seditious; St. Paul complains about it, and Christ
indicates such by his title. The 2nd Psalm, v. 1. 2. also says of this:
\"Why do the heathen rage, and the people speak so vainly? The kings of
the land rebel, and the lords counsel with one another against the Lord
and his anointed.\" The heavenly Father, and the heavenly Father\'s Son,
Christ, are causing an uproar in the world, so that emperors and kings
are raging and people are chattering about it. But in fact it says that
neither the heavenly Father nor the

948 Erl. so, S84-S8S. Sermon On Joh. 19, 15. 16. W. VIII, SS4-SS7. 949

The Son is to blame for such rebellion, but the blame lies with the
emperors and the kings, who do not want to suffer Christ with His
gospel, but say, v. 3: \"Let us break their bands and throw off their
ropes. Christ does not teach sedition, but suffers sedition.

Now there is a great difference between the rebellion that I make and
cause and the rebellion that I suffer. Christ taught rightly, and never
incited to sedition, and never preached sedition, but taught how to
stand against God and Caesar, as His teaching is, Matth. 22, 21: \"Pray
to Caesar what is Caesar\'s, and to God what is God\'s.\" John the
Baptist also preaches and teaches rightly Luc. 3, 14. When the men of
war asked him what they should do, he answers them: \"Do neither
violence nor injustice to anyone, and be content with your honor.\" Yes,
he lets himself be beheaded over his office and for the sake of truth.
This does not mean that he taught or stirred up rebellion, but that he
suffered rebellion. Christ does not rebel against kings and emperors,
but they rise up against him and condemn his word and gospel, neither
wanting to hear nor see his teaching; therefore they are rebels who
cause rebellion, and not Christ.

So now our princes say that our teaching is seditious. Yes, right; but
you must understand it right. Our doctrine suffers sedition, but does
not cause sedition. For we do not preach that men should take up the
sword, but that every man should be obedient and subject to his
authorities; but they, who reproach our doctrine as seditious, take up
the sword. If they were not obdurate, I would ask them how it could be
that we are rebels, because we do not burn, behead, or chase away
anyone, but rather they burn, behead, and chase away the unruly.

. But our gospel must be stirring because it preaches what people do not
like to hear. So if it works, it works. For thus says the 120th Psalm,
vv. 5, 6, 7: \"Woe is me, that I am a stranger among Mesech; I must
dwell among the tents of Kedar. It is long for my soul to dwell with
those who hate peace. I keep

Peace; but when I speak, they looked on war.\" There the Holy Spirit
says that the gospel does not cause turmoil; but when God\'s Spirit
opens his mouth and begins to preach to the world, the world is in armor
from hours. So do our adversaries; they strike at one commandment after
another: Resist here, resist there; strangle here, strangle there; and
yet blame us, we are rebels. But if one holds our doctrine and life
against their doctrine and life, it is easy to find out which part is
rebellious.

\(74\) Yea, they say, thou shalt not teach the gospel, neither shalt
thou preach it; thou shalt not punish our false doctrine and shameful
living; thou shalt not expose our idolatry, for out of it cometh
sedition. That is where the devil strikes; why do you not hear the
gospel as we do? Why do you not let the same discipline, instruct and
guide you? If thou wouldst, thou wouldst be one with us, and we with
thee, and there would be no strife nor battle between us.

75 So the gospel of Christ is always called rebellious in the world,
because the devil and the world stir up rebellion against it. But they
would gladly interpret that the gospel is seditious because it teaches
what they do not like to hear, just as we must also be called seditious
to our adversaries, because we preach what displeases them. True, we
preach what they do not like to hear, and therefore they are angry and
persecute us. But this is not preaching sedition, but suffering
sedition. If it were true, every servant would say to his master when he
is punished by him: Dear lord, you are causing sedition; I must resist
you, for you are telling me what I do not like to hear. Such things no
master can and should suffer from his servant. But Christ and his gospel
shall suffer it from his blasphemers and persecutors.

We know well that Christ is considered the greatest abomination in the
world at all times, as the 22nd Psalm, v. 7, says: \"I am a worm, and no
man, a scoffer of men, and despiser of the people. Therefore it is no
wonder that we are also called rebels. But we can prove by deed that not
we, but they are rebels. For

[950 Eri. so, 3SS-SSS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
9S7-SM. 951]{.underline}

They have the sword; but we choke no man with the sword, but preach and
confess the truth: neither must we have the name without action, as if
we were rebels. So here stands our judgment. For the judgment that goes
against Christ, that he is a rebel, goes against us also. If the world
has not condemned Christ, and Christ must suffer, it will not condemn
us, and we must suffer. And let this be a comfort and a joy to us,
because we are as our Head, Christ, was. \"For the servant shall not be
above his lord, nor the disciple above his master\" \[Matt. 10:24\].

**V. 16, 17: And they received Jesus, and led him away, and he bare his
cross.**

The Lord Jesus has passed his sentence, is condemned to death and
condemned for all of us. Now the text says further that he had to carry
his own cross. Whether this was the custom, that all who were judged had
to carry their cross, or whether it was a special shame for Christ that
he alone had to carry his cross, I do not know. Many have been concerned
about this, and want to investigate and certainly find out whether he
had to bear it out of the custom of the country, or whether it was a
disgrace to himself, but they have not been able to be certain of the
matter. For both may well be. First, it may well have been a common way
and custom that every offender, sentenced to death, had to carry his
cross with him until the place of judgment. Again, it may well be that
they alone, to spite and woe, to greater and more shame, and to avenge
themselves on him the more, have laid his cross upon this Jesus, that he
has had to bear it, and the other two murderers, who were crucified with
him, have not borne their crosses; both these things may be; therefore I
do not conclude which of these two is certain; let each one think which
he will.

78 Truly, Christ indicates something and gives an understanding with
these words, when he says Matth. 10, 38: \"Whoever does not take up his
cross and follow me is not worthy of me. He speaks as if he were
speaking

my way, as if such a custom and habit had been in the country, and as if
he wanted to indicate, as it were, that everyone had to carry his cross
according to the country\'s custom, and that it had come from such a
country\'s custom that carrying the cross had been used for all
misfortunes. Just as if I wanted to make a proverb out of the word
\"gallows\" or \"hanging on the gallows\" in the German language, and
say: \"My work, poverty, shame, and sickness hurt me as much as if I had
hung on the gallows or on the cross;\" then the torture would become a
proverb, and would be called gallows or cross, of every accident and
misfortune, evil and suffering. So it can also be seen that Christ spoke
in a proverbial way when he said: \"He who does not take up his cross\";
and it is almost as if other people also spoke in this way according to
national usage: \"Each one will have to carry his own; I have my
gallows, I carry my cross, another has his gallows and cross. So Christ
also carries his cross, and no one can carry it but Christ alone.

So St. Paul says in 2 Cor. 12:7: \"I have a stake driven into my flesh,
that is, the angel of Satan, who smites me with his fists, lest I exalt
myself. This is so much to say: I have a cross smitten into my flesh, I
have a cross that smites and blisters me well about the head. For that
which St. Paul here calls a stake is precisely that which Christ calls a
cross. For in the countries of the East there were two ways of killing
people: First, they nailed the evildoers to a cross or stake, just as
Christ was nailed to the cross with his hands and feet. The second way
was to impale people on a cross or stake, as is still the custom in
Hungary and Turkey today, to impale people on a stake, to crucify or to
hang them; and this is called hanging on a stake. So St. Paul says that
he has a stake in his flesh; not that he was put on a physical or wooden
stake, but that he takes this way of speaking from the fact that he saw
in the country those who were to be put to death on a spike. As if he
wanted to say: I have a great plague and terror from the devil, that I
just feel as if

952 Eri. so, \[ss-ssl. Sermon On Joh. 19, 16. 17. w. VIII, WO-SSL. 953

I would have been impaled, and a stake would have been thrust through my
flesh. Therefore, it may well be that it has been the custom of the land
for everyone to carry his spear, stake, or cross.

\(80\) But whether we know this not thoroughly, whether it has been
customary, or whether it has been done for Christ\'s special dishonor,
it is without danger. Let each one do as he thinks best; our Christian
faith will not break our necks because of it. It is certain that Christ
carried his cross; it is also true that the Jews, out of hatred and
envy, insisted that he be crucified, which among the Jews was not only
the highest and most severe punishment, but also the worst and most
shameful, most difficult death, so that murderers might be judged; just
as in Turkey, whoever is found guilty of an offense is impaled.

81 But it may well be remembered that it was a heavy burden for Christ
to carry his cross; therefore some fathers say that he grew weary under
such a burden and could no longer walk, and that Simon was forced to
carry the cross for him. The painters paint it as if Simon had to help
the Lord Jesus carry the cross, so that Christ carries the foremost part
of the cross and Simon the hindmost. But this is not right. Simon did
not help Jesus to carry his cross, but Christ, condemned to death, does
not walk with bare shoulders, but carries his cross and gallows on his
own neck.

This is how it happened: Christ began to carry his cross from Pilate\'s
Gate, and he carried it through the whole city until he reached the
gate. Then, at the gate, they seized Simon of Cyrene, who was a lowly
and common man coming from the field; and they forced him to carry the
cross after him, even to the place of judgment. The evangelist Lucas
clearly says that they put the cross on Simon so that he would carry it
after Jesus; he does not say that he helped him carry the cross.

83, You see that Christ must carry his own cross, since he is now
condemned to death, and that he is not shown so much friendship and good
will that he would have been spared this burden, but he must bear it
himself and carry the cross himself.

that he might be crucified. Now this was an unkindness among the people;
just as today in our country we are much more kind than the Orientals.
For our evildoers do not carry the gallows or the wheel to be judged,
but the gallows and the wheel are prepared beforehand and prepared
outside the city. But it is described by the evangelist for this reason,
so that it may be seen how much it has stood and cost, the redemption
from sins. Jesus is innocently condemned to death and nailed to the
cross as the worst offender, and must himself carry the cross on which
he is to hang.

\(84\) After this Christ must not only bear his cross, but is also led
to the place called the place of the skull. Calvaria means a dead man\'s
head or skull, the bone above the brain; therefore they call it locum
calvariae, or place of the skull, the place where the evildoers are
judged, because many dead men\'s heads or skulls lay there. We call it
the gallows; elsewhere it is called the raven stone, because the ravens
sit on it and eat the dead bodies there. Summa, it was the place of
execution. Here in Wittenberg it is called the gallows, in Erfurt it is
called the Rabenstein. As every city has its own German, so one should
call the place. The Jews called it Skull Place, because the place used
to be full of dead bodies and legs.

The evangelist writes this to show that Jesus was not taken to a
special, secret place, but to the common, public place where the other
evildoers were put to death. And the chief priests did this so that it
would seem the greater, and so that he would be accused of having well
deserved death, and that it would be just for him, and that he would
have to suffer his punishment like other evildoers. Then all the people
fell from him. For the chief priests said, \"If this man were a true
prophet, God would not let him come to this place; but because he comes
here, God does not respect him, and there is no hope for him. With such
cries they have turned many people away from Christ.

86 Further, the evangelist says that they crucified two others with
Jesus on both sides.

954 **Erl. 50, SS1-S9S.** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W.
**VIII, 9SL-9SS.** 955

But JEsum is in the middle. They are not satisfied that Jesus carries
his own cross and is crucified in the common place of judgment, but they
also give him two companions, \"so that the scripture would be
fulfilled\", as the other evangelists say from the prophet, Is. 53, 12:
\"He is counted among the malefactors. These two were highwaymen,
murderers, and malefactors, who are to be judged with the wheel or the
sword, because they break the common peace of the land, against the
proper authority, which protects and should protect the peace of the
land; therefore they are guilty of death. Such rebels and breaches of
the peace are the two with whom Christ must be crucified.

And not only that, but he must also stand in the middle and have these
two murderers on his side, as the worst rebel and evil-doer. Where they
could have done worse, they would have done it without a doubt. Satan
and his people are so poisonously wicked that he is not satisfied with
Christ being crucified, but does it as badly as he can. Pilate did not
command that he should be crucified in the midst of the murderers. The
soldiers did this in honor and service of the chief priests, who were
pleased to see it, as they no doubt did it out of bitter envy and
hatred.

\(88\) Behold, therefore, as it is with our Lord Christ, so it is with
us now; we are dealt with most severely, and lack nothing, except that
we have not yet bared our necks; though many of ours have bared their
necks, and are still bared, who are slain by our adversaries, and are
still being slain daily.

**V. 19-22 Pilate wrote an inscription and put it on the cross, and it
was written: JEsus of Nazareth, King of the Jews. This inscription was
read by many Jews, because the place was near the city where Jesus was
crucified. And it was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Then said the
chief priests of the Jews unto Pilato, Write not, The King of the Jews;
but that he said: I am the king of the Jews. Pilate answered, What I
have written, that have I written.**

The other evangelists report that they gave Jesus vinegar mixed with
gall to drink at the place of the skull \[Matth. 27, 34\]. With this
they have shown once again that no man on earth is so bitter and
poisonous as the adversaries of the gospel. Summa, there is no human but
only devilish hatred among them. To the other two murderers they will
undoubtedly have given a cup of wine, as Proverbs 31:6, 7 says: \"Pray
strong drink to them that perish, and wine to the afflicted souls, that
they may drink, and forget their miseries, and remember their calamities
no more.\" But they give Jesus vinegar to drink instead of wine; and
they do not have enough of it, but mix the vinegar with gall, as St.
Matthew says, or as St. Marcus Cap. 15, 23. says, with myrrh, which is
even more bitter. If they could have given him Kellerhals and
Colochint 1) they would have done so gladly, no doubt.

So Christ is crucified and hangs on the cross as the worst thief,
scoundrel, rebel and murderer that ever came on earth, and the innocent
little lamb, Christ, has to bear and pay for other people\'s guilt,
because it is for us. It is our sins that are on his neck; we are such
sinners, thieves, scoundrels, rebels and murderers. For even if we do
not all act so rudely, we are still such in the sight of God. So Christ
comes in our place and bears our sin and pays for it, so that we may be
saved through him. For if we believe in him, not only we who avoid
gross, outward sins will be saved through Christ, but also those who
fall into gross, outward sins will be saved, if they repent righteously
and believe in Christ. For many murderers are saved, as the history of
the Passion testifies, that the thief was converted and saved.

But Pilate\'s writing an inscription and putting it on the cross was a
fine, beautiful way and custom that pleased me very much. The pagans
have held a fine, strict, serious judgment, have the thing

1\) In the editions: Kellerneck. Kellerhals is a plant of extremely
acrid taste (Vapliirs msrsriill). Colochint - Coloquinte. Cf. 2 Kings
4:39.

956 **Erl. 50, zgz-sss. Sermon on John 19:19-24. W. VIII, 9W-968.** 957

They acted with seriousness; before anyone was judged, he had to be
accused. They did not execute people for unheard things, but left them
room to answer, or that they might be properly convinced and not
answer. 1) This is fine and praiseworthy in the Romans. After that it
was also fine and praiseworthy: Whoever was judged had a tablet on his
cross or gallows, on which was written what he had forfeited, so that in
the punitive court it would be acted publicly, and everyone could see
what he had done. In this way they showed that it was not a bad, small
thing to kill a man and take away his life, which could not be restored
to him. Therefore, they not only proclaimed before the courts by
judgment what each one had done, but also made known by writing on each
one\'s cross each one\'s guilt and abuse, so that no one could long ask
why he was judged. So it also happens here that Pilate puts a
superscription over the cross of the Lord.

But Christ is judged because he is the king of the Jews; this must be
his guilt, sin and iniquity. Now Pilate knew otherwise; nevertheless, he
kept the custom and usage of Roman law, and had the sentence proclaimed
and written in the superscription that Jesus was crucified for
disobedience and rebellion. With this Pilate wanted to palliate himself
as if he had crucified Jesus not without guilt and wrongdoing, and also
that he interpreted this to the Jews that they had crucified their king.

So Christ is the King of the Jews without his will, that is, without his
sin. Thus it is written over the crucifix to this day: \"Jesus of
Nazareth, King of the Jews. Although the title was honored, just as the
cross and the death of Christ were honored, the Jews did it to their
greatest shame and disgrace, as if he had wanted to be king and had
acted rebelliously against the emperor.

1\) i.e., that they would be convicted and would no longer be able to
present a well-founded excuse.

94 The inscription on the cross is also written in Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, because at that time there were many foreigners in Jerusalem who
had come for the Easter feast from all kinds of languages, but
especially from these three languages. Therefore Pilate wrote the title
in these three languages, so that everyone might see, read, hear and
understand the reason why Christ was crucified, lest there be a murmur
among the people that he was crucified and yet had no guilt of death in
him.

The Jews cannot let this title be good either. The first two words,
Jesus of Nazareth, they leave unchallenged and remain; but that it is
written, \"Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews,\" the proud saints are
ashamed. For they are afraid that afterwards they will hear: Why is your
King crucified, impaled, and broken straight? Therefore they say to
Pilato, \"Do not write, \'Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews,\' but
write, \'Jesus of Nazareth has said that he is King of the Jews. They
are so presumptuous, proud, and forbidding that they do not quite grant
him even that title.

But Pilate is a Roman man, and will not change the title for their sake.
\"What I have written,\" he says, \"that I have written\"; as if to say:
I cannot make a new superscription for every fool; as the title is once
written, so it shall remain. So the title of the Lord on the cross must
remain in its entirety, not out of Pilate\'s prudence, but out of God\'s
sending, because this title belongs to Christ alone. But what the title
means spiritually does not belong here, but shall be said at another
time. 2)

**V. 23. 24. But the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his
clothes.**

2\) At this point, the following remark is found in the Eisleben edition
(whether it comes from Aurifaber or from Poach, we do not know): Here
end the sermons of the man of God D. Martin Luther, so he has done Anno
1528 and 1529 about the Passion; what follows, is taken from elsewhere.
As the following scholion shows.\" The \"Scholion\" to which reference
is made is the next following marginal gloss. However, it is in straight
contradiction to the intermediate remark, which would not have been in
place here, but only in the following § 108.

[958 Erl. 60, SS5-S98. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SK8-S7I. 959]{.underline}

**They made three parts, one part for each soldier, and also the skirt.
The skirt, however, was unstitched, and had been sewn from the top down
through and through. Then they said one to another, \"Let us not divide
it, but loosen it for what it is. That the scripture might be fulfilled,
which saith, They have divided my garments among them, and have cast
lots upon my skirt. This is what the soldiers did.**

97.^1^ ) Then St. John makes a very diligent text about the Lord\'s robe
and garments, and says that the soldiers who crucified Christ cut his
garments and divided them among themselves, but they left his robe
unseparated and played with it. The evangelist here interjects this
story before the Lord\'s departure, although it seems that it happened
after the Lord\'s departure. No doubt he does this for the sake of
spiritual interpretation, as he also introduces the Scripture and says
that the Scripture is fulfilled by this, which says, \"They have divided
my garments among them. 2c. Ps. 22, 19. But he also does not forget the
history, how he concludes this story, and says: \"These things were done
by the soldiers. As if he should say: They were right bold fellows, who
practiced such thirst and courage will on the innocent man. We will
leave the spiritual interpretation for now and stick to history.

According to history, this behavior of the soldiers shows how safe,
steady and firm the people who crucify Christ are. These soldiers thus
ride with the Lord\'s garments as if he were a mischief-maker and
murderer. Such certainty greatly annoys the weak believers. In our time,
it is especially annoying and difficult that the spirits of the wicked
speak so defiantly, as if they were so sure of their own things that
they can also swear and offer defiance with God\'s final judgment. This
is the way of the wicked, that they are blood-curdling and insolent, and
commit sacrilege without all shyness. A righteous Christian is full of
fear, trembling and terror, and

1\) Marginal gloss: This following interpretation is taken from a sermon
of D. M. L., which he preached on Easter Eve \[March 27\] Anno 1529.

cannot bring it to such security; but the wicked are like a demon,
having neither fear nor timidity, not caring if someone will avenge
their evil, but walking safely and boldly as if it were all forgotten
forever, Ps. 10:5 and 94:4.

\(99\) These things are shown here according to history, that we may not
be offended at the boldness of the wicked, nor grow fainthearted over
it. As: We believe in Jesus Christ, that he is our Lord, who can and
will represent us against all our enemies; but what happens? He
sometimes leaves us in the lurch, as if there were no God to take care
of us, and nothing else appears before our eyes but that we are
completely abandoned, so that even our adversaries make a mockery and
play of it. This grieves Christians to such an extent that they feel,
grasp and see in themselves all fear and trembling, but in the other
part all certainty, defiance and firm courage. But we must get used to
it. Christ on the cross had to try and experience this himself.
Nevertheless, it is said: All things last a while, and everything has
its time. Summa, these warrior servants are figures, models and fathers
of all secure people.

**Now there stood by the cross Jesus his mother, and his mother\'s
sister, Mary Cleopha\'s wife, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore
saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he saith
unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son. Then saith he unto the disciple,
Behold, this is thy mother. And from that time the disciple took her to
himself.**

The dear Lord Christ wants to bless the world completely and to depart
from it. He no longer has anything on earth, neither money nor goods,
neither robe nor clothes, but hangs naked on the cross; he has not laid
his head, nor is his foot wide enough to die on the ground; he does not
lie on a bed, but hangs freely in the air; only he still has his mother
and his beloved disciples. Then he departs completely from the world,
and gives up his mother also, and his dearest disciple, who lay on his
breast in the Lord\'s Supper. This is a

960 Erl. so, S9ö-4oo. Sermon on John 19:25-30. W. vm, 971-974. 961

It is a great sorrow when one passes away and does not want to take on a
mother or a disciple or anything else from earth. The dear Lord must
think nothing good of the world, that he gives it such a valete.

To the mother he says, \"Woman, behold, this is your son. To the
disciple he says, \"Behold, this is your mother. And from that hour the
disciple took her to himself.\" This is said so much: the disciple John
accepted the mother of Jesus as his own mother, took her into his house,
cared for her, waited on her, provided for her, that she might remain,
as an abandoned widow, who was now also deprived of her only son.

From this text, Mary was made an idol in the papacy; and immediately in
the Passion, when Christ and his Passion were preached, the Mother,
Mariam, was preached, that she was commanded and given to us as the
Mother of Christ. We want to hold the dear virgin and holy mother in all
honor; as she is worthy to be honored; but we do not want to honor her
in such a way that we make her equal to her son Christ. For she was not
crucified for us, nor did she die; neither did she plead for us on the
cross; but Christ was crucified for us and died, and pleaded and prayed
for us with tears on the cross. Therefore, one honors the mother Mariam
as one pleases; only one does not honor her with the honor that one
should honor Christ with. And this is also the reason why the Lord puts
away His mother from Himself, because He alone wants to be the one to
whom we should cling.

\(103\) But the pope with his monks does the opposite, leaving Christ
the Son behind and clinging to the mother. Christ leaves everything for
our sake, earth, mother, disciples, so that he may help us; therefore we
should also cling to him alone, and give the honor due to him to no one
else. Because he himself has given up his mother and does not want to be
with her on earth, nor do we cling to her, we should not cling to the
mother either, and leave the Son. It is right to honor Mary, but to
build on her and take away Christ\'s honor and office and give them to
the mother would be to deny Christ\'s suffering.

**V. 28, 29, 30 After this, when Jesus knew that all things were
finished, that the scripture should be fulfilled, he said, I thirst.
There stood a vessel full of vinegar. And they filled a sponge with
vinegar, and put it about an hyssop, and held it to his mouth. When
Jesus had taken the vinegar, he said, \"It is finished,\" and bowed his
head and died.**

\(104\) The holy evangelists here all praise the fact that our dear Lord
Jesus Christ was mocked, scorned and reviled on the cross, and make a
greater suffering out of it than out of his bodily torture. For they
bring in all blasphemy and shame, because those who passed by blasphemed
Him and shook their heads, saying, \"If you are the Son of God, come
down from the cross\" \[Matth. 27, 42. ff. Marc. 15, 31. ff. Luc. 23,
35. ff.\]. The chief priests, scribes and elders mocked Him, saying,
\"He helped others, and cannot help Himself.\" The murderers who were
crucified with him also reviled him. It happened to the dear Lord Christ
in his suffering, as the common saying goes: He who has the damage must
not care for the mockery. Everything that Christ has, speaks and does
must be used; even his prayer, when he cried out: \"Eli, Eli, lama
asabthani: My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?

\(105\) To such a mockery also belongs that they give him vinegar to
drink in his great thirst, as the Scripture foretold long ago. They had
carried out a vessel of vinegar for his sake, that they might water him
with it. They gave the other disciples good wine to drink, but they
watered Christ with vinegar, mocking him: \"Yes, he is thirsty; give him
something to drink. For here it happens that no one on earth is so evil
as Christ, he must be the most fearful; here one no longer sees a thief,
but all eyes and poisonous arrows go to Christ. The devil forgets all
others, so greedy and fierce is he from Christ. For he wants to take
revenge; therefore he takes everything he has,

[962 Eri. so, 400-402. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
974-978. 963]{.underline}

Honor, clothes, body and life. That is suffering; be silent of the
torment of the soul, which we do not know.

In short, all that Christ encounters in his suffering is vile hatred and
envy; what he does is vile poison and gall among the devil\'s servants.
If he opens his mouth, they mock him; if he wants to drink, they give
him vinegar; if he prays, they turn his word into a mockery. Such things
are not done to a desperate, treacherous wicked man, when he is already
condemned to death; only to this JEsu, who is innocently condemned, such
things happen. So be it: all mercilessness shall pass over Christ and
over his holy gospel, so that the devil may pour out all his malice and
all his power over Christ, and become powerless over him, for salvation
and comfort to us who believe in Christ.

107\. But when the Lord ends with the word, \"It is finished,\" he means
that all the Scriptures have been fulfilled. As if to say, \"The world
and the devil have done to me as much as they were able; I have also
suffered as much as was necessary for the redemption of men and as was
prophesied and declared in the Scriptures by the prophets. Therefore all
things are fulfilled and accomplished. We should be well aware that
Christ\'s suffering is the fulfillment of Scripture and the redemption
of the human race. \"It is finished\", God\'s lamb is slain and
sacrificed for the sin of the world \[Hebr. 10, 14. ff.\]. The right
high priest has completed his sacrifice, God\'s Son has given and
sacrificed his body and life in payment for sin; sin is blotted out,
God\'s wrath is atoned for, death is conquered, the kingdom of heaven is
acquired, and heaven is unlocked. Everything has been fulfilled and
completed, and no one may argue as if there were still something left to
be fulfilled and completed.

**V.31-37. But the Jews, because it was the preparation day, that the
bodies should not remain on the cross through the Sabbath (for the
Sabbath day was great), besought Pilate to break their bones, and to
take them away. Then the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first
one, and the other one who was with him.**

**was crucified. But when they came to Jesus, seeing that he was already
dead, they did not break his legs, but one of the soldiers opened his
side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out. And he that
saw it hath borne witness, and his testimony is true; and he knoweth
that he speaketh the truth, that ye also may believe. For these things
came to pass, that the scripture might be fulfilled: You shall not break
his leg. And again another scripture saith, They shall see in whom they
have stung.**

108.^1^ ) To praise and honor our dear Lord God, and to give thanks to
the suffering and death of our dear Lord Jesus Christ, and that we may
do the highest and best service this day, that is, act upon God\'s holy
Word, let us take before us this passage from the Passion, which we read
from the Gospel of John on the 19th.

Among the Jews it was the way and custom, yes, not only custom, but also
God\'s commandment, that the dead bodies of the crucified or hanged
should not hang on the cross nor remain unburied until the setting of
the sun, so that the earth would not be defiled and cursed. For thus it
is written in the Law of Moses, Deut. 21:22, 23: \"If anyone has
committed a sin worthy of death, and is thus put to death by being
hanged on a tree, his body shall not remain on the tree afterward, but
you shall bury him the same day, for a hanged man is cursed by God; lest
you defile your land, which the LORD your God is giving you for an
inheritance.\"

1\) Marginal gloss: The following piece \[from? 108 to § 136j is
preached by D. Martin Luther on Easter Eve \[April 12\] Anno 1533. -
Already on that day, Easter, April 13, 1533, Luther preached the sermon
on the second article of the Christian faith (Walch, St. Louis edition,
vol. X. 1088. Erlanger, 2nd ed., vol. 19, 1) at Torgau. The third part,
or rather the third sermon \<St. Louis edition, vol. X, 1125. Erlanger,
2nd ed. Bd. 19, p. 40), is so much in agreement with the one that is
reproduced in the Rörersche Hauspostille (Walch, St. Louiser Ausgabe,
Bd. XIII, 1866. Erlanger, 2. Auflage, Bd. 5, p. 1) under the date \"am
Osterabend 1532\" d. i. den 30. März 1532, that one would probably like
to assume that we are only dealing with two different redactions of one
and the same sermon.

964 **Eri. so, E-404. Sermon On Joh. 19, 31-37. W. VIII, S7S-97S.** 965

\(110\) Moreover it was necessary that the bodies of the crucified or
hanged should be taken down from the cross before the high Sabbath, that
they should not remain unburied. For the Sabbath surpassed all other
feasts, because it was commanded in the Ten Commandments; therefore the
Jews hastened to remove the bodies from the crosses before the great,
high Sabbath began, which was great and glorious because it fell on the
high feast of Easter. For just as with us Easter Sunday is held much
higher than a bad, common Sunday, so with the Jews the Easter Sabbath
was held much higher than a bad Sabbath, although the Sabbath itself,
according to the third commandment, had to be kept holy and honorable.
For this reason, the Jews hurried and asked Pilatum, the governor, to
have the legs of the crucified broken and the bodies removed from the
crosses.

111 And when Pilate commanded, the soldiers came and broke the legs of
the two seers, that they might die sooner. This was a severe punishment.
For you yourself must reckon that it was no child\'s play that they so
tore and crushed the nailed, bleeding and wasted corpses. They have
martyred them anew, and they have crucified them on the cross. Such
torment and torture will be hard for the left thief and will make him
sore, so that his bones will be broken on the cross and he will go down
to hell in great pain. Again, it will be easy for the right and pious
thief, even though the pain of the body has already been great. For
since Christ, in whom he trusted and whom he called, was now already
departed, he will have awaited death with joy, and said: \"Fresh on,
dear soldiers! O strike dead, strike dead! that I may soon come to my
Lord and King in his kingdom and paradise.

Therefore the legs of the two executioners are broken and are cut on the
cross. But Jesus, because he is already different, will not have his
legs broken, so that, as St. John says, the scripture would be
fulfilled, which says: \"You shall not break his leg\" \[Ex. 12, 46\].
He should be the right paschal lamb, which should be eaten whole.

But one of the soldiers opened his side with a spear, and immediately
blood and water came out. This is another great miracle, which happened
during the suffering and death of the Lord, that blood flowed out of his
side when it was opened on the cross. It is not natural that blood
should flow out of a dead corpse; for when the body is dead, the blood
is delivered 1) and stagnates in the body. Since the Lord is deceased,
and his body is dead, his blood should also have been supplied to the
heart, according to the nature of the dead corpse. The fact that blood
flows out is contrary to nature and a miraculous work. But so that such
a miraculous work may be all the greater, not only blood, but blood and
water flow out of his body at the same time.

\(114\) John the Evangelist did not report such a great miracle, which
took place on the cross with the dead body of Jesus, before other
evangelists, without cause or in vain. For with this he not only
commemorated the mere miraculous work that took place on the cross, but
also wanted to indicate and imagine a high, excellent consolation for
us.

What then is the fact that blood and water flow from the side of the
Lord Jesus on the cross at the same time? Answer: Our redemption is
hidden in the miraculous work, as St. John himself interprets it in his
first epistle on the 5th, v. 8: \"Three things testify, the Spirit, and
the water, and the blood, and the three are together. From the same
three pieces, two pieces are shown and described here, the water and the
blood; and the two pieces are to be separated from each other, whether
they are already together.

The blood that flows from the side of the Lord Jesus is the treasure of
our redemption, the payment and satisfaction for our sin. For by his
innocent suffering and death, and by his holy, sacred blood, shed on the
cross, our dear Lord Jesus Christ has paid all our debts, eternal death
and damnation, in which we are stuck because of our sins. The same blood
of Christ represents us to God, and cries out to God for us without
ceasing: Mercy, mercy! forgive, forgive! Indulgence, indulgence! Father,
Father! and

1\) deliver - coagulate.

[966 Erl. so, 404-407. Interpretations On John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
97S-SS2. 967]{.underline}

earns us God\'s grace, forgiveness of sin, righteousness and salvation.
Thus the blood of JEsu Christ, our only mediator and advocate, calls
without ceasing for and for, so that God the Father considers such a
call and intercession of His beloved Son for us, and is merciful to us
poor, miserable sinners \[Zach. 9, 11.\]. For he cannot see any sin in
us, even if we are already full of sin, even if we are all sin, inwardly
and outwardly, in body and soul, from the skull to the heels; but sees
only the precious, delicious blood of his dear Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ, so that we may be sprinkled. For this same blood is the golden
robe of grace, so that we are clothed, and in it we come before God, so
that He cannot look at us in any other way, nor will, than as if we were
the dear Son Himself, full of righteousness, holiness, innocence.

\(117\) On the other hand, the innocent blood of Christ has such virtue
and power that it absolves, absolves, washes and cleanses us from all
our sin and iniquity \[1 John 1:7, Revelation 1:5\].Thus, whoever is
sprinkled and clothed with this blood may safely and joyfully come
before God, call upon Him, hope with certainty and without doubt that he
will be heard, as St. Paul says to the Ephesians in 3, v. 12: \"Through
JESUS Christ we have joy and access in all confidence, through faith in
Him.\" Yes, he may not only go to God, call upon Him, and provide all
good things for Him, but he may also boast that He is the Son of God, to
whom all His enemies and adversaries, indeed no creature, can do no
harm, and to whom everything must be subject. Rom. 8, 39.

But the evangelist adds that with the blood water flowed out of
Christ\'s open side. This part is also to be noted. For although the
precious blood of Christ is our redemption, payment and satisfaction
before God, and through its merit and intercession we are righteous and
pleasing children of God, we are still not perfect and completely pure
as far as our sinful nature is concerned. For sin, if it still remains
in our flesh and blood, is always stirring without ceasing, and the
filth of the old Adam gushes out, defiling and polluting us daily, and
inciting us to evil lusts,

that we sin, fall, stumble and miss every day.

119\. Now the water that flowed from Christ\'s side belongs to this, so
that we are cleansed daily from the remaining sins and daily
transgressions and failures \[Ps. 51, 4\]. But the same water is holy
baptism \[Tit. 3, 5\], the sacrament and supper of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the dear word of God, which we preach and hear. The same
cleanses and washes us from sins that daily stir within us and cause us
to fall. Therefore, we should take the same blessed word and the holy
sacraments with all seriousness and diligence, and keep them in constant
use, resist the sins that are in us, obtain absolution, use the
sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ often, and cleanse, wash, and
sweep ourselves always. When I am challenged with weakness of faith, I
should say, \"Well, I still feel in me much sin, weakness and infirmity,
but I am baptized; I will run to the dear Word, hear the sermon, receive
absolution, and take the holy Sacrament, comforting and strengthening
me, and cleansing and purifying me from my weakness. When I am attacked
by anger, impatience, bellyaches and other sins, I shall do likewise.

\(120\) Thus, through baptism, absolution, sacrament and word, I should
wash and cleanse myself daily from the sins that still cling to me, so
that I may resist them. This, then, is a constant washing and cleansing
of the blessed water within us, by which we put a bit in the mouth of
our sins, evil lusts and desires, so that they do not take us captive,
nor rule over the spirit; for without this, sin would be too strong for
us, overwhelm us, and take us captive, so that we would have to sink
into it and perish. Then our dear Lord Jesus Christ has poured out of
his side this powerful water, the dear baptism, the blessed bath, and
the holy sacrament of his body and blood, the medicine and refreshment
of our souls, and the holy absolution and absolution from sins, and the
dear word, so that we might recover against all kinds of temptation and
receive strength against sin.

121 Therefore, we should be mindful of the dear Word.

968 **Erl. so, \"07-40S. Sermon on John 19:31-37. W. VIII, gss-887.**
969

and the holy sacraments and firmly defy the devil and our own flesh, and
say: Even though you devil are still so angry and wicked, and you flesh
is still so naughty and sinful, and leaves me no peace, I am still
baptized and have God\'s word: if you can defile and pollute me much, I
can bathe, wash and cleanse myself again. And such faith in us God looks
upon, takes and keeps us in His grace, for the same faith\'s sake \[Jer.
5:1\]. Even though we are sinners and unclean, and fall daily, God sees
none of these sins, but sees only the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son,
marked on our foreheads, and the holy baptism in which we put on Christ.

This is the purity and holiness of Christians, which is found in faith
in Jesus Christ, and in the satisfaction of His holy, sacred blood, and
in the cleansing that takes place through baptism, through the Word, and
through the holy Sacrament. He who knows these things and

who can withstand temptations and sins, and defy them by right faith,
and say: I am a Christian, sprinkled with the blood of Christ and washed
from sins, and baptized in his name to blessedness and eternal life. For
the devil cannot suffer the word where it is spoken in firm confidence
and faith, but he must be loosed, and all sadness must depart.

Therefore the blood and water, which flowed from the side of our dear
Lord Jesus Christ on the cross, is our highest consolation. For in it is
the salvation of our souls; in the blood is our redemption and atonement
for sin; in the water is our daily cleansing and purification of sins.
We should learn these things well, and thank our dear Lord God for His
abundant love and goodness, and our faithful Redeemer Jesus Christ for
His suffering and death from the bottom of our hearts. For this purpose,
may the same God and Father, together with the Son and the Holy Spirit,
grant us His grace. Amen.

**The first part of the twentieth chapter of John,**

of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ.

1\. Just as the holy evangelists diligently describe the burial and tomb
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and all the circumstances of time, persons,
place and manner actually indicate when, by whom, in which place, and in
which form and manner he was buried, that the chief priests, scribes and
Pharisees, with the favor and help of Pilate the governor, kept the tomb
with guards until the third day in the best way possible, and also
closed the tomb and sealed the stone. And they describe all this so
diligently for our sake, that they may make us certain and assure us of
the article of our faith, where we confess that Jesus Christ, Son of God
and of Mary, our Lord, died and was buried.

and manifold appearances and revelations, show also by person, time and
place, when, where and to whom Christ has shown himself alive. And they
do this also for our sake, so that we may be assured of our faith in the
most certain way also in this article, when we confess and say: I
believe that Jesus Christ, true God and man, died for our sins and rose
from the dead on the third day.

\(2\) Not only do the dear evangelists diligently describe the Lord\'s
resurrection from the dead, but also the holy prophets in particular
emphasize this article, that he will rise from the dead. For that they
prophesy so gloriously of his kingdom, how he will be a king and lord in
the whole world, all this is understood in this article, that Christ
will be on the third day.

970 **Erl. 50, 409-41U** Interpretations on John the Evangelist. **W.
VIII, 987-990.** 971

Risen from the dead. We want to hear the same text about the
resurrection of the Lord, as described by St. John, so that we may make
our faith certain, strengthen it and establish it.

**V. 1. On the Sabbath Mary Magdalene came early, while it was still
dark, to the tomb and saw that the stone had been removed from the
tomb,**

3\. According to the history, you know that the other evangelists,
Matthew, Marcus, Lucas, write that Mary Magdalene, and Mary Jacob, and
Salome, and Joanna, and some with them, came feasting to the tomb of the
Lord on a Sabbath very early, when the sun was going out; And when the
stone was rolled away from the sepulchre, and they entered into the
sepulchre, and found not the body of the Lord Jesus, but saw a vision of
angels, they departed again from the sepulchre, and told the disciples;
and straightway they went forth again unto the sepulchre. This is how
the other evangelists write. St. John describes in many words that Mary
Magdalene came to the tomb as if she had gone out to the tomb alone, and
announced to the two disciples, Peter and the other disciple, whom Jesus
loved, that is, John, who wrote this Gospel, that the tomb was open, and
the body of Jesus was in the tomb. The tomb was open and the body of the
Lord was gone. After that he writes very broadly that the same two
disciples, Peter and John, ran out to the tomb with each other, but that
John ran first, faster than Peter, and came to the tomb first. This
seems to be a useless story and gossip, but we will talk about the same
story later.

004 Now these things, and others, are all written for this cause, that
this article, that Christ is risen from the dead the third day, might be
made sure in them which should believe. For St. John did not write his
gospel for Christ\'s sake, who had no need of it, nor for his sake (for
he has his part in it), but for our sake, that we also might believe,
and through faith obtain the power and fruit of the joyful resurrection
of our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus he himself speaks at the end of this
chapter,

V. 31: \"These signs are written that you may believe that JEsus is the
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing in him you may have life in
his name.\"

\(5\) It is also important that this article, because it is the highest
and noblest, remain certain and firm along with the other articles of
our faith on which our salvation is based. For this article has had, and
still has, the most controversy, and is the most difficult to believe.
The other articles of our Christian faith are also difficult to believe,
but this article is the most difficult. The reason is that none strives
against experience as much as this one. For we see before our eyes that
all the world is carried away by death, and dies: then emperors, kings,
high and low, young and old, and all the children of men, one after
another, are laid in the grave, and digged. One is eaten by wild beasts,
another by the sword; this one leaves a leg in Hungary, another is
burned with fire; this one is eaten by worms in the earth, another by
fish in the water; another is eaten by birds in the sky, and so on.

\(6\) It is difficult to believe that man, who perishes and dies in many
ways, should live again, and that the members of man, which are
scattered so far apart and turned to ashes and powder, should come
together again in fire, water, and earth, and that the soul of man
should dwell again in the same body in which it dwelt before, and that
man should have the same eyes, ears, hands, and feet, but that the body
with its members should have a different nature \[Job 19:25 ff\]. Such,
I say, is difficult to believe. For if one wants to calculate it
according to reason, then it can be seen as if this article, of the
resurrection of the dead, is either nothing at all or quite uncertain.

\(7\) People used to joke and say, \"That sheriff in the village, when
he was about to die and his priest came to him and comforted him with
the resurrection of the dead, said, \'Lord, is it true that the dead
rise? Well, to please you I will believe it; but you will see that
nothing comes of it. This is a joke; it would like to

972 **Erl. so, 411-414. Sermon On Joh. 20, 1. W. VIII, 890-992.** 979

but it must be a serious matter. For I fear that there are many such
mayors, not only in villages, but also in cities and castles. There are
now few people on earth who believe this article seriously, but
especially the great merchants, the rich and powerful of this world,
believe nothing of it. In Judaism it was the same; hardly half of them
believed that there was a resurrection of the dead, even the clergy did
not think anything of it. The whole sect of the Sadducees believed
neither God nor heaven, neither resurrection of the dead nor eternal
life, neither angels nor devils. Summa, if one takes reason to counsel,
and judges according to outward appearance and experience, then faith
falls away, and man abandons this article.

\(8\) Therefore it is necessary for every Christian to have before him
the testimony of the Holy Scriptures concerning the resurrection of the
dead, and that the resurrection of the Lord Christ be proved and
attested by certain revelation, and that he may be certain of it, and
leave outward appearances and the experience of reason. And this is also
the reason why St. John, as well as the other evangelists, have
described the history of the Lord\'s resurrection so diligently, and
have left nothing out that serves to strengthen this article.

\(9\) I was greatly astonished that the Jews should have fought so
obstinately against such constant testimonies and public signs, and
against their own consciences; for they well knew that Christ was
buried, and so kept in the sepulchre, both with seals and guardians,
appointed by the chief priests and Pilate the governor, that no man
might steal him out of the sepulchre. Now on the third day he is gone
from the tomb, and they themselves must confess that the tomb is empty
and he is gone. That they give money to the soldiers, and command them
to say, \"His disciples came by night, and stole him while we slept\";
this they themselves do not believe to be true. Nor is it so with the
others, for even Pilate did not believe it. Truly no one would believe
it if someone said to us, \"That thief hung on the gallows for two days,
and was well kept with guards.

He came and stole him from the gallows, especially when he was in danger
of the same thing happening to him as to Love, who had been hanged. The
disciples were much too stupid to venture among so many guards and carry
away the dead corpse. It is impossible to believe their lie; the Romans
were not children, so that they would have let themselves be fooled like
that. Therefore, I say, I am greatly surprised that the Jews have been
so hard against their own conscience. Nevertheless they say rightly that
they have slept; for they sleep even to this day, as they that are blind
with their seeing eyes, and will not see the truth. Isa. 6, 9. 10.

Nevertheless, the resurrection of the Lord is revealed: the women, the
disciples, even the Jews themselves, even though they buy the gross lie
for money, confess that Christ is not in the grave. That is why the two
disciples going to Emmaus on Easter Day, as St. Lucas writes \[Cap. 24,
22. 23. 24.\] \"Some women of ours frightened us, being early at the
sepulcher, and not having found his body, came and said that they had
seen a vision of angels, saying that he was alive. And some of us went
to the sepulcher, and found it so, as the women said, but they found him
not.\" And St. Matthew writes \[Cap. 28, 15.\] that this kind of talk
has become common among the Jews until this day. It will have gone
through and through among the common people, just as it would become
widely known among us, if now one of the dead would rise from the dead.

\(11\) Thus the resurrection of our dear Lord Jesus Christ from the dead
is sufficiently proven and witnessed, even by the Lord\'s adversaries.
It has testimony from the governor Pilato, from the high priests and
Pharisees, and from the common people. All these things have been done
for our good, that we may be served thereby, and that we may be assured
of this article. The great city of Jerusalem, both city and rabble, must
bear witness to this article. Of course, no one among them has seen him
resurrected from the dead. Nor should they have seen him, for other
witnesses were chosen to see him, as St. Peter says in Acts 10, v. 40,
41: \"God raised him from the dead on the third day.

[974 Erl. so, tit-ii\". Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
9S2-ggs. 975]{.underline}

days, and make him manifest; not to all the people, but to us, the
chosen witnesses of GOD, who have eaten and drunk with him after he rose
from the dead.\"

\(12\) First, the resurrection of the Lord Christ is made certain by the
testimony of his adversaries; then by the testimony of his friends;
third, by the testimony of the Lord himself, that he appears alive and
is seen; and fourth, by the testimony of the dear prophets and the holy
Scriptures. The guardians, Pilate the governor, and the chief priests
and Jews confess that Christ is not in the grave. Then Peter and John
not only run to the tomb, but also Magdalene and all the other women and
disciples, and find it just as the angels had said. So also the Lord
himself comes to them, eats and drinks with them after his resurrection,
talks with them, lets himself be touched, felt and understood, and says
Luc. 24, 39: \"Behold my hands and my feet, it is I myself; feel me, and
see, for a spirit has not flesh and legs, as you see that I have.\"
Summa, he thus remits them for the forty days until his ascension, so
that none of them can deny, but all must confess that the Lord has truly
risen from the dead. Finally, the Holy Scriptures and the testimonies of
the prophets agree that both. Friends and enemies both testify to the
resurrection of Christ, and to such testimony also comes the work of the
resurrection.

\(13\) Upon such testimonies let every Christian\'s heart groan with
joy, 1) believing assuredly and without a doubt that Christ rose from
the dead on the third day. For Pilate the governor, and Caiphas the high
priest, and all the people of Jerusalem, with Herod the king, bear
witness on one side. Then the apostles testify on the other side, and
their testimony goes throughout the whole world. Thirdly, the work
testifies for itself; and lastly, the Holy Scriptures testify. We should
certainly rely on this, and need no further special revelation.

14\. i for my person let me at these

1\) i.e. support. Otherwise written: stönen.

I would not want to have any special revelation and to see Christ
personally. For such personal seeing would not be as useful to me as
these testimonies. Because I have often read that the devil often
disguised himself in the form of Christ and appeared, I could not
believe such revelations. But that Pilate and those who crucified Christ
themselves confess that he rose from the dead, and that the disciples
testify to this, and that Christ himself testifies, and that the
Scriptures of the prophets testify, is more certain and stronger to me
than all special revelations.

\(15\) It is a strange bird on earth for such a heart, which considers
this article of the resurrection of the dead to be certain. For all the
world learns this article as another history and story; but that it
should venture life and limb, and all that it has, nothing comes of it,
for it is uncertain of this article. Now one should be most certain of
this article, for where one holds this article to be certain truth, that
is, to leave life and limb over it, that makes one a Christian. And
therefore we preach this article, that we may be sure of it, and that
every man may search his own heart, and examine himself, whether he will
also die upon this article. Of the fruit of Christ\'s resurrection I
will not speak now, for I have often preached of it at the Easter feast,
that the resurrection of the Lord Christ brings with it redemption from
sins and death: but now I will preach of the text in Himself, that we
may become certain of the history and story, and that every one may hold
this sermon to be certain and firm.

16 This is what Saint John means by describing history so diligently,
because he would like to make us certain, so that we have no doubt about
it. He actually describes time, persons, and the work of the persons, as
befits a good historian. He introduces Mariam Magdalenam alone, and
praises her primarily because of her faith. For behold, what a fervor is
in her heart; so that St. John also diligently silences all the other
women, and remembers only Mary Magdalene, so that he may show her great
love for the Lord Christ.

976 **Eri. so, tis-tis. Sermon On Joh. 20, 1-10. W. VIII, 9SS-SS8.** 977

\(17\) On one Sabbath, saith he, that is, on the other day of the
Sabbath, she came alone to the sepulchre. She would have preferred to
come before, but the Sabbath prevented her. In addition, she comes to
the grave early, while it is still dark, she hardly waits until morning.
This shows her heart, fervor and love, which she bears to the Lord
Christ. All this has its allegory and spiritual interpretation, but we
want to stay with the history.

The dear Mary forgets all her worries and business in her house, and
soon runs to the grave early in the morning to seek the Lord, and is so
utterly imprudent with great love that she does not consider what she is
doing or planning. If she had been sensible and prudent, she would have
thought and said to herself: What are we doing? Are we not great fools?
We run to the grave, where so many guardians lie before the governor
Pilati and the high priests? There is also a great stone at the door of
the tomb, and the stone is sealed, so that our running and walking is in
vain. No doubt she would have thought of it, as she will think of it
later, when she is on her way. But first she is mad and blinded by great
love, that she does not think of any of them; her heart is so inflamed
with love that she neither sees nor hears.

\(19\) Thus a heart that is embraced with love is wont to see anything
but that for which it has desire and love. This is also seen in mad
love; therefore the poets have painted that Cupid or love is blind. Just
as it happens in mad love that he who is embraced by such love sees
nothing and hears nothing except what he loves, so it also happens in
this love for Christ that such a man who loves Christ becomes drunk and
no longer thinks or sees anything but Christ. Nevertheless, this Mary
does not yet believe that Christ has risen from the dead, but only burns
with love for him who is dead, as she burned with love for the living
Christ before. This is a good thing about love, that it goes freely and
does not think beforehand whether it is possible that it will begin or
begin. So also does a man who believes in Christ

Believing, he goes along cheerfully and freely, confessing Christ,
speaking of him, and not considering whether it is possible that he may
pass through, seeing and esteeming no man, neither father nor mother,
neither goods nor honor, neither body nor life, nor anything that is on
earth.

**Comes to the grave, and sees that the stone was gone from the grave.**

20 This reads as if Mary Magdalene, and the other women with her, did
not enter the tomb at first, but as soon as they saw the stone removed
from the tomb and the tomb open, they turned back and went home again to
tell the disciples. The other evangelists do it a little differently,
especially St. Lucas \[Cap. 24, 2. 3.\] writes that when the women found
the stone rolled away from the tomb, they went into the tomb and did not
find the body of the Lord Jesus.

**V. 2. Then she runs and comes to Simon Petro and to the other disciple
whom Jesus loved, and says to him, \"They have taken my Lord out of the
tomb, and we do not know where they have laid him.**

This is what the dear Mary will have spoken, so that one tear will have
chased the other; her eyes will have flowed with weeping and sadness; I
cannot imitate her, nor can I reach her heart\'s thoughts and body\'s
spirit with words. Her words, therefore, will have flowed from a great
and excellent passion and love, so that not only her mouth spoke, but
also her whole heart and all her limbs, as it is wont to happen when the
heart is serious. O dear disciples, she will have said, what shall we do
now? The stone of the tomb is gone, and the tomb is open; how will it
always be closed? With these words she reveals her fierce heart, which
carries her to Christ, and her great desire and lust, of which her heart
is full.

**V.3-10. Then Peter and the other disciple went out, and came to the
sepulcher. And the two ran together, and the other disciple ran before
Peter, and came first to the sepulcher, and looked in, and saw the linen
laid; but he went not in.**

**\
**978 Eri. so, 418-421. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
SÄS-IVVI. 979

**Then Simon Peter came after him, and entered into the sepulcher, and
saw the linen laid, and the face-cloth, which was bound about Jesus\'
head, not laid with the linen, but wrapped up by itself in a place
apart. Then went in also the other disciple, which came first to the
sepulchre, and saw, and believed. For they did not yet know the
Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. Then the disciples went
together again.**

22 These two disciples, Peter and John, were also on fire, and loved the
Lord Jesus above all the other disciples; therefore they also set out
first for the tomb, and run more than all the other disciples; but John
runs faster than Peter, who also was younger and stronger than Peter.

23 John the Evangelist made a long theiding of it, and as it seems a
useless discourse, that these two ran together, and John came first to
the sepulcher, but did not enter into the sepulcher; but Peter,
following him, went into the sepulcher, and saw the linen laid, and the
face-cloth wrapped aside in a separate place; for the sepulcher had two
doors, where one could go in and out.

\(24\) This beautiful, noble text the pope and his followers wanted to
draw and stretch to prove and confirm his authority that he, the pope,
is the head of the whole Christianity and lord of the whole world, as
well as an earthly God and Christ\'s governor on earth. This, he says,
is indicated here, that Peter, whose heir to the throne is the pope, is
a lord of all apostles. For since John does not want to go into the tomb
of the Lord before Peter, but lets Peter go in first, as the chiefest,
much less would he have done or undertaken anything else in which he did
not grant Peter the preference and the authority. It is as if Christ had
established and instituted a physical, temporal government through his
apostles.

25 Christ, our dear Lord, had more needful things to do on earth, for
which he came, than to preach and teach about the temporal kingdom, or
to establish it, and

order. He commanded the worldly rule to Adam, when he said to man Gen.
1, 28: \"Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue
it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the
air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth. He came to
earth to save us from sin and death, and to teach us the way to
salvation. He called and sent his apostles to preach the kingdom of
heaven, and by their word and preaching to bring people to salvation.
And this the dear apostles did faithfully and diligently. If the pope
also did this, we would willingly and gladly consider him to be the
supreme authority. But the fact that the pope led the people to
salvation does not result in anything, but rather he leads them away
from the kingdom of heaven to hell through his idolatry and infernal
abominations.

\(26\) It is true that every Christian should contend and contend that
he is the chief and chiefest in Christ\'s and the apostles\' office
\[Luc. 13:24\], but it is necessary to interpret and understand what
Christ\'s and the apostles\' office is. Christ did not rule the house,
the country, the people, the cities, nor did He subject Himself to rule,
but rejected such office and rule from Himself, saying Matt. 8:20: \"The
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of
Man hath not where to lay His head.\" And Luke 12:14: \"Who hath made me
a judge or a judge of inheritance over you?\" His office and work is to
preach the gospel and to give the Holy Spirit, so that men may come to
the knowledge of the truth, be saved from sins and death, and be saved.

He commanded the apostles to preach the gospel of the grace of God and
to lead people to the kingdom of heaven through such preaching, not to
rule and reign in a worldly manner. Thus he says to his disciples Matth.
20, 25-28: \"You know that the worldly rulers rule, and the overlords
have power. It shall not be so among you; but if any man will be mighty
among you, let him be your servant. And whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your servant. Just as the Son of Man did not come to be
served, but

980 Eri. so, 42I-4SS. Sermon on Joh. 20, 3-10. W. vm, iooi-iao4. 981

that he may serve and give his life for the salvation of many. If the
pope, cardinals and bishops wanted to be the highest and most noble in
this service, how gladly we would accept them and recognize them as our
highest and most noble; but they do not like the official authority, but
quarrel about the authority of power and rule.

\(28\) Now you know, as you have often heard, what the difference is
between Christ\'s kingdom and the temporal government. Christ\'s kingdom
goes no further than to save men\'s souls from sin, death and hell, and
to help them to God\'s grace and mercy, so that man may be saved to
eternal life. And in this kingdom and ministry Christ\'s apostles are to
serve. Whoever does this, and preaches to the people about this grace of
God, and serves them so that they may come to eternal life and be saved,
shall be called a pope and a ruler. But this kind of authority, which
stands in vain service and servitude, the pope does not like with his
group, but seeks worldly power and sovereignty; and for the way to
salvation he teaches vain outward ceremonies and human commandments of
eating, drinking, dressing, celebrating 2c. That is, stepped out of
Christ\'s ministry and left the ministry of the apostles, martyrs and
all righteous Christians.

\(29\) What do I ask for it, or what does it help me against sin and
against death? or, what does it promote me to eternal life, if I already
have and keep all the commandments of the pope, of ceremonies, eating,
drinking, dressing, celebrating? Eating, drinking, dressing belong to
the worldly regiment; in the spiritual one I am not allowed to take such
care. The soul is not allowed to eat, drink, dress or anything like
that. If I only have someone here who faithfully and diligently preaches
to me how I can be rid of sins and death and become eternally blessed, I
will listen to him and gladly give him the honor of sitting far above
me. But that the pope and his mob sit on top, and want to be the rulers
in the church, and ride on delicious mules and large, magnificent
cabals, and do not even ask how the people are taught, and know how they
can be saved from sins.

and death, and be saved and saved, which are all the bishops in our
time: this may well be the devil\'s authority and sovereignty, of which
neither Christ nor his apostles and martyrs in his kingdom know
anything; without it being proclaimed by Christ and the apostles that
false Christs and false prophets will arise \[Matth. 24, 5\], and \"that
the man of sins and the child of perdition, who is an abominable man,
shall exalt himself above all that is called God or worship, so that he
shall sit down in the temple of God as a god, pretending that he is
God\", 2 Thess. 2, 3. 4.

\(30\) Such devilish authority of the pope and his followers is now
revealed by the gospel, so that anyone who understands Christ\'s kingdom
and ministry rightly will not be misled or hindered by such larvae. For
Christian authority, which Christ commanded in his kingdom, is called
and is a service, namely to wait for souls, to serve people with the
word of grace, so that they may be redeemed and saved from sins, death
and hell. He who works and does the most here is the best and highest.

If you want to understand this text correctly and know why Peter entered
the tomb first and John followed, whether he came to the tomb before
Peter, know that Peter was older and was called first by Christ. For
this is how it should be in Christianity, that one should honor the
other because of his age or gifts, as St. Paul teaches in Romans 12:10:
\"One should precede the other with reverence.\" So the other disciples
let Peter be the greatest among them and gave him the preference,
because he was the oldest among them and the first to be called. Again,
even though Peter was the greatest and most distinguished among the
disciples because of his age and profession, he still allows himself to
be sent out by the other apostles in Samaria to preach the word of God
\[Acts 8:14\], and every Christian willingly and gladly allows another
to be preferred over him. Therefore, in this text it is described and
indicated how John held Peter in honor, and not how Peter was the
supreme apostle, and such authority was inherited from Peter to the
pope.

982 Erl. so, 42S-4SS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
1004-1008. 983

\(32\) In the world this order and distinction must be and remain, so
that the temporal authorities are held higher than the subjects; and a
mayor in a city is more honestly dressed and kept than a bad citizen;
and a citizen more honestly dressed and kept than a common servant.
Where this difference and order would not be in the secular regime, the
strong would trample the weak under their feet, and finally become a
desolate being in the world; But here, in the spiritual government and
kingdom of Christ, where there are vain pious children, such a
difference is not, nor is it necessary, but the lower a man lets himself
be brought down, and the more he serves others, the greater he is in the
kingdom of heaven; and again, the greater the Christian, the more he
rejoices and takes pleasure in it, when he himself is to serve others,
or sees that another is preferred to him.

\(33\) Therefore this and other such gospels are not to be applied to
the outward, physical nature, as the pope does, but to the inward,
spiritual nature, so that all who are in Christ\'s and the apostles\'
office may promote how the souls of men may be helped. For worldly
authorities govern body and goods, but Christ governs souls through his
apostles and disciples with the word. Therefore, with this text, St.
John neither establishes nor confirms the authority and sovereignty of
the Pope, which he himself assumes over all of Christendom and over all
the world, as the head of the church and God of the world, but thereby
shows the kindness, love and humility of the dear apostles, which they
had among themselves.

34 Secondly, the running of these two disciples serves well in the
history to make it firm and certain, and is as much said as if one said,
Christ is truly risen from the dead; for the sign, the two disciples,
Peter and John, ran out with each other to the tomb. Item: John ran to
the sign before Peter, and came to the tomb first. John did not go into
the tomb at the time of the sign, unless Peter came afterwards and went
into the tomb first. Item: as a sign, these two disciples in the tomb

The linen cloths in which the Lord\'s body was wrapped were found laid
in one place, and the face-cloth that was tied around Jesus\' head was
laid in another place and wrapped on one side.

35 But the beloved disciples, though they had seen and experienced these
signs, yet could they not thereby be sure of the resurrection of Christ,
but concluded from these signs the contradiction, that the body of the
Lord was stolen by his enemies, and taken away out of the sepulchre.
Because they found the tomb open, and the linen cloths and the
face-cloth laid, each in a separate place, they said, \"There have
certainly been men here who have power and authority to open and close
the sealed tomb, that they have been allowed to commit such an outrage,
and to tear off the linen cloths and the face-cloth from the body of the
deceased, and to wrap them together. If friends had done so, they would
have carried away the body with the linen cloths and the face-cloth at
the same time, and rolled the stone again on the grave. So the dear
disciples, in their weakness, are interpreting against the resurrection
of the Lord what serves and should serve for the resurrection of the
Lord. It helps a lot that they heard from Mary Magdalene that she said:
\"They have taken the Lord out of the tomb, and we do not know where
they have laid him. By this they are strengthened in their delusion,
that because they now thus found it, they were said: Verily, dear Mary,
thou hast rightly said that the body is gone; for where his enemies had
not taken him away, the linen cloths and the face-cloth would not be fo
neatly laid.

The disciples could not believe that the Lord had risen from the dead,
because they did not yet know the Scriptures. Therefore the outward word
is always the strongest testimony of all the works of Christ. As long as
the disciples are without the word, they cannot believe that Christ has
risen from the dead; but when they receive the word, and Christ presents
the Scriptures to them, and opens their understanding, they believe. And
if three angels Gabriel had already come and testified to them, they
would have believed such a thing.

984 **Erl. so, 42S-4SS. Sermon on John 20:3-11. W. VIII, 1006-Ivos.**
985

We do not believe the testimony as firmly and strongly as we believe the
Word and the Scriptures. Therefore there is no better and more certain
safeguard for our conscience than the outward, bodily word. We would not
turn to all testimonies, both of friends and enemies, nor be moved by
them, if Christ\'s voice itself did not follow, namely the holy
Scriptures, which are the best and strongest testimony.

**V. 11. But Mary stood before the degree and wept outside 2c.**

37.^1^ ) This story is described by St. John so that he may depict and
portray Mary Magdalene with great seriousness, as she walks along and
burns with fervent love for Christ, as if she were drunk and, as it
were, without sense and reason. She is so full of devotion, desire and
love for the Lord Christ that she neither sees nor hears. If she had not
been so drunk with great love, she would have turned away when she stood
alone in the garden and saw two angels in white garments sitting before
her in the tomb, and heard them talking to her and asking why she was
weeping. Then the Lord Himself appears in the form of the gardener and
speaks to her, saying, \"Woman, why are you weeping? Whom seekest
thou?\" Then she should have been frightened by such a sight, and should
have fled from the grave; as St. Marcus \[Cap. 16, 5.\] writes of the
other women, who, seeing in the grave a youth in a long white garment,
were terrified, and quickly went out of the grave, and fled away with
trembling. But she is so completely drowned in love and drunk that she
respects none, and fears neither angels nor anyone. \"Tell me (she says
to the Lord, whom she believes to be the gardener), where hast thou laid
him, and I will fetch him?\" Truly, there should have been a beautiful
carrying, if a woman had dared to carry a dead corpse.

1\) Marginal gloss: Saturday after St. Mti, i.e. on the 19th of the
fallow month \[Junis Anno 1329 has D. M. L. this sermon gethan.-Vermuth
had Bugenhagen not yet returned, because on June 14, 1529 Luther reports
to Justus Jonas (De Wette, vol. Ill, p.. 469; Walch, old edition, vol.
XXI, 1168): \"Pommer writes that he will come shortly.\"

\(38\) So is every Christian\'s heart, which truly loves Christ, that it
makes itself believe that all things are possible for it, whatsoever it
may think. Earthly love also does this: everyone who is in it makes
himself believe that he wants to do more than he can or may, as the
common saying goes: \"Much depends on thoughts. This is why this Mary is
a fine, beautiful model and excellent example of all those who cling to
Christ, that her heart should be inflamed with pure, righteous love for
Christ. For she forgets everything, both her feminine manners and her
person, and does not let herself be challenged by the fact that she sees
the two angels before her; nor does she think that Annas and Caiphas are
hostilely angry. Summa, she sees nothing, hears nothing but Christ
alone. If she would only find the dead Christ, she would have enough.
For this reason the evangelist was so diligent to present an example to
all the world, so that we who preach it or hear it might also gain a
desire, love and fervor for the Lord Christ.

The Lord had cast out seven devils from Mary \[Luc. 8:2\], therefore she
could not forget such great good deeds. In addition, she was the host of
the Lord, and the Lord was her constant and dearest guest, who often
stayed with her \[Luc. 10, 38. ff. Joh. 11, 20.\], so that Christ and
Mary, both because of the good deeds and the daily fellowship, became a
brotherhood, not only in an earthly way, but also spiritually. Therefore
her heart is full of love for the Lord, and cannot think, dream, or
speak in any other way than this: \"If I only had this man, my dearest
guest and Lord, my heart would be content. It still happens today when a
person has received a benefit from another, and especially when a
long-lasting habit, an old companionship and friendship come into play,
which becomes so strong that when it is time to part, it hurts beyond
measure. This happens naturally. But in addition to such earthly love,
there is also a spiritual love for the Lord in Mary, because she loves
him so dearly and fervently, and has followed him, served him, and given
him her goods and honor, her life and limb, and everything she has.

986 Erl. 60, 428-430. interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
I0M-I0I2. 987

\(40\) Whoever reads or hears this example should take himself by the
nose, smell his bosom, and search his heart to see if it also burns with
such fire and heat of love for Christ. For we have all received great
abundant benefits from God, as St. Paul says in Titus 3:4, 5: \"that the
kindness and brightness of God our Savior appeared to us, not because of
the works of righteousness that we had done, but according to His mercy
He made us blessed\" 2c. And what other benefits do we receive from him
daily? He also deals with us in the same way as he dealt with this Mary;
we read, preach, hear his holy word. He is such a common guest with us
and lodges with us daily, but spiritually, as he was and lodged with
Mary. Yes, he is more with us; for in this way we have it much clearer
and brighter than she had it, and has cast out from us not only seven,
but a hundred thousand devils. Such things, I say, have happened to us,
and still happen to us daily; yet we are not so pious as this Mary
Magdalene, for none of us loves Christ so much, and has such a fervent,
ardent heart for him, as she had. Therefore, when one of us reads or
hears this example, let him cast down his eyes and be ashamed. For our
ingratitude cannot be sufficiently explained in words.

\(41\) Yea, wouldst thou say, Mary hath done well; she hath had the Lord
with her personally and bodily, and he hath been her guest, therefore
she hath been able to love him easily; if he were my guest also
personally and bodily, I would love him also, and do him all good, even
as she did.

42\. Answer: What would be more, if he was already personally with you,
and bodily your guest? I mean, you would love him as the Pharisees loved
him; they also had him personally, and he was their guest in the flesh,
eating bread with them; yet they stung him like poisonous vipers and
serpents. But the Gospel tells us that Mary loved the Lord Jesus, not
because of his yellow hair, nor because of his person, nor because of
his bodily presence alone, but because of his presence in the flesh.

I was hanging on his mouth, listening to his speech. The same word that
she heard from him was the fire of her love that burned in her heart. If
we were to make the calculation here, the fire of love in our hearts
should be much greater than it was in Mary, because we now hear his
speech much more abundantly and clearly than she heard. She has heard
his speech for about a year, or barely half a year; but we have now
heard his gospel for ten years, and yet we act as if we had always had
such a treasure, and as if it were not a gift or a present that the word
has been given to us so abundantly at this time: we are so lazy,
indolent and careless about the dear word.

And would God that sloth and laziness would not remain, and that the
laziness of the word would not be followed by the contempt and
persecution into which all the world has fallen. We no longer remember
what we have been put into under the papacy. Truly, a hundred thousand
devils had possessed us at that time; we had accepted all false
doctrine, error and abomination, and the whole world was full of
idolatry, holy service, pilgrimages, indulgences, bulls,
confraternities, masses, and who can tell it all, and all this without
any measure; and in sum, we were all deprived of the dear pure Word, did
not know what Christ was, or faith in him. Who is there among us who
remembers this now? Now we should thank God that he has delivered us
from such a prison of the devil, and has given us the light of his word:
so we go on, and are not only careless and lazy to hear the dear word,
but also begin to despise and persecute it.

\(44\) I have often said this, and I think it is good and necessary to
speak of it often, and to remind people of the cruel blindness and
terrible darkness in which we lived under the papacy, since we had no
knowledge of God and His will, and no comfort, but only restless,
volatile hearts and consciences. But now that we have been mercifully
delivered from such blindness and darkness and have come to the Word
\[Isa. 9, 2. Luc. 1, 79.\], from which we can learn to know God rightly,
we are so ludicrous,

**988 Erl. so, 4Z0-4S2. Sermon on Joh. 20, 11-16. W. VIII, I0IL -1014.
989**

sleepy and ungrateful, that not enough can be said about it. If one were
now to give to God in honor and to the Word for promotion the hundredth
part that one has given to the devil in the papacy for the service of
establishing and confirming masses and other idolatries, we would have
to despair.

But we will also be paid daily. It will happen to us as Solomon says,
Proverbs 10:24: \"What the wicked fears, that comes upon him.\" We are
ungrateful to God and His word, therefore it will happen that the devil
who is cast out from us will bring seven other devils with him, which
are worse than he himself, and for one error we will have seven times as
much error, and will thus become seven times worse with us than it was
before \[Luc. 11, 26.\]. Then all blame will be placed on the gospel, as
many have already begun to blaspheme the gospel and say: God would have
us remain under the pope; these are the fruits of the gospel, that it is
everywhere evil; if we had not accepted the gospel, there would have
been no need. So the gospel must take the blame and bear it, and our
ingratitude and contempt, which is the cause of all evil, must go out
blameless and free, so that it may be true that seven devils have come
where there was one before.

46\. after that, that we now stand as if we would starve \[Ex. 16:3,
Deut. 11:5\], this also shall come upon us, and come into the hands,
that men shall die there as swine. Now it is said that the devil brought
the gospel into the world. This is because we are so ungrateful for the
great good deed of God that the devil has been cast out from us and we
have the fellowship of the gospel. Now Christ is staying with us, he is
with us not only in the church, but also in the room, in the parlor and
everywhere; he deals with us in the most loving and friendly way, but we
do not respect it; therefore we will have to pay enough for it.

47 Therefore, this example of Mary Magdalene is prescribed for us, so
that we may see a picture of a beautiful, fine heart, which is so full
of Christ that she sees nothing before it.

nor hears; before her all else is dead and dead; Christ alone, dead and
buried, lives in her heart. If she does not have him, she has nothing;
but if she has him, she has everything. Dear one, show me such a
Christian among us, who is thus minded against the gospel, who is thus
moved, if he have not the gospel, that he have nothing; and again, if he
have the gospel, that he have all things.

48 St. Paul boasts of himself that he is such a man who respects nothing
but Christ alone, Phil. 3:7, 8: \"What I have gained I have counted as
loss for Christ\'s sake. For I reckoned it all as harm, against the
abundant knowledge of Christ my Lord, for whose sake I reckoned all
things as harm, and reckoned them as filth\"; and Phil. 1:21: \"Christ
is my life, and to die is my gain.\" But we cannot boast of ourselves
with truth, but we may boast of our ingratitude and contempt, if it is
to be boasted of. Unfortunately, it is so with us that if I were to
preach to the elderly alone, I would have stopped three years ago, but
for the sake of the young, who are growing, I must preach. We old people
remain John in *eodem*; and go with us according to the saying: Old dogs
are not to be tamed; old peelers may not be made pious. And in sum, we
are not worthy to hear such examples as this Mary\'s is; we should be
preached to by Marcolfo; innocent hearts alone accept it; with us old
people it is lost. This example of Mary makes us all ashamed; let us
also be a little ashamed.

**V. 16 Jesus said to her, \"Mary. Then she turned and said to him,
\"Rabbuni, that is, Master.**

\(49\) Mary, being in heat, and not knowing the Lord Jesus (for she does
not believe that he is risen and alive, but thinks that he is stolen out
of the tomb), desires to know where he is laid, and will go and dig him
up. When she is thus heated, I say, and burning, she calls JEsus by
name, saying, \"Mary\". The Lord has let his usual voice go, which is
the

[A90 Erl. so, 4ss-ts\". Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. vin,
1014-1017. 991]{.underline}

He was most known to the disciples and women who were around him, as the
natural, ordinary voice is very difficult to conceal. When the Lord
spoke thus and let his ordinary voice go, Mary knew him from the
beginning. She no longer thinks he is the gardener, nor does she say to
him, \"Where have you taken him, tell me, and I will fetch him? but soon
turns and runs to him, wanting to touch him and kiss him: Now he is no
longer dead with her, whom she wants to dig up and fetch; but his voice
gives her testimony of him, that he himself is present and alive.

**V. 17 Jesus said to her, \"Do not touch me, for I have not yet
ascended to my Father.**

How am I to understand this? Should she touch him only when he has
ascended? Did I mean that if he had ascended to the Father, he would
have to descend to be touched; if he had ascended to the Father, he
could no longer be touched? Answer: So you shall understand: Christ
wanted to punish Mary\'s opinion with these words, and to show that it
was wrong and unjust. But her opinion was this, that she understood the
resurrection of the Lord to mean that he would live with them again, as
before; just as Lazarus, the widow\'s son at Nain, and the daughter of
the ruler of the school, and other dead men, after they had been raised
by Christ, went about among the people, eating and drinking, as before.
So she also thought that Christ had come back to mortal life through his
resurrection, as before; therefore she also wants to touch him in such a
way that she delights in his bodily fellowship, kisses him, deals with
him in the most friendly way, and serves him, as before.

51\) But the Lord does not want his resurrection to be understood in
this way, therefore he says, \"Do not touch me, I have not yet
ascended,\" as if to say, \"I have not risen from the dead because you
touched me and kissed me, as before. So I am also no longer in the being
and life as before. Through my resurrection I have not again entered
into the former being and life, so that I may use it as I did before.

Lazarus and others, after they were raised by me, needed it. But for
this cause I am risen from the dead, that I might ascend unto my Father,
and receive another life eternal. In this way Lazarus did not rise from
the dead, for Lazarus did not ascend to heaven. So the Lord wants to
indicate with these words that his resurrection has a different meaning
than Lazarus and the others who were raised from the dead, namely, that
he thereby ascends to heaven and takes the kingdom as a king and lord
over all. As if he wanted to say to Mary, \"I do not care about your
touching me, but I care about what you think of my resurrection, namely,
that you believe that I have come into another being through it.

**V. 17. 18. But go to my brothers and tell them: I ascend to my Father,
and to your Father, and to my God, and to your God. Mary Magdalene comes
and announces to the disciples: I have seen the Lord, and these things
he said to me.**

You hear this text preached almost every year at the Easter feast, for
it is a beautiful text that requires a whole sermon. But to speak
briefly of it, this is the summa: Christ, risen from the dead, wants to
be and be called brother to his disciples and to all believers.

\(53\) These words should be written with great and golden letters; not
badly on paper, nor in the book, but in our hearts, that they may live
within. \"Go, and tell my brethren.\" This may be a word that should
make a Christian cheerful, and stir and awaken him to love for Christ.
But such words do not belong to ungrateful hearts; it is also always a
pity that they should fall into a sure, impudent, reprobate, ungrateful
heart, for they are such pearls as Christ says Matthew 7:6 should not be
cast before swine.

54 Who could properly syllogize and calculate what the word \"brother\"
means? Peter had denied the Lord three times; the other disciples had
fled from him in his distress and suffering, and had disgraced him.

992 **Erl. 5\", 4SS-4S7. Sermon on Joh. 20, 17. 18. W. VIII,
1017-1020.** 993

So not only Peter, but also the other disciples were all in a bad
conscience, fear and trembling, and were not only not allowed to move
before the Jews, but also had to cast down their eyes and be ashamed of
themselves, as the unfaithful and perjurers who had turned away from
their Lord. To them he should have rightly said: Go to the perjured,
unfaithful wicked, who have in part denied and conspired against me, and
in part have become apostate and unfaithful to me, and tell them that
they have this and that. But he turns it back, and says, \"Go, and tell
my brethren.\" He could not have used a kinder, gentler word against
those who sit in the midst of hell, with an evil conscience and terror,
because they have been unfaithful and perjured against their Lord. In
addition, it is God\'s eternal Son, Creator and Lord of all things, who
calls them brothers.

\(55\) If a man could consider how rich and comforting these words are,
he would be drunk with joy and gladness, as Mary Magdalene is drunk with
devotion and love for the Lord. All that is in the world would stink
before him; he would not make a god out of the wealth, money, goods,
power, splendor and glory of this world, as the majority of the world
unfortunately does. For he who believed with all his heart that Christ
was his brother, would walk along in vain leaps, saying, \"Who am I that
come to such honors, and am and am called the brother of the Son of God?
I am not worthy that such a great king and Lord of all creatures should
call me his creature \[Gen. 18:27\]. Now he is not satisfied that I am
and am called his creature, but also wants me to be and be called his
brother. Shouldn\'t I be happy because this man calls me his brother,
who is Lord over heaven and earth, over sin and death, over devils and
hell, and over all that may be called, not only in this world but also
in the world to come? But our hearts are too small and narrow, and the
consolation is far too great and even exuberant, that we cannot grasp
it, even though we hear and learn about it daily. But where such things
fall into a heart, and are grasped with faith

When a brother becomes a brother, it must follow that such a heart
becomes joyful and despises everything that is in the world as vain
filth and stink in the face of this brotherhood. But if a heart does not
become joyful and glad, it is a sign that the same person has never
heard the word \"brother\" or has never understood it, or if he has
heard and understood it, he has never accepted or believed it.

But the consequence of the word \"brother\" is important and glorious
beyond all measure. For if I am Christ\'s brother (as Christ certainly
promises us in these words), it follows irrefutably that I sit with
Christ in joint fiefdom and equal inheritance, and have in common with
him all the goods that he has. St. Paul knows how to syllogize and
conclude this very well, to Ephesians on the other hand, when he speaks
Cap. 2, 4, 5, 6: \"God, who is rich in mercy through His great love, so
that He loved us when we were dead in our sins, made us alive together
with Christ (for by grace you were saved), and raised us up together
with Him, and seated us together with Him in the heavenly realm in
Christ Jesus. And to Colossians Cap. 3, 3. 4.: \"You have died, and your
life is hidden with Christ in God. But when Christ your life shall be
manifested, then shall ye also be manifested with him in glory\"; and 1
Cor. 3:22, 23: \"All things are yours; but ye are Christ\'s; but Christ
is GOD\'s\"; and 1 Cor. 6:2, 3: \"Know ye not that the saints shall
judge the world? Know ye not that we shall judge the angels?\" So the
word \"brother\" gives me such a crown on my head, which no one can
pronounce, nor fathom or comprehend with thought \[2 Tim. 4:7, 8\]. St.
Paul understood it; that is why he spoke and wrote about it so
gloriously.

57 Our enthusiasts and the spirits of the sect are misusing this
beautiful, lovely word \"brother\" to such an extent that we are no
longer allowed to use it. It is almost forbidden to call anyone by the
name of \"brother,\" for they have so polluted this word, as well as
other words, with their shameful nature. But if this word \"brother\" is
used by me correctly and from the heart, and firmly believed

994 Eri. so, 4S7-4SS. Interpretations on John the Evangelist. W. VIII,
EV-UW. 995

it follows that I belong to the paradise and kingdom of heaven, where
Christ is the Lord, because I am a joint heir with him. He gives us this
name because we are to be his fellow heirs, to live and reign with him;
indeed, he not only gives us the bad, mere name, but also gives us the
inheritance to it. Therefore every Christian and believer in the Lord
Christ is called a brother because he is a joint heir with Christ of all
heavenly goods. Christ also says about this Matth. 12, 50: \"Whoever
does the will of my Father in heaven is my brother, sister and mother.
To \"do the will of the Father\" does not mean to enter a monastery and
become a monk, but to adhere to Christ and to believe with certainty
that what he promises us is true, that he wants to be our brother. This
is how the Lord Himself interprets what God\'s work and will is, when He
says: \"This is God\'s work, that you believe in Him whom He has sent\";
and soon after, v. 40: \"This is the will of Him who sent Me, that
whoever sees the Son and believes in Him, may be saved. Son, and
believeth on him, shall have eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day.\" There you hear, whoever holds on to Christ and believes
in him, is Christ\'s mother, brother, sister, God\'s child and heir.

What can be preached that is better and more comforting? What is it that
our enthusiasts pretend that such things should not be preached, but
that the word should be abandoned and we should go much higher? I ask
you, can anything else, better and higher be preached than that our dear
Lord Jesus Christ preaches to us here about his brotherhood? Ask your
reason about it right away. Even if I knew and preached all allegorias
and secret interpretations, neither I nor anyone else would become
Christ\'s brother. Therefore there is no higher word and preaching in
the Scriptures than that a poor man, who is in sins as Peter and the
disciples were then, and is the devil\'s own, shall, without all his
merits and works, come to the glory of being Christ\'s brother, that is,
an heir of the kingdom of heaven, and lord over sin, death, the devil,
and hell.

59\. that is why the sorry devil is with the

They are the same as the red spirits and enthusiasts who pretend that
the preaching of the Gospel is nothing and that we must go even higher.
Even though they have been chattering on for a long time, they cannot
produce a higher doctrine, nor a better sermon, but bring forth their
own thoughts and shameful dreams. But here is the best and highest
doctor and teacher that ever came and will come on earth, who brings
forth this teaching from his brotherhood. Therefore it is a great,
horrible and frightening thing that the devil can blind people in such a
way that they abandon this highest, the highest doctor\'s sermon and
teaching, and pretend that one must come even higher.

\(60\) Now we ought to take heed to this preaching of our dear Lord
Christ, for it is not written for the disciples\' and apostles\' sake,
but for all our sakes. Therefore, because it has come down to us and is
preached to us, we should diligently attend to it. And especially let
evil and despairing consciences have this sermon commanded them, that in
temptation, fear, and trembling they may rightly apprehend this
consolation, that they may not fall into despair, nor be dismayed or
afraid of him who calls them brethren. If you have sin or an evil
conscience, your brother Christ has no sin but pure innocence and
righteousness; if you are in death, he is not in death but alive, indeed
he is life itself. The same Christ calls you his brother; now that he
has died and risen again from death, and has become a Lord over all, why
will you be afraid? What you have of sins and death, he can easily repay
and replace, and bring you to righteousness and life.

Whoever does not learn this consolation and does not take it seriously
is not a Christian; but whoever learns this consolation correctly and
firmly believes that Christ is his brother is a Christian and blessed,
and if he is already in sin up to his ears, so that he has also already
denied Christ. The sin of Peter and Paul need not be too great; the word
\"brother\" must redeem Peter and Paul, if they hold to Christ and
believe that what Christ has promised them is true, and be greater than
all the perjury and denial committed by Peter, and all the lusts of the
Lord.

996 He, so, 4M-41I. Sermon on Joh. 20, 17. 18. W. VIII, I02S-I0W. 997

rung, vilification and persecution, committed by Paulo.

62 But, alas, it is lacking in us, that we do not believe it strongly
and firmly. Mary Magdalene comes to the disciples, brings them the word,
and preaches the sermon to them, as Christ had commanded her: \"Go and
tell my brothers. The disciples hear the same comforting word, that
Christ will be their brother, and his Father their Father, and his God
also their God; Christ makes no distinction between himself and them as
to common goods and inheritance, though there is a great difference
between himself and them; yet he will share his inheritance with them,
so that there will be no difference between him and them as to the
inheritance and fellowship of heavenly goods. But what do the dear
disciples do? They think that such a message and such a word are fables
and fairy tales, that Christ has died and that they cannot believe that
he has risen from the dead.

63 This is why the word of grace and the preaching of Christ\'s
brotherhood is preached, heard, talked about, and yet not believed, but
considered a fable. We do not receive the same word from the heart, nor
do we have joy of it in our hearts. It is a great thing and a wonder
that Christ does not mind that we are such great husks and bad boys;
nevertheless, regardless of this, he wants to be our brother. Therefore
there is no lack in him, but the lack is in us. This shows how difficult
it is in

Come to believe the word of grace. If you were a hundred years old, you
would still have enough to study and learn about the word \"brother,\"
and you would never learn it. The apostles themselves heard it, but
still did not believe until another master came over them, namely the
Holy Spirit. Therefore it is not only difficult for us, but also for
them, to believe such things. For the gnawing and biting of the
conscience is so hard and heavy, like a stone, that it does not allow
the word \"brother,\" but always says against it, \"Yes, how can I
believe it, because I have forsaken and denied Christ, have committed
this and that sin? Thus it is that one does not believe the word, even
though one hears it, reads it and speaks it himself.

\(64\) Therefore let us forget our sin (for there is a time for
remembering sin; there is also a time for not remembering sin), and let
us not follow the gnawing and biting of our conscience, nor judge
according to our feelings, but according to the word. When our heart
says: If I knew how I would atone for my sin, I would walk on vain
needles and not let anything spoil it. Say thou against it: Let hear
what my brother, Christ, says; who thus speaks: I am the Son of God and
heir; thou shalt be my joint heir, if thou cleave unto me, and believe
on me. And such treasure thou shalt not earn of me; but I give it thee
by grace and freely. Now this may be a sermon to which we are much too
weak, both to preach and to believe.

998 **Erl. (s.) 17, WS-225.** interpretations on the Acts of the
Apostles. - W. VIII, **I024-IV2S.** 999

**IV. D. M. Luther\'s interpretations of the Acts of the Apostles.**

Two sermons

about the

**fifteenth and sixteenth chapters of the Acts of the Apostles. \*)**

Anno 1524.

**The first sermon.**

**On the Fifteenth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.**

Held between May 22 and June 4, 1524.

**Chapter 13.**

And certain came down from Judea, and taught the brethren, saying,
Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved.
And when there was an uproar, and Paul and Barnabas had no small quarrel
with them, they commanded that Paul and Barnabas, and certain others of
them, should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders for this
question. And being led of the church, they passed through Phoenicia and
Samariam, and told the manner of the Gentiles, and made all the brethren
great joy. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received of
the church, and of the apostles, and of the elders. And they proclaimed
how much God had done with them. Then some of the Pharisees who had
believed stood up and said: They must be circumcised, and commanded to
keep the law of Moses. But the apostles and the elders came together to
consider this speech. And when they had long contended, Peter arose, and
said unto them: Men and brethren, ye know that long before this time God
hath spoken among us, that by my mouth the Gentiles should receive the

\*These two sermons were delivered in 1524. The index of Poach about the
sermons held by Luther, which is printed in \"Andreas Poachs handwritten
collection of unprinted sermons of D. Martin Luthers u. s. w., edited by
lüo. Dr. Georg Buchwald, Leipzig 1884.\" (Introduction p. XVI ff.),
places the first sermon, on Act. 15, between May 22 and June 4, 1524 (I.
6. p. XIX. Cf. p. XXXID. The second sermon, on Act. 16, has its place
there between June 5 and 8, and will therefore have been delivered
either on June 6 or 7. According to the Erlangen edition, 2nd ed., vol.
17, p. 22,-1, there is a single edition of the first sermon, on the 15th
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, which gives the year 1525. The same
is cited in Panzer, No. 2689 and Dftesuur, Xo. 1669. The title is: \"Ain
Sermon von der freyhaitt der gewissenn Vber das XV: Cap der XII: Pötten.
Wirckunng Durch. D. M. Luther: Geprediget zu Wittemberg LI.V.XXV. Roman.
3. so we now hold that man is justified to do the work of salvation,
allain by faith.\" Without place and printer. The first authentic
edition, however, seems to be the one cited by Dietz, Wörterbuch, p.
I.II: \"Zwue Sermon aufs das. xD. und. xvi. Capitel ynn der Apostel
geschichte. Martin Luther. Wittemberg. 1526.\" At the end: \"Printed by
Hans Lufft.\" All collective editions (with the exception of the 2nd
edition of the Erlanger, which places it in the year 1525) assign these
sermons to the year 1526, also Seckendorf, Hist. Outw, lib. II, p. 59
and Köstlin, Martin Luther, vol. II, p. 148. In the collections:
Wittenberger (1553), vol. IV, p. 551; Jenaer (1556), vol. ill, p. 285;
Altenburger, vol. ill, p. 451; Leipziger, vol. XII, p. 189; Erlanger,
1st ed. vol. 19, 180. The second edition of Erlanger, vol. 17, p. 223,
does bring the reprint of an old edition of 1526, but one in which the
place and printer are not indicated. Therefore, we prefer to reproduce
the text according to the Jena edition, which corresponds almost
entirely with the Wittenberg edition. The deviations from the Erlangen
edition are numerous, but only in a few cases is the meaning affected,
and the redaction of the Wittenberg and Jena editions is better suited
for ours, because the (minor) changes have made the expression smoother
and the understanding easier.

1000 **Erl. (2.) 17, SSS-SS8. Sermon on Apost. 15. W. VIII, IU27-I0SV.**
1001

heard the word of the gospel and believed. And God, the Proclaimer of
hearts, testified about them, and gave them the Holy Spirit, just as he
gave us, and made no distinction between us and them, and purified their
hearts through faith. Why then do you tempt God by putting a yoke on the
necks of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we can bear? But
we believe to be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, just as
they did. Then the whole crowd was silent, and listened to Paul and
Barnaba, who told how great signs and wonders God had done through them
among the Gentiles. After this, when they were silent, Jacob answered
and said: Men, brethren, hear me: Simon hath told how at the first God
visited and accepted a people out of the Gentiles unto His name. And
there agree with the words of the prophets, as it is written: After this
I will come again, and will build again the tabernacle of David, which
is fallen down, and the breaches thereof will I build again, and will
establish it; that whatsoever is left of men may inquire of the LORD,
and of all the heathen concerning whom my name is called, saith the
LORD, which doeth all these things. God is aware of all his works from
the world. Therefore I decree that those who turn to God from among the
Gentiles should not be troubled, but write to them to abstain from
impurity of idolatry, and from fornication, and from strangled things,
and from blood. For Moses hath of old time been preached in all the
cities that preach him, and is read every Sabbath day in the synagogues.
And it seemed good unto the apostles and elders, and to all the
congregation, to choose men of them, and to send them to Antiochiam with
Paul and Barnaba, even Judam, whose surname was Barsabas, and Shilan,
which men were teachers among the brethren. And they gave writing in
their hand, saying, We the apostles, and elders, and brethren, wish
salvation to the brethren of the Gentiles which are at Antioch, and
Syria, and Cilicia. Because we have heard that some of our own have gone
out, and have led you astray with doctrines, and have broken up your
souls, saying that ye ought to be circumcised, and to keep the law,
which we commanded not: it hath seemed good unto us, gathered together
with one accord, to choose men, and to send them unto you, with our
beloved Barnaba and Paulo. Who have given their souls for the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ. So we have sent Judam and Silan, who will also
proclaim the same in words. For it pleases the Holy Spirit and us to lay
no more burden on you than these necessary things: That ye abstain from
things sacrificed unto idols, and from blood, and from things strangled,
and from fornication; from which, if ye abstain, ye do well. Be well.
When these were finished, they came to Antiochiam, and gathered the
multitude together, and delivered the letter. When they read it, they
were comforted. And Judas and Silas, who were also prophets, exhorted
the brethren with many sayings, and strengthened them. And when they had
departed for a season, the brethren sent them away in peace unto the
apostles. But it pleased Sila to remain there. Now Paul and Barnabas
were in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord with many
others. After some days Paul said to Barnabas, \"Let us go back and see
our brothers in all the cities where we have preached the word of the
Lord, and how they are doing. And Barnabas gave counsel that they should
take with them John, whose surname was Marcus. But Paul saw fit that
they should not take with them one who had departed from them in
Pamphylia, and had not gone with them to the work. And they came sharply
together, so that they departed from one another: and Barnabas took
Marcum, and sailed into Cyprus. And Paul chose Silan, and went,
commanded of the brethren by the grace of God. And he went through Syria
and Cilicia, and strengthened the common people.

\(1\) In this chapter we argue and treat of the freedom of conscience,
of which we have often said, namely, that where faith and the grace of
God are to be preached, that which is established and done by works must
fall away and be rejected. For grace and works, faith and law, do not
and cannot go together; there must be one alone, as far as the
conscience is concerned. For works may and ought to be done, but so far
as the conscience is concerned.

not rely on it, nor put his trust in it; but do it freely, in honor of
God and for the benefit of his neighbor, and cling only to faith in the
Word and in the grace of God.

2 This is the righteous, pure teaching and preaching. Where this is
concerned, there is no lack of heresies and sects. Therefore, from the
beginning of the world, the main heresy, which is called the Pelagian
heresy, of free will and the right to do as one pleases, has always come
along.

1002 Erl. (2.) 17, SLS-SSO. Interpretations on the Acts of the Apostles.
W. VIII, lüM-um. 1003

The merit of works, which has always been interwoven and stuck together
like the dung on the wheel. So at first Abel taught the word purely and
kept it in his conscience, but Cain clung to works and lost his faith.
The same happened to Isaac and Ishmael, Jacob and Esau, and many others.
All the prophets, too, were about this, that they led from false works
and trust to faith, and were at enmity 1) with the false prophets about
it.

This strife will and must remain forever. Therefore we should surrender
to it, as we see before our eyes: whether one sect perishes, that as
soon as many others arise, lest it ever remain so completely pure. The
reason is that reason is not able to surrender to faith alone. If
someone is to believe purely and simply in God\'s word, the Holy Spirit
must create it and work it in the heart; nature cannot do it on its own;
whatever one says and does, it remains attached to the works. But since
not all have the Holy Spirit, but the greater part remain in his flesh
and blood, and walk according to reason, it must therefore happen that
they remain on works and without faith. Now as little as it is possible
to be without evil men and to be without them, so little is it possible
to be rid of the wicked and of false doctrine.

4 The same thing happened to the apostles. When Paul and Peter began to
preach, especially among the Gentiles, that faith alone would save, if
the heart put its trust and confidence in God\'s grace, those who were
also Christians came in and made themselves believe that they had the
Holy Spirit, and stood up and said that faith alone was not enough; one
must also be circumcised, otherwise one would not be saved. What did
they seek, but that Christ should fall to the ground and that his
suffering should not apply, because they insisted that one would not be
saved without the law? Although they heard the apostles themselves
preach the gospel more abundantly than we do, they were nevertheless so
deeply immersed in error, drowned in blood and flesh.

1\) hostile - even very. ,

Therefore it is necessary to grasp the example well. We boast of the
first Christianity in a hostile way, how perfect it was, and how strong
the Holy Spirit was; but if you look at it in the light, the Holy Spirit
has always been equally strong and equally weak. For then they had
received the Holy Spirit; yet they are so weak that they cannot wrap
themselves up, that faith alone, without the law, must make blessed:
that if three apostles had not stood, the whole company would have
fallen, and would have concluded that one must keep the work of the law
as necessary. What then do we boast and praise of men and our churches?
Well, the apostles were not able to eradicate these sects; they may have
fought against them, as Paul does so powerfully in all his epistles, and
saved some, but they were not able to put a stop to it. It remained and
continued until the world under the pope was drowned in it, so that no
one came out. That is one piece, shown in this text.

\(6\) Then we learn here that each one must take care of himself that he
is sure and certain of the righteous doctrine, and do not put it on
other people\'s shoulders and conclusions; if not, the Holy Spirit will
soon let you see a defeat. If you are to be saved, you must be so sure
of the word of grace for yourself that, if all men spoke differently,
even if all angels said no, you could still stand alone and say: I still
know that this word is right; and that is why: for those who are against
us have no stronger remedy which they raise, than to say: Yes, should
God let the world, with so many learned, pious, holy people, remain in
error so long? That is why they think that where most of the people
fall, that is where they should go; they insist on this and cry out:
There are so many and great people on our side, plus such a long time
and habit; therefore we cannot err. Hold this up to their noses, and
say, \"Let the greatest, the most learned, conclude and say, \'Why then
is it written here that above the main matter of the Christian faith
fall the

2\) Erlanger: Learn.

[1004 Etl. (2.) 17, SSO-2S2. Sermon on Apost. 15. W. VIII, I033-I0SS.
1005]{.underline}

very best Christians, except for three persons, who stand alone
chivalrously? And yet St. James stumbles a little; comes along well, but
is not as loud as the two. 1) Would they not also have said there:
Should the Holy Spirit thus forsake the new Christianity, that it should
err, and the three alone should be right?

\(7\) Therefore I have said that every Christian must be so sure of the
matter that he feels in his heart what is right and what is not right,
as Christ says John 10:27, 4, 5: \"My sheep hear my voice, and they know
me; but they know not the voice of strangers, and they hear them not.\"
The sheep must be sure of the voice, close their eyes and ears, and not
want to hear anything, as great, many, wise, pious people are. If it
does not do this, it forsakes certainty, and only wants to hear what is
finally concluded, it is already deceived by the shepherd. God has
indicated this to us in this first Concilio. He allows it to happen that
you strengthen your faith through the favor of pious people who keep it
with you; so far that you do not trust in it, as if you could not lack
it. Accept it, but do not rely on it. The Holy Spirit has not promised
to be in the conciliis, but in the hearts of the Christians whom he
knows.

8 For, behold, there were with one another Christ\'s disciples, and the
apostles\' disciples, a band of Christians, the Pharisees, in Jerusalem
the capital; yet is the council altogether false, and they freely
conclude contrary to the Holy Ghost. Peter alone resisted, and Paul and
Barnabas joined him, though it did not help. For the crowd had to give
way to them; but they did not remain on it, as Paul complains Gal. 2:11
ff. that Peter himself also stumbled. Therefore it is clear that the
concilia are uncertain, and can by no means be built upon. For none has
ever been so pure, it has added to and detracted from the faith; and the
newer, the worse, until the end.

1\) Thus the old edition of Walch, who compared the edition of Luft, and
the Erlangen. Wittenberg and Jena: \"three\" with the marginal gloss:
\"Peter, Paul, Barnabas.\" About this reading the word in § 5 decides:
\"if three apostles had not stood.\" Therefore Barnabas is not to be
included. But also the reading: \"three\", which Erlanger has provided
with an exclamation mark, is not inconsistent and could be justified
from § 8 and § 11.

since they burned at Costnitz the holy men, Johannem Hus and Hieronymum
of Prague, 2). This, the Apostle\'s Concilium, although it is the first
and purest, still runs a little under; but without harm. Let it happen
that the law runs along a little; but that only the main part is left,
and let faith alone make pious and blessed; the rest the Holy Spirit
still lets go at the time there.

\(9\) Now let us deal with the question which they are dealing with
here: whether the Law of Moses and circumcision, coming from ancient
times, 3) should be kept? Then they unite with one another, who bear the
name of Christianity, Jacob also, and say: No; especially to the
Gentiles. This is a resolution and article that Paul obtained and
received. Thus Peter appears and proves it to be true, namely, that the
Mosaic Law does nothing to this. This was well known, which had happened
in Cornelius\' house, Apost. 10, I. ff., where all the Gentiles were
uncircumcised and did not keep the law; nevertheless, when he preached
the gospel and the faith to them, the Holy Spirit fell upon them and
made them clean, as well as the Jews. He saw and felt it bodily, that
the Holy Spirit made no distinction between Jews and Gentiles, but
allowed it to be equally valid; where the gospel was preached, there he
came. Therefore he must conclude: Where we do not want to try the Holy
Spirit, we must say that it is not necessary, otherwise he would never
have come on the Gentile Cornelium, and those who were in his house.
With this they are decided and stopped, but still not all; let them say
what they wanted, but soon went out aside; but is so powerful that no
one can speak against it. This is the main conclusion of this Concilii,
on which it stands.

10 Therefore, the apostle speaks such strong words: \"God, the Savior of
hearts, testified about them and made no distinction between us and
them. Why is that? \"He cleansed their hearts through faith.\" There is
neither law nor circumcision added to it; and yet are as pure as we.
Behold, how boldly

2\) Erlanger: \"the saints\" instead of: \"the holy men - Prague\".

3\) Wittenberg and Erlanger: Herkommen.

1006 Erl. cs.) 2SS-SS4. Interpretations on the Acts of the Apostles. W.
vin, ivss-ioW. 1007

He is so certain of the matter that he says: \"Whoever does not want to
have enough of it, but demands the work of the law, let him tempt God.
So he even cancels it with one word. With what then do they tempt God?
\"To put a yoke on the necks of the disciples, which neither our fathers
nor we (says he) could bear, but we believe to be saved by the grace of
Jesus Christ, without circumcision and law, just as they.\"

11 See, this is what St. Peter bases himself on, namely, that the Holy
Spirit publicly proves this, as St. Paul and Barnabas also testify from
the miraculous works that God had done through them among the Gentiles.
As if they were to say, \"That what Peter said was true, we also
experienced; wherever we went, we preached no laws, but only the gospel
of Christ; as soon as the Holy Spirit came, and the miraculous signs
with it. Since there are so many signs, that wherever we go we see and
grasp them, there is no need to establish the law. So these three men
receive this piece, that nothing is necessary for salvation, but mere
grace.

Now, this text applies just as strongly now as it did then, against all
doctrine and life that clings to works; without them now not making
concilium about it, and first questioning themselves. They are probably
led deeper into it by faith than those; they are so mad that they have
imposed and made necessary their own self-invented works, statuses,
orders, new doctrines and articles through the concilia, in which they
are stuck and drowned, so that no one can get out. How the masses and
vows still cling so hard that they make everyone so conscience-stricken:
if I don\'t do it, I am damned; and again: whoever does it, does a good
work. But what is St. Peter hurling at us here? If the law of Moses and
the circumcision, which God commanded, the glorious work from heaven, do
not apply, what then should your own deeds apply? If it is against Moses
and the fathers, how much more is it against a shabby monk\'s cap?

\(13\) Therefore this saying shall continue to the end of the world,
that it may be concluded 1) where

1\) In Walch\'s old edition and in the Erlangen edition with incorrect
punctuation: \"so that one concludes: Where human knowledge arises, we
let it happen\", 2c.

The feet of men are opened: We allow this to happen, that one does the
work; but that one does not keep it in the opinion of being saved with
it, if one keeps it; or condemns it, if one lets it go. Apart from the
conscience it may be kept, if we thus stand, that without works we trust
only in God\'s grace, that our salvation does not depend on works, deeds
or omissions, nor is it of our own merit, but is pure mercy and gift;
this would be rightly preached and kept. Works must indeed be done; but
this is the misfortune, that self-conceit cannot leave off, it must fall
upon it, and hinder it from remaining true. That is why this teaching is
in danger and always has to fight. If it were not so, it would be noisy
and bad, as it will be on the last day.

\(14\) It is therefore well established that no one can comfort or
strengthen the conscience except by faith in true grace. Peter concludes
that the fathers were not saved in any other way, and could not bear the
law. Why could they not bear it? What was the defect? Because they saw
that no matter how much they did works, the conscience could never have
rest. For Moses did no more than drive the conscience to grace with so
many laws. Therefore every law is impossible for the conscience to bear.
In the body it is not yet too heavy; but the conscience, which lies
underneath, is so tired and miserable, always wants to cling to the
works, can have no rest; the more it does, the more tired it becomes;
yes, it probably presses it into a single 2) work, that the world
becomes too narrow for it; it always drives and says: Do, do, do! It
does not cease until we see by God\'s grace that it does not do this, it
must do grace, otherwise it is never done; thus the heart becomes
satisfied, bold and courageous toward God, and the works fall away and
no longer cause trouble. This means, \"They could not bear it,\" that it
should remain so bad, and \[Peter\] concludes, 3) that one should not
put on the law nor circumcision.

2\) Erlanger:, \"little\"; probably a misprint.

3\) \"closes\" put by us instead of: \"close\" in the editions. With
these words Luther goes back to what was said at the beginning of this
paragraph: \"To this Peter closes\".

1008 **Erl. (g.) 17, Wt-SW. Sermon on Apost. 15. W. VIII, 1038-1040.**
1009

\(15\) I say this because the papists and works saints keep the text for
themselves in that which the apostles subsequently set forth: One shall
abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, and from things
strangled, and have decreed some things which now no one keeps. Because
God\'s law (they say), which the Holy Spirit had made, has been
abolished, it is within man\'s power to reverse and change God\'s law
and order. For this is what God has decreed and changed in the whole
world. For we eat all kinds of flesh, along with blood and choking, as
well as dead birds and fish, which they put on the Gentiles here. Thus
we have power to change what God demands. If this is true, we say again
with a clear conscience: The pope may also command what he wills, so far
as he leaves us the power to delay and cancel it. Behold, they take this
very chapter, interpret it in such a way that it is contrary to it,
namely, contrary to the law, and make it the law. Therefore I have said
that the main saying of this chapter must be understood well, that one
tempts God if one wants to put a law on the Christians 2c.

16 Now then, distinguish the two: to lay down the law, and to lay it
down to the conscience. A law may be laid down so far as to leave the
conscience free, unbound and unsubdued, so that it remains pure and
clings only to the bridegroom Christ, and knows no consolation because
it clings to God\'s grace. If the law comes into it, it is tempted as
soon as God comes into it. From this saying, we must understand what
James says, otherwise the two are against each other. Peter says: You
should not put on a yoke; Jacobus says: You should keep special pieces.

\(17\) Thus saith Jacob: Simon Peter hath told how at the first God hath
visited to receive a people of the Gentiles unto his name; and there
agree with the words of the prophets. Therefore I conclude that those
who turn to God from among the Gentiles should not be troubled, but
should be told to abstain from uncleanness of idols, and from
fornication, and from strangled things, and from blood. For Moses has
from long 1) times

1\) Erlanger previous.

It is read every Sabbath day in the schools. Then he concludes that one
should not keep Moses longer, otherwise it is read enough among the
Jews, and yet he adds a law to it, like Moses. How does this rhyme?
Moses is not to be read nor kept, but left to the Jews, and yet a piece
or three taken out? For they are all three in Moses; and the fourth,
fornication, is also forbidden by nature. Now what does Jacobus say?
Does he not conclude against Peter and himself in one speech? See to it
that you do not give the reason to those who want to have power to
change God\'s commandment. If then the Holy Spirit is not to be against
himself, it must remain as said, that one may lay down a commandment so
far as not to bind the conscience with it.

\(18\) Therefore Jacob\'s saying, Keep the three pieces, must be taken
to mean, lest he make trouble nor conscience, as he says before, but
keep the works at the will of the Jews. For there was no thing that so
nearly troubled and vexed the Jews as these three. Forasmuch then as he
taketh away circumcision and the law, the same is taken away, that a man
may eat blood and things sacrificed unto idols, as Paul saith; and yet
the law remaineth. 2) Therefore it is not necessary to admit that the
papists 3) say: they may, according to the example of the apostles,
change God\'s commandment. 4) For the apostles let the conscience be
free, without making any outward remarks, and leave something to the
Jews, which at that time the Gentiles held to their love and service.
Therefore, if in no concilio did God forbid the pope to change this, it
does not exist that they have the power to change it. Who did it then?
The common man. For it has fallen from himself. 5) Since it was no
longer a nuisance, nor was there any need to serve the Jews with it, it
was left to stand freely. For the cause has now ceased, wherefore the
apostles have set it.

2\) In all editions: \"The right\". The meaning of this sentence is:
Although Jacobus says to keep the three pieces, the right to eat blood
and sacrifices to idols still remains, because he takes away the
circumcision and the law.

3\) Erlanger: \"those\" instead of: \"the papists\".

4\) \"they like - change\" is missing in the Erlanger.

5\) Jenaer: that.

1010 **Erl. (s.) 17, SSS-SS8. Interpretations on the Acts of the
Apostles. W. VIII, I040-IWS.** 1011

19 Therefore, as I have said, it should be done in two ways. One is to
weigh down the conscience, the other is to weigh down the fist. If the
pope were to do the same, we would say that it would be good and well
done. As if the monks kept their rule in such a way that they left it
free, and the conscience unbound, and always remained so, that they did
their vows and works for the sake of their neighbor, not to become
blessed with it. But they do not want to go there, saying: they are
bound to it before God in conscience, and there is danger of the souls\'
salvation; faith and grace must be nothing there. So they want to lead
their law in such a way that they weigh down both heart and hand; the
heart against God in conscience, the fist also, outside before the
people. To this we freely say: No. For the three have decided with
miraculous signs, confirmed by the Holy Spirit, that the conscience
should be free from all laws, that only God\'s grace should be in it and
rule. Nevertheless, the laws of love may be kept, so that the conscience
remains free. And if the apostle Jacob had been of the serious opinion
that this law must be kept for the sake of conscience, we would not
accept it. For Jacob had not yet done a sign, but Peter and Paul; they
prove it tangibly before their eyes with many signs that their doctrine
is right. Jacobus is alone, had no sign, and confesses that which they
have said. Therefore, whoever will not let him be told and
instructed, 1) we must let go. Those who have the Holy Spirit understand
it well, that it is so.

20 So one must rhyme over the one that Jacobus interprets, and let the
others happen, because that remains, that the consciences are free and
untroubled; they have enough of that. That, they think, will come off
and fall down; they have not been so quarrelsome that they have fought
for the sake of the little thing, if it is without harm. Although I say
that the Holy Spirit caused St. Jacob to stumble a little. There would
have been no need; but for the sake of the weak, because the Gentiles
can hold such things for the love of the Jews, they let it happen and
give way.

1\) Thus the Wittenbergers. In the other editions: \"know\".

Let us do likewise. If they allow us to believe that priests, monks and
nuns are the devil\'s work, and that they stand alone in the grace of
God, but nevertheless desire that they be allowed to do otherwise, or to
do so for a time, we would gladly yield and serve them. For love can
well suffer this.

21 See, now you can conclude from this text that the pope has no power
to catch the consciences with laws, and they can prove nothing for
themselves from this. Therefore it follows that since Paul brought this
commandment back and forth, they have been comforted. From what? From
the fact that Jacob had commanded them not to eat blood? No, that was
not the main thing, but this is what they were looking for, that they
set the disciples free, on which Paul held and pressed hard, and also
obtained, 2) which made them glad. Still our fools say: If Paul held
hard on it, that the three pieces should be held, then we must also hold
hard on it. Yes, dear one, put on glasses and turn it around, is just
the contradiction. For it is ever undeniable that the Gentiles
complained of keeping the law, and therefore they determined that they
should 3) not be troubled nor troubled. This is what Paul held about.
This is also the main part. The other part was only added and given for
the sake of the Jews, when there was not much interest in it.

22 Therefore we find in the epistle to the Corinthians that Paul speaks
directly against these words and explains the text \[1 Cor. 8:4\]: \"We
know of the food of the sacrifice made to idols, that an idol is nothing
in the world, and that there is no other God without the one. Therefore,
the sacrifice to idols is also nothing. Therefore, a Christian does not
care that it is sacrificed. How does he say it is no idol nor sacrifice
to idols; and yet says one may eat things sacrificed to idols? Yes, he
who has a free conscience, and knows that only grace is necessary for
salvation, is as safe to eat idolatry as other meat, makes no
distinction, is nothing unclean to him, has no law. Therefore he says:
If you want to eat it or not, I do not ask, neither does God. But at the
same time he says: If you eat it, do not eat it with him who still has
idols, or

2\) Erlanger: to have attained.

3\) Wittenberg and Jena: those.

1012 **Erl. (2., 17, SS8-S4I. Sermon on Apost. 15. W. VIII, 1043-1046.**
1013

is so weak that he does not know that there is no idol, and thinks that
he may eat this and not that. For he would think that you were
worshipping idols and making yourself a partaker of idolatry. One should
spare such consciences and not eat with them. Thou mayest eat it with
thee, but if thy brother understand not, abstain; not for thine own
sake, but that thou mayest bring him, that he may learn and know it.

\(23\) Thus both are with one another: one must be drawn into the heart,
the other into the fist. According to the conscience there is no idol
nor sacrifice to idols, as now with us. He who is a Christian knows no
distinction of days, no Friday nor fast day, as Paul Rom. 14:2: \"One
believeth that he may eat all things; but he that is weak eateth herbs\"
2c. But when he comes out into a place where these things are not
understood, and the days are still kept, he follows them, because they
have not yet heard the gospel, and have not the knowledge. Therefore
they must be dealt with in this way until they also have freedom.

24 Thus the understanding of this text is clear, that Jacobi\'s laying
on is not the main piece, but let it remain only by heart, so that it is
kept only for the sake of love, which might cease with time. So one
would still do with monks and nuns, that one keeps it with them,
dresses, eats, prays 2c., not longer, than that one brings them out.
Since

I would be obliged to keep all that they keep, but only by heart;
inwardly, according to the soul, we are not to be troubled. Now whoever
teaches the text differently, falsifies it. Paul has led it rightly,
also admitting that one should keep this at the time; nor does he preach
freely against it, that neither this nor that is anything.

\(25\) This seems as if he had condemned it, and yet it stands that he
had helped it. It is necessary to distinguish between those who are not
bound by conscience and those who are a little bound by heart, so that
it is not assumed that the pope has the power to change the commandments
of the conscience and the commandments of God. According to the outward
nature, each one has the power to do all kinds of things for the sake of
love and service, if it would help and serve the neighbor. For love is a
law in itself: he who has it is subject to all laws. Again, faith is
subject to none on earth. The heart should know of no law, but on the
fist all laws may be beaten. So it is true that they are free, and yet
they keep them; the heart should not keep them, but let grace alone
rule. But the body keeps not two or three laws alone, but all laws, as
thou comest to men, that thou mayest keep all manner of laws; but not
that it may help or hurt the conscience, or give or take anything. So
both remain true, doing nothing or keeping nothing, and keeping
everything; having no law, and having all laws.

**The Other Sermon.**

**On the Sixteenth Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.**

Held on the 6th or the 7th of June, 1824.

**Cap. 16, 1-12.**

He came to Derben and Lystram, and behold, there was a disciple there
named Timothy, the son of a Jewish woman, who was a believer but of a
Greek father. He had a good reputation among the brethren, among the
Lystrans and in Iconium. Paul wanted to let him go with him, and he took
him and circumcised him for the sake of the Jews who were in the same
place, because they all knew that his father had been a Greek. And as
they passed through the cities, they delivered them to keep the sentence
which was decreed by the apostles and elders at Jerusalem. Then the
common people were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number
daily. As they passed through Phrygia and the land of Galatia, they were
multiplied by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia. When they came
to Mysia, they tried to pass through Bithynia.

1014 **Erl. (2.) 17, S4I-S1S. Interpretations on the Acts of the
Apostles. W. VIII, I048-I0SI.** 1015

travel, and the Spirit did not allow them to do so. And when they were
passed over before Mysia, they came down to Troas. And there appeared
unto Paul a vision by night, a man of Macedonia, which stood and
besought him, saying, Come down into Macedonia, and heal us. When he had
seen the vision, we immediately sought to go into Macedonia, knowing
that the Lord had called us there to preach the gospel to them. So we
departed from Troas, and straightway we came to Samothrace, and the next
day to Neapolis. From there we went to Philippi, which is the capital of
the country of Macedonia and a free city.

1 This Timothy, as the text says, was a Gentile, from a Gentile father,
but from a Jewish mother, whom Paul circumcised. But Titum, who was also
his disciple and also a Gentile, he did not want to be circumcised, as
he writes Gal. 2, 3. This he does for the weak Jews, that for the
stiff-necked and stubborn ones. For if these Jews had been so hardened
that one had to keep the law or could not be saved, as some insisted, 1)
Apost. 15:2, he would not have circumcised Timothy as he did not want to
circumcise Titum, contrary to those who wanted to put the law on their
conscience as necessary for salvation. But again, if they had been weak,
he would have circumcised Titum also. And because he allows it here, and
gives way to the Jews, it is a sure sign that they had not yet heard the
gospel enough, and was still too new to them; to them he goes to will,
as love demands.

002 As if I were now among the Jews, and should preach the gospel, and
saw that they were weak, I would be circumcised, and eat, and abstain as
they did. But I would not do this any longer or any other way, except
that I might be with them and preach the gospel. For if I did not follow
them, I would shut the door on myself and on my gospel. Therefore I
would have to put on their ways and say in this way or the like: \"It is
true that circumcision was instituted by God, and was good and right;
but we have a doctrine of Christ that nothing more is necessary for
salvation than faith in the Savior, and circumcision does nothing to
make it valid before God in the conscience. 2c. Now that they have been
so instructed for a while that they could well grasp it, and still want
to 2) wait for the circumcision, they are to be saved.

1\) The Wittenbergers: drungen. Jenaer: drringen. Erlanger: \"waren\"
instead of: darauf drangen.

2\) Wittenberger: also.

If I were to say, \"Goodbye,\" because that would be too close to the
gospel and faith, and not to suffer; whoever wanted to believe it, would
believe it, whoever would not, would stay away from it; I would have
done my part.

\(3\) So the apostles both confessed Jewish and Gentile, as Paul says in
1 Cor. 9:20: \"To the Jews I became a Jew,\" that is, I sacrificed and
circumcised myself, not that I should do it, but that I might win the
Jews; (2c.) item v. 22: \"To the weak I became as a weak man, that I
might win the weak. Our doctors did not see this, but thought that Paul
was only fencing with mirrors here, since his only purpose was to bring
them to faith and free their consciences. I do not care so much to
become a Gentile with the Gentiles, as if the law were nothing, that I
should let them eat and be eaten with, 3) which is forbidden and
abominable to the Jews, but that I should win them, not that I should
earn anything. So, wherever he went, he could continue with the gospel
and be pleasant. Behold, this is a master of caring for souls. But we
have done nothing else, but with our laws we have driven the people and
consciences, and said: So do, and not otherwise, if yet a bishop should
both, break loose his law and set it, that it would bring benefit.

Now this Timothy was converted before by the first sermon; for here
Lucas describes Paul\'s return, as it goes and stands 4) His father had
been a Gentile and died, therefore he came to faith uncircumcised.
Because he is now a disciple and a believer, he must not be circumcised
anywhere. For he that believeth and followeth Christ

3\) Jenaer: with eat.

4\) i.e. Paul\'s second journey, which he undertook to see \"how they
were keeping themselves\". Apost. 15, 36.

[1016 Erl. (p \> 17, S4S-S4S. Sermon On Apost. 16. W. vm, lasi-MS4.
1017]{.underline}

disciple, he has everything he should have. Why should he be
circumcised? Yes, he was such a Christian, who also testified to the
faith with deeds, full of the Holy Spirit and its fruit. For the
brethren bore him witness, with whom he was well reputed; wherefore Paul
also took him with him to minister, instead of John, surnamed Marcus, 1)
Acts 15:37. 15, 37, who had departed. Now, this faithful and pious and
holy Timothy 2) is here circumcised by Paul. Is this not foolishness
from such a man? But why does he do it? For the sake of the weak, not
for the sake of the stiff-necked Jews; otherwise he would not have
looked at them. Therefore the text says: \"He took him and circumcised
him because of the Jews who were in the same place, for they all knew
that his father had been a Gentile. As if to say, \"If it had been done
secretly, he would not have done it; but because it was known to
everyone and was notorious, he did not want to shake consciences. As if
he wanted to say: They do not yet understand, therefore one must have
patience with them.

\(5\) Behold, we have here an example of love, and how to deal with the
weak. Which art is most necessary to know, especially for preachers, so
that they do not plunge in with unreasonableness and drive by force. At
that time they were still deep in the mud, the law was still on their
necks, they could not get rid of it and free their consciences;
therefore they had to be well instructed beforehand, as we have also
done among ourselves, who have been burdened with the Pope\'s laws for
so long. But now it has come to pass that some have heard it preached,
and some not. Now those who have heard it, not for half a year, but for
two or three, that they might well understand it, and not be weak, but
blaspheme it, and oppose it, we must also lift up our heads, and lift up
our horns, and for this very reason forbear, and practice the
opposition, which they have thought necessary. But they say, \"Should we
not obey the emperor and the pope who have decreed it? We say again:

1\) The words: \"with the surname Marcus\" are missing in the Wittenberg
and in the Erlangen.

2\) \"Timotheum\" is missing in the Erlanger.

We have a greater emperor, whom we must obey more. Whoever wants to wear
caps, keep orders 2c., may do so, as far as he does not let his
conscience force him; and with the weak, who do not oppose the truth,
but would like to know it, you shall bear patience. But if a bishop or
prince would force you to wear the caps, you shall throw them over his
head in defiance, to save freedom. But to those who do not wilfully
oppose it, but are distraught in their cause, and are in doubt, and know
not what they do right, but would gladly be instructed, they must be
made to suffer it, and abstain from it, until I instruct them enough
with right understanding. Then I must not defend freedom, because they
do not fight against it, but must save it \[i.e. freedom\] for a while,
to use it externally, although I always keep it in my conscience:
precisely for this reason that I bring them up and make room that they
also come to freedom and need it. If they then accept the word, I have
won the souls without all my harm. For we also live for the sole purpose
of helping to make Christ\'s kingdom greater, as love demands. That is
why a Christian must let himself be brought down, and be as he sees that
the people are.

\(6\) But no man goeth right, except he that understandeth the gospel,
and both faith and love. In the case of the hard-hearted, who will not
listen, there can be neither love nor patience; for there it is faith
and the word of God that must be confessed and kept up in word and deed,
to which all things must give way. In the case of the others, who do not
challenge faith, love and patience must go; there I must do nothing for
the sake of God, but only for the sake of my neighbor, as St. Paul says
here, not for the sake of necessity or deed, but for the sake of weak
consciences. For the law says: One must circumcise oneself. They could
not soon refrain from this. If Paul had not circumcised Timothy, they
would have thought, \"Paul is a holy man, why does he take the Gentile
with him? Then their consciences would have been troubled and confused.
As with the

1018 **Erl. (2.) 17, S4S-S47. Interpretations on the Acts of the
Apostles. W. VUI, IVS4-10S7.** 1019

Pabst\'s laws the weak consciences do; if they keep it, they err, that
they are still too attached to it. But if they do not keep it, they err.
For they are not yet so strong that they refrain from it with a free
conscience. Therefore, they must be spared and carefully treated until
they understand. In the meantime, I can tell whether they want to follow
or not. If I notice that they are disobedient, I leave them.

\(7\) We have indeed brought it about that the common man comes up; but
that some are prevented, happens through so many bishops\' larvae, who
set themselves against it, and hinder it by force. Because they have
been preached to enough, and it is not our fault, we have to go through
fresh; and even if there are still those among them who have not yet
heard the gospel, we still have to go on for the sake of the believers
1). For if we should give way to either of these, giving way to the
weak, or representing the faith, we should resist the stiff-necked
before, that we might keep the word against them that would destroy it,
rather than give way to the weak, and by such giving way let liberty
suffer distress and be oppressed. Therefore, if I am among such a
multitude, some having the gospel, and some wishing to suppress it, I am
guilty of obeying faith rather than love, for faith is above love, and
is most concerned with it. Even if I slacken love, it is a sin against
my neighbor; but to slacken faith, and to be blasphemed, is to deny
Christ and God. That is more difficult than to do against one\'s
neighbor; there one can come to grace again, but to deny God is too
difficult. Where, then, I say, in a community there are weak and strong,
I must look more to the strong and command the weak to God. I must
defend the faith with head, neck and belly, so that it is not dampened
and beaten down. If we have it, we can come to love again. But whoever
takes it and lets it go has lost Christ and everything, so that there is
no more help. For this reason we must now set our necks to freedom, to
preserve it. 2) It is a

1\) Erlanger: \"around the believing heaps\".

2\) \"to preserve them\" is missing from the Erlanger.

2c., but before one lets such right and freedom be snatched away, and
acts against it, one should die over it. For we must not deny Christ,
who with his precious blood has purchased for us freedom from all laws.

8 This is the first part. What follows now concerns the Jews, since St.
Lucas says how St. Paul delivered in the cities the sentence that was
decreed at Jerusalem, and how they were strengthened in the faith by it.
Behold, he had now circumcised Timothy, and went about proclaiming that
the Gentiles should not be circumcised, as had been decreed by the
apostles. Then he made it clear that he did not consider circumcision
necessary, but only for the sake of the weak Jews, and that no one would
follow the example, he preached and showed the contradiction. They were
strengthened in their faith, not because of the law of Moses, but
because they heard that no burden should be placed on them.

9 Further, he speaks of St. Pauli\'s journey, as he is drawn. Who does
not know here the land kind 4), does not understand what the text says.
He has sailed the country road on the shore, from morning to evening, as
those know who are land-going. The first trip has not gone far over
Cilicia. The other one stretched further; when he found that the
disciples had increased, since he had preached, he continued inward
toward evening, toward 5) Asiam Minorem. There he was able to preach
twice, but he did not have room in all Galatia. Afterwards, in Bithynia,
towards midnight, as the sea was rushing into Hungary, the spirit
resisted him. How this happened, he does not write, nor does he express
whether they were prevented by the wind or by the Holy Spirit. Because
in Hebrew and Greek language wind and spirit is one word. That he should
be prevented by the wind, I cannot believe; therefore I have Germanized
it: \"vom Heiligen Geist\". After that they came across the sea at last,
against

3\) Erlanger: poor.

4\) Thus the Erlangen. Wittenberg and Jena: the Landart.

5\) Erlanger: to.

1020 Erl. \<2.) 17, S47-SM. Sermon on Apost. 16. W. vm, I0S7-IÜS\". 1021

to our country, in Troada, and since now Turkey is. 1) Then he saw a
vision, I think, in a dream, that a man was standing before him, asking
him to come into Macedonia. Then they went straight and came to the city
of Philippi, and there 2) he preached. This was a capital city in the
country, and a free city of the Roman Empire, which was called colonias
before times.

There are two pieces in this text: One, that the spirit hinders him from
preaching the word; the other, that St. Paul believes the vision in a
dream. There you see, although it is the highest work to preach God\'s
word, and no greater service can be done than to take souls and make
them blessed; it also says here that Paul is ready for it, and yet is
not allowed by the spirit. Is it not a miracle that a man is more
willing and more ready to help people than God? since one often reads
the contradiction that God is always ready to help people and comes
before they ask for it or think of it. Because here, in the holy
presumption of helping people, he should have a criminal and carnal
thought of preaching the gospel and helping them, who wants to rely
always and forever on a good thought? There ever falls all presumption
and defiance of our works, as if they should and must please God. Even
more miraculous is the fact that he knew for certain 3) that he was
called to preach the gospel 4) because his ministry was commanded to him
by God; nevertheless, since he wants to carry it out, it does not want
to go away. 5) Such is the fact that he says Rom. 1, 13: \"I have often
intended to come to you, but have been prevented from bearing fruit
among you. His will is not lacking, but God\'s will. I am a preacher to
the Gentiles and have been called to do so; 6) but God has not yet
wanted me to come to you.

11 Now this is written so that

1\) Erlanger: \"the Turkey\" instead of: and since now is the Turkey.

S\) Erlanger: \"den\' hat\" instead of: und hat da.

3\) Erlanger: was.

4\) \"the gospel\" is missing in the Erlanger.

5\) Erlanger: walk.

6\) Instead of the following, the Erlanger has: \"but he did not want\".

St. Paul^7^ ) wants to break down all presumption, that we walk in fear
and humility, that no one should boast: I can do this; 8) or: I have
done this out of good opinion, but thus say, as St. Paul: I will do
this, if it is God\'s will; but because it is not yet time, although he
has commanded it, or perhaps another cause is reserved for him. Paul: I
will do this, if it is God\'s will; but because it is not yet time,
although he has commanded it, or perhaps another cause is reserved for
him, I must follow him and be obedient, follow his word, not my will,
even if I could convert the whole world. So then, if it is forbidden in
the highest work not to follow our will but His, much less will God
accept our good opinion and self-chosen works. This means a good work,
not that I choose and have a good opinion about it: but that is done in
honor of God\'s name, and is done in His will and service. Therefore, we
must stand before God with such a heart: I will do this,^9^ ) if it is
your will to honor your name and promote your kingdom;^10^ ) not that it
seems so good to me. In this way Christ says Matth. 10, 5:^11^ ) \"Go
not into the way of the Gentiles,\" 2c., and Cap. 15, 24: \"I am not
sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.\" It is a poor
thing to preach to the Gentiles, and yet it would have been a
deliciously good work. God wants to keep us in his obedience, so that we
do not do anything of our own accord, out of our own discretion and
devotion, because we have his will. If we do anything beyond that, it is
of the devil, however delicious it may be.

12 Therefore, what has been the cause here that St. Paul is prevented,
must be put to God; his will is good, but it has not yet been time. For
afterwards he has come there, Apost. 18, 23,^12^ ) and preached to them,
after which he wrote the epistle to the Galatians 2c. This is now the
summa:

7\) Erlanger: \"he\" instead of: St. Paul.

8\) \"thun\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

9\) \"Das will ich thun\" is missing in the Erlanger.

10\) Erlanger: I will do it.

11\) Also the second edition of the Erlanger has reprinted here from
Walch the wrong Bible quotation: \"Matth. 10, 52. We have already drawn
attention to such occurrences several times in the 7th volume.

12\) Erlanger: \"Actor. 18 (V. 18)\" reprinted from Walch.

1022 **Erl. (S.) 17, S4S-SSL. Interpretations on the Acts of the
Apostles. W. VIU, ivss-ilm.** 1023

However good the work is, even by God\'s command, God wants to reserve
for it space, place, time and manner; for He does not reject the work of
preaching here, but hinders and holds it for a time, because it was not
yet ripe. Let this be said to us as an example, that we do not go in at
our own discretion, as if we wanted to carry out the thing ourselves,
and not let God master it.

\(13\) Secondly, here is a question: Why does Paul believe the vision in
the dream? and whether one should believe the dreams? It is partly
commanded and partly forbidden in Scripture to believe dreams. Apost. 2,
17. we have from the prophet Joel, who speaks, Cap. 3, 1. ff: \"I will
pour out of my spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters
shall prophesy, and your young men shall see visions, and your elders
shall dream dreams\" 2c. Item, 4 Mos. 12, 6. God says: \"If anyone among
you is a prophet of the LORD, I will make myself known to him in a
vision, or I will speak to him in a dream.\" Thus we read how God
appeared to King Solomon in a dream, 1 Kings 3:5. Again, Moses also
strictly forbade believing dreamers, as Deut. 13:1 ff.

\(14\) What shall we say about this and decide when one should or should
not follow dreams? I know of no better answer to this than this: that a
righteous dream is one that God gives, and so gives that he who has it
certainly realizes and understands that it is from God, as he is certain
of the faith of the gospel, so that it lies in experience. For one does
not have to reject the dreams at all, because the examples lie so
strongly there. But they must be in the same form as Paul teaches about
prophecy in Romans 12:7, that they are similar to faith. But how one
knows whether God has inspired 2) or the devil, cannot be shown by
doctrine, but must be given by experience. 3)

15\. alfo, Solomon has been sure that his dream was from God, not a
ghost \[1 Kings 3:5\]. Item, the king Abimelech,

1\) Erlanger: \"his\" instead of: GOD\'s.

2\) Erlanger: talked.

3\) Erlanger: say.

Genesis 20:3, who was punished by God in a dream because of Abraham\'s
wife. It is written about the pagan king Attila that he once saw in a
dream how he had to stand before three men in court and was sentenced to
death. The next day the bishop Paulinus was brought before him, who was
his prisoner, and a gardener was one of his knights. Then he saw that he
was the one whose form he had seen in a dream, and soon after that he
was killed. Thus such dreams happen to both saints and unholy ones, and
are solely in God\'s power; no one can judge them, except the one who
has them.

16 But to fall upon it, and, as some fools have done, to make books of
it, is nothing but deceit. No one can make an art of it, nor is it worth
anything. See how Joseph \[Gen. 40, 12. ff.\] interprets and interprets
their dreams 5) to the chief tavern-keeper and baker 4) of Pharaoh, who
lay captive with him. To the one he interpreted his dream, that he
should be released after three days, and come to his office. The other
thought he should interpret his dream in the same way 6) because it was
the same dream, but he interpreted it much differently, namely, that
after three days he would be put on the gallows. This is how he
interprets the king\'s dreams, of the seven full and thick, and other
seven thin and scorched ears, 7) which no one else could interpret
\[Gen. 41, 25. ff\]. Therefore, such certain interpretation is not from
nature, but from God.

\(17\) Therefore, dreams should not be believed, nor should they be
interpreted according to our reason, but God should be told, and He
should be interpreted; as Joseph also says \[Gen. 40:8\]:
\"Interpretation belongs to God. Though they are common, both Christians
and Gentiles, yet no one knows what they mean, let the Spirit interpret
them. As Peter 2 Ep. 1, 20 declares, one should not believe any
interpretation in spiritual matters, unless it is from God. \"For no
prophecy (says

4\) Erlanger: \"den Knechten\" instead of: dem obersten Schenken und
Bäcker.

5\) ÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊÊ \"ÊÊÊÊYour dreams\" is missing from the Erlanger.

6\) Erlanger: something good.

7\) \"von - Aehren\" is missing in the Erlanger.

1024 **Erl. (2.) 17, 251-2SS. Sermon on Apost. 16. W. VIII, IVSI-IVKS.**
1025

He, v. 21.) in the Scriptures is done by their own interpretation. For
no prophecy has ever been produced by human will, but the holy people of
GOD have spoken, driven by the Holy Spirit.\" Therefore, dreams to,
dreams to, just don\'t interpret it, let God make it certain, don\'t be
certain of yourself.

18\) So St. Paul interprets here the vision 1) by the Holy Spirit, which
appeared to him by night; namely, a man from Macedonia standing and
asking him to come into Macedonia and help them. 2) For it is also true
and rhymes with the matter, Apost. 16, 9. and is similar to faith. For
he was a preacher, and the vision 3) meets the preaching ministry, and
has lacked it until now, that the time was not yet there. But now, when
a Macedonian man appears and asks for help from St. Paul, it rhymes with
his ministry; for Paul\'s help was in the preaching ministry. Although
all this was not enough for certainty; the Holy Spirit had to make it
certain in the heart; nevertheless, the vision was the means and witness
for such certainty. Just as the word, without spirit and faith, is not
enough to make anyone certain, so it is the means by which the spirit
and certain faith come. For reason could not have interpreted or
understood it from itself, it is too blind; and it should have been well
with it, according to the saying of Christ, Matt. 13:13, \"With seeing
eyes they see not.\" We have many examples of this in the

1\) Erlanger: the dream.

2\) Instead of: \"so ihm -helfen\" in the Erlanger: \"und fehlet
nicht\".

3\) Erlanger: \"of dreams\".

Romans stories, because they have held much on dreams and signs, and
have missed with their interpretation. And even if a face, dream, or
sign was quite apparent, so that one could almost grasp it, and they
also interpreted it correctly, nevertheless they were never sure of it,
but had a delusion about it, and so they dared to put it in, as is
nature\'s way: if it was true, it was true; if it was missing, it was
missing. This means that the seeing eye cannot see that there is a vain
conceit that either misses or hits by accident. Such a dream was the
emperor Julii, because he dreamt that he slept with his mother. They
thought that it meant that he was going to destroy his fatherland and
desecrate it, but no one was sure of that; nevertheless, he dared to do
it, and he managed to hit it on the head.

19 But here the text says: St. Paul was sure of his face; this was the
spirit, not reason. Therefore it is with dreams that many of them are
true, and they are true. But to be sure of it before it happens, that
nature cannot give; afterwards, when it has happened, it thinks behind
itself and says, \"Behold, this is what I dreamed. And it is a very
different thing to believe a dream before it happens, 4) and another
thing to experience and notice afterwards, when it has happened. Before
history, no one can be sure of it without God\'s inspiration alone;
after history, it teaches itself; and even if it were true by nature, no
one can be sure of it. That is enough of it.

4\) i.e., before it becomes a factum. Wittenberger: \"it\" instead of:
he.

[1026 Eri. si, sExpositions on the 1st epistle to the Corinthians. W.
vm, rust f. 1027]{.underline}

**V. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretations or the first epistle to the
Corinthians.**

**A. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the seventh chapter of the
first epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians. \*)**

August 1523.

> To the strict and firm Hans Loser zu Pretisch, hereditary marshal of
> Saxony, my favorable lord and friend, grace and peace in Christ.

Strict and firm, dear lord and friend! I keep what I have said with full
hope that you will, according to your noble mind, again keep what you
have said and no longer delay.

In order that you may be the more Christian about it, I have taken the
7th chapter of the first epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians and
interpreted it to you for your service and for the benefit of those who
desire to use it, for the reason that this chapter, before all the
writings of the entire Bible, has gone back and forth against the
marriage state, and at the same time has gained a tremendous appearance
for the dangerous and strange state of marriage.

Chastity. And if I am to tell the truth, no one has so nearly puffed
himself up with this chapter as the very people who have been least
chaste. I also meant that chastity was so mean as they pretend. But I
have, praise God, become aware these three years of what in the world,
apart from marriage, chastity is, even in both men\'s and women\'s
monasteries.

Since God has instructed me to preach about the state of marriage and to
remove the cover from the devil\'s chastity, so that fornication will be
less prevalent and the poor youth will not be so miserably seduced by
the falsely famous appearance of chastity, I must take care that this
chapter, its main part, will no longer remain its cover of shame, but
will be understood according to the right opinion of St. Paul. And I
have brought the same to you for your

\*Luther wrote this in 1523 in honor of the state of marriage and so
that the seventh chapter of the first letter to the Corinthians would no
longer remain the cover of shame of the papist celibacy. (Compare the
note to § 4 of this writing.) He dedicated the same to the hereditary
marshal of Saxony, Hans Loser, as a bridal song for his upcoming
wedding. In the Weimar edition, eight individual editions are listed,
all of which belong to the year 1523. Two of them are attributed to the
Officin von Cranach und Döring in Wittenberg, a third to Melchior
Lotther. Only in one of them is the printer named: Gedruckt fin
Straßburg\] zum Steinburck. By Wolfs Köpffel.\" Ju the collections:
Wittenberger \<1556), vol. I, p. 334; Jenaer \<1585), vol. II, p. 272;
Altenburger, vol. II, p. 383; Leipziger, vol. X, p. 312; Erlanger, vol.
51, p. 3, and Weimarsche, vol. XII, p. 88. Because the first volume of
the Wittenberg edition was published under Luther\'s eyes in 1539 (by
Cruciger and Rörer), we, like the Erlanger, use the text of the
Wittenberg edition as a basis, but compare it with the Latin translation
by Johannes Lonicer, which he had published in Strasbourg in 1525 under
the title: Martini Lutheri I In septimum primae ad Corinthios caput,
Exe- gesis, II De matrimonio sermo, III Duorum de matrimonio thematum
Analytica, nuper latina facta per Joan. Lonicerum. Argentorati 1525.
This translation is included in the Latin Wittenberg edition, Dom. V,
lol. 102. The text alone is found in De Wette, Vol. II, p. 364. - It was
only later that we were able to compare the Weimar edition as well, but
apart from the deviations of the biblical text, which is given in the
Wittenberg edition according to our Bible, we find only very
insignificant variants, which are of no importance for our edition,
e.g.: to the Corinthians, to the Corinthians, to the Corinthians, to the
Corinthians, to the Corinthians, to the Corinthians, to the Corinthians,
to the Corinthians. For example: an die Corinther- zu den Choriuthern;
Ehestand - ehlichen stand; Anno 1523- hm 1523 iar; D. Martinus Luther -
Martinus Luther; Daniel 12 (correct) - Daniel 8 \<wrong); Wiederum -
Wiederum aber; aufm Dorfe - auff dorffen; hohe, weise - hoch weyße; 2c.
These are the variants on the first three pages (pp. 92-94) of the
Weimar edition. Of course, we refrain from noting them. By the way,
compare our note on the biblical text before § 119.

1028 Eri. si, t s. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7. w. vm, ims-ioss. 1029

Wedding 1) want to give, so that I also once a Christian epithalamion,
that is, a bridal song to sing, as one before times to do

1\) Only in December 1824 Loser married Ursula von Portzig. Luther
performed the wedding ceremony in the presence of Amsdorf, Melanchthon
and D. Jonas in Pretsch Castle. (De Wette, vol. VI, p. 544.)

so that your undertaking may be to the honor of God and for the
advancement of your blessedness, and may be accomplished. Command you
and your dear bride in God\'s grace, Amen. At Wittenberg, Anno 1523.

D. Martinus Luther.

**Preface.\*)**

1 It is a fool that taketh a wife, saith the world; and it is certainly
true. Many of the learned have also decided that a wise man should not
take a wife, even if she were wisdom herself. This is also right and
well said. For those who believe that after this life there is no other
life (as such people do), do almost wisely that they make do with free
fornication, and do not join in the toil of married life, so that they
may have a little less evil days here in this life. Of course, our
clergy have also seen this, and have turned to chastity, that is, to
free fornication, in the very finest way, as Daniel Cap. 12 \[11, 37\]
said of them, saying: \"They will not respect wives,\" nor desire them.

2 Again the spirit says, it is a wise man who takes a wife. This is
certainly true. And the truth also impels, that a wise man should take a
wife, though she were folly itself. This is also right and well said.
For if a Christian man waits for another life after this one, it is
almost wise for him to have the fewer good days here, so that in that
life he will have eternally good days. This is what God saw fit to do
when he created man and woman and gave them together.

\(3\) Thus the state of marriage is spoken of in two ways; first, by the
clever and worldly, that is, the blind and chief fools before God; they
look upon the state of marriage as if it were a remaining, rash, human
possession, which might be used and dispensed with, as I can dispense
with a remaining garment or mantle. They then make the world full of
their foolish and blasphemous writing and crying out against the
marriage state, and counsel

But they themselves feel well, and prove sufficiently by deed that they
cannot do without women, as they are not created for marriage, but only
for driving, bluing and dragging themselves with whores day and night.

4 The arch-fool Johannes Schmid von Costnitz, 2) the highly famous
whoremonger, who has written a great book, recently printed in Leipzig,
against the marriage state, is also of this kind now, and yet says
nothing more, except how much effort and work is in it. Just as if the
whole world did not know that before, and the donkey\'s head would have
to teach it to us first of all, which even no farmer in the village is
unaware of. If I were chastity, I would know of no greater, more
insulting disgrace and shame than that such boys and whoremongers and
enemies of chastity should praise me. They reproach us that we are
enemies of chastity, that we should not make marriage a thing of the
past.

2\) Cf. Tischreden, Cap. 28, § 4. Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII,
937. - Johann Faber (actually Johann Heigerlin from Leutkirch, son of a
blacksmith) had published a book in Rome in August 1522 under the title:
llolrannis-Idabri Gonstantisnsis in spiritualidus vicarii Opus attvsrsus
nova guasttarn st a sirristiana rsli\^ions prorsus aliena tto\^rnata
Martini Imtttsri. (Roinas in 6ampo kiors per Maroslluin 8ilbsr alias
I\'ranclc.) Luther himself made no reply to this, but caused V.Justus
Jonas to write a rebuttal. This is entitled: Vttvsrsus .lottannsm
Vadruin Gonstantisn. Vicarium, scnrtationis Patroninn, pro eonsuZio
saosrttotali, llusti llonas ttsksnsio, WittendsrMS. 1523. To this
writing Luther added an accompanying letter , (Letter to Justus Jonas,
Walch, old edition, vol. XXI, 833). The reason that Luther refers to
Faber\'s book as \"recently printed in Leipzig\" is that Duke George of
Saxony had it printed in Leipzig by Melchior Lotther. It was completed
on April 25. - Indirectly, Luther himself also responded to this book
through the present writing.

\*) This superscription is only in Latin.

**1030 Erl. 51, 5-7. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the**
Corinthians**. W. vm, 1088-1074. 1031**

and like to see \[people\] married, 1) and we are to consider them high,
wise 2) people who can do nothing but fornicate without ceasing, and
praise chastity only with the pen, and blaspheme the marriage state.
They are boys, not only in their skin, but also in the bottom of their
heart, who are not worthy to be answered.

\(5\) And what is it that all the world complains about the marriage
state? We ever see before our eyes that God daily creates and sustains
in life, not only men, but also women. So it is certain that He does not
create a woman for the service of fornication. Since God\'s work and
word are there before our eyes, that women must be used either for
marriage or for fornication, such pagan larvae should keep their
blasphemous mouths shut, and let God\'s word and work go unpunished and
unhindered, unless they, after their highly praised

1\) In the German editions: \"und gern ehelich sehen werden\". It seems
to us that the last two words are transposed by a printing error, so we
have changed according to the Latin: quodque juvet nos videre, coadunari
conjuges.

2\) So the Jenaer; Latin: sapisntss st prasotaros. Wittenbergers:
hochweise. Weimarsche: hoch wehße.

wisdom would teach us, contrary to God, to strangle or expel all women.
So God must be our fool; what He does is not good, what we do is well
done.

Now then, God has created woman in such a way that she should and must
be around her husband; it should be enough for us that God is with us,
and hold the marriage state in honor as a divine, noble business, 3)
and, if the smart ones do not want to get involved, let them fornicate
and screw in their pagan blindness, as long as God allows them to. We
have God\'s word for us, which will remain, and will not be frightened
by such rude blacksmiths, even if there are more of them than the sand
of the sea. Although it is a great sin and shame that we Christians
become such great fools, and first of all want to advise and judge
whether women are to be married or not; as if someone still wanted to
ask whether he also had to eat and drink in this life. Now enough of
that; 4) we want to hear the words of St. Paul.

3\) Business \-- creature.

4\) \"davon jetzt genug\" is missing in the Weimarschen. This variant of
the Wittenberg is not noted in the Weimar edition.

**The seventh chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians.\*)**

**Cause why St. Paul wrote this chapter. 5)**

1\) The reason for writing this chapter was this: Those at Corinth, when
they became Christians, especially those who were converted from the
Jews, kept the law of Moses along with the gospel. Moses had commanded
7) that every man must be legitimate. What was a man must have a wife;
what was a woman must have a husband, for chastity was condemned as a
barren estate. All this happened because Christ was promised from
Abraham\'s seed,

5\) This caption is missing in Weimar\'s.

6\) Wittenberg: of the Cap. Weimarsche: Capitels.

7\) Weimarsche: hatte; in the other editions: hat.

and no one knew which person this should be, in honor of this seed all
Jews had to become married and breed until he came. So the Corinthians
ask whether they still have to keep such a law of Moses and do not have
the power to remain without marriage, because they have the desire and
love for chastity, and many other laws of Moses have now become free
through the gospel3); because the weak consciences could hardly leave
the law of Moses, which they were used to. To this St. Paul answers them
here and says: It is not only free, but also good to keep chastity,
whoever has desire and love for it. But he speaks of it very stupidly
and carefully, and always includes the marriage state, and says:

8\) In the issues: warm.

\*) Here follows the text of the entire seventh chapter in the Weimar
edition.

**1032 Erl. si, 7-9.** Sermon **on 1 Cor- 7, 1. 2. W. vm, 1074-1078.
1033**

**B. i. 2. It is good for a man not to touch a woman. But for the sake
of fornication let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have
her own husband.**

\(2\) Behold the words, how briefly he breaks off, saying that it is
good for a man not to touch a woman, but he does not say it, nor does he
advise anyone to do so; indeed, he soon falls on the marriage state, as
if he were concerned that such a good or gift of chastity would be
strange, and that it would become vain fornication. Therefore he
commanded that every man should have a lawful spouse, and avoid
fornication.

3 So this is the first conclusion: that whoever does not feel this good
thing 1) about himself, but feels fornication, he is commanded here to
become married. And this commandment you shall not receive as from a
man, but from God. From this it follows that no one can vow chastity,
nor should he keep such a vow, but tear it up where he finds and feels
that he does not have the good thing, and finds himself inclined to
unchastity. For such a vow is actually made against this commandment of
God; but against God\'s commandment one cannot vow anything, and if it
were vowed, he who keeps it is damned.

\(4\) Some have stretched this \"touching women\" so tightly that they
do not want to touch women\'s hands and skin. To this end, they have
invented many laws and ways to separate themselves so far from women
that women could neither be seen nor heard; they meant to help chastity
in a masterly way. Thus those who conceived and founded monasteries
thought to keep boys chaste by the absence of maidens and maidens chaste
by the absence of boys. But how well this was done, and what room was
given to the devil, would be terrible to hear and to say.

\(5\) Such blind, wretched people have thought to bring chastity to men
from within, when it must be a gift from heaven, springing from within.
For although it is true that it is almost provocative and inflammatory
when the male image and the female image are one among the other, it
does not help the cause that they are one among the other. For what does
it help me if I see no woman?

1\) Jena and Weimar: the fine thing. Erlanger: dieß Gute.

and yet my heart is full of women, and my thoughts cling to women day
and night, and I think more shameful things than anyone should do? And
what is the use of shutting up a maiden, so that she neither sees nor
hears a man\'s image, and yet her heart sighs day and night without
ceasing for a boy? One must have the heart for chastity, otherwise such
a being is worse than hell and purgatory.

\(6\) Therefore this word of St. Paul must also be understood
spiritually and in the heart, so that he is called \"touching no woman\"
who outwardly abstains from women out of his heart, desire and love; and
not he who must outwardly abstain from women, and yet inwardly in his
heart is full of desire and love for women. For this is a hypocrite,
whose chastity appears before the world, and is lost before God, yes, is
a twofold unchastity. For St. Paul\'s word is freely spiritual, and
demands a free spirit, and must be grasped with a free spirit. But the
hypocrites take it with displeasure, and make a dead letter and a
fearful law out of it, which compels them, and makes the lost, false
chastity sour for them, with their outward abstention from women.

7\. Now notice what horrible murderers of the soul these are, who keep
the mad, young people to chastity only outwardly, and force them to bear
the secret suffering (as they say), and have no eye at all on whether
such a person also has desire and love for it inwardly; think that
chastity, the more sour it becomes, and the harder it is to bear, the
more precious it is in the sight of God, like other bodily sufferings
and accidents, but do not see that such sufferings and bodily sufferings
have greater difference than heaven and earth. For other sufferings can
be borne with a happy conscience without sin, and are only painful
sufferings. But this affliction is a sinful affliction, which cannot be
borne with a happy conscience, for it is sin and wrong in itself;
therefore it is not to be counseled nor helped, except that one may get
rid of it and be rid of it, which may be done by marriage, and not
otherwise. But that suffering is to be counseled by 2) patience, whether
one also cannot get rid of his.

2\) Weimarsche: through the.

**1034 Erl. 51, 9-12.** interpretations **about the 1.**

**Epistle to the Corinthians. W. vrn, 1076 -107s. 1035**

8 Thus St. Paul also wants the word to be understood spiritually, when
he says: \"It is good for a man that he\" 2c. That such \"good\" is not
said of merit before God, as if a chaste man were better before God than
a married man, as so far the text is also interpreted by St. Jerome; for
that belongs to faith alone and not to any work; but is said of the
temporal good chamber and rest from this life, which a chaste man has
over a married man. For he who lives without marriage and chastely is
above all the toil and unpleasure that are in the conjugal state. And
lately it is a lovely, 1) merry and even a fine gift to whom it is
given, that he is chaste with pleasure and love. Also, he himself will
afterwards sufficiently emphasize what he means by such \"good,\" for it
behooves St. Paul not to leave unconsoled those who like to remain
chaste. But one must leave it alone that a married woman may be higher
before God than a virgin, although the wife here on earth has much
trouble and unpleasure in her state, and a virgin has much pleasure,
rest and good days.

\(9\) Now the opinion of St. Paul is, \"It is good for a man not to
touch a woman,\" and in the New Testament it is not a sin to be without
wife and child, as it was in the Old; that is, he who has grace to live
chastely with lust and love can have good days; as it is also said,
Fool, take a wife, and thy joy shall be ended; item, Marriage is a short
joy, and long displeasure, and what more sayings are of the married
state; which all here agree with St. Paul. Paul, that it is good not to
touch a woman. Wherefore also in the law of Moses it was commanded, that
a new husband should be given liberty a whole year to rejoice with his
wife, and not to go to war, or to have common offices; as Moses should
say, The joy shall be for a year; after that it shall be found.

\(10\) But where there is no grace to live chastely with pleasure and
love, it is better to become married; indeed, there is no other means
that can help, except the married state. Therefore, where one cannot
have the good days of chastity, one must go to the evil days of
matrimony. For it is ever better to have evil days

1\) Wittenberger: bodily. Latin: umaBils.

suffer without sin in the marriage state, because have good days without
marriage state with sins in unchastity. But no one likes to avoid such
evil days, so everyone shuns the marriage state. Therefore it is said:
It must be a bold man who takes a wife. Yes, indeed, bold, and no one
does so well as a devout Christian who walks by faith, who can direct
himself into evil days, so that he does not complain and cry out and
blaspheme God and his work, as the foolish, blind wretches do. This is
also what St. Paul means here, that he so soon falls from chastity to
the marriage state and says: \"But for fornication\'s sake let every man
have his own wife, and every woman her own husband.

\(11\) What is this said for the sake of fornication, for this much:
Where such good days cannot be, that chastity may be willing and merry,
there will certainly be unchastity and fornication? But that there be
not, it is better to live godly and blessedly, and to forgive oneself
for the good days, which they have that touch no woman, and to consider
the evil days, to avoid sin, because it is ever better to have
unpleasure without sin, than sin without unpleasure, yea, sin with
unpleasure added.

12 And notice the words of St. Paul, that he does not make much
provision for chastity to the Corinthians. For he saith, It is a fine
thing about chastity; yea, if unchastity did 2); \"therefore have every
man his wife\" 2c. He does not mean chastity as we have done so far, and
still do, but wants to have them all united in marriage. And yet he
(when he was full of the Holy Spirit) knew human nature, kind and
capacity better than all the bishops who have come after him, who have
perverted and rejected this divine order, so that now St. Paul\'s word
no longer applies: \"Let every man have his own wife\"; but so now he
preaches: Some may have wives; some shall not have wives; make the
\"every one\" \"some\". But of this hereafter. Further on St. Paul
speaks:

2\) Latin: si irmontinsrUiu non obskurst. - The Weimar edition makes the
remark here, \"On this use of .thete\* equal to mhd. \[ntsts cf.
Zeitschrift für deutsche Philologie, vol. XXIII, pp. 41 ff.\" Cf. s 54
of this writing.

3\) \"eigen\" is only in the Jenaer.

1036 **Erl. 51, 12-14. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 3-5. W. VIII, IV7S-1082.**
1037

**V. 3. 4. Let the man render the owed friendship to the woman. The
woman is the same as the man. The woman is not powerful in her body, but
the man is. The man is not powerful in his body, but the woman is.**

Here St. Paul instructs the spouses how they should behave toward each
other for the sake of marital duty, and calls it a guilty will or
friendship. It is guilty, and yet it should be done willingly. This
guilt makes God allow and forgive the marriage state, which he otherwise
punishes and condemns. For in this way the marriage state is written in
the law of love, that neither is powerful in his own body, but must
serve the other, as is the way of love. But this does not work in
fornication, since neither is powerful nor indebted to the other, but
each seeks its own in the other; therefore it is against the law of
love, therefore it is also against God. It is indeed a great word that
no one is powerful in his own body, that where unchastity is concerned,
one should serve the other, and can give himself to no one else.
Therefore it is seen how adultery is the greatest robbery and theft on
earth, for it gives away a living body that is not its own, and also
takes away a living body that is not its own.

14 Now, the words of St. Paul are clear enough, and do not require much
gloss; so I do not want to dig so deeply into them, and write uncleanly
about the duty of marriage. A Christian man will know how to be moderate
even in this. So there is nothing in it, as an unchristian man rages and
rages in this. Some old teachers have probably used the pagan saying: He
who is too hot in love is an adulterer against his own wife. But a
heathen has spoken it, therefore I do not respect it and say it is not
true. Of course, no one can be an adulterer with his wife if he does not
want to consider her his wife or touch her as his wife.

\(15\) I am careful not to speak ill of the matter, for St. Paul says
here that the marriage state is there as a help and means against
unchastity. Therefore, whoever needs to defend himself against
unchastity, keep

I, who have St. Paulum here as my advocate and patron.

16 Therefore it must not be right in some places to separate the bride
and bridegroom until the third night, and to teach them to abstain until
the third night, according to the example of Tobiah. I let everyone keep
this, as far as he desires. For I have also experienced what misfortune
has followed from the fact that the evil spirit always wants to be in
the game. If the example of Toby is so valid, why is not the example of
the patriarch Jacob much more valid, who touched his Leah the first
night and recognized her? Let it be free; fools are they that set the
rope and the law in such matters. The bride is the bridegroom, and her
body is not powerful, and again. Let it remain so, and do no better.

\(17\) So they have also exempted some days, as the holy evenings; item,
pregnant bodies 2c. Well, it is fine and well done to be moderate in all
things, but still one should not make a necessary law in this, and these
words of Paul are right, who states that no one is powerful in his own
body, God grant, be it this or that day, as God gives it. He only sees
to it that unchastity is prevented and not given room or cause. O, this
little word of St. Paul cancels a great deal of law: \"No man is
powerful in his own body; indeed, he cannot suffer any law. For how
should anyone forbid me the body that is granted to me by God\'s right
and power? God\'s leave is greater than all men\'s commandment; what he
giveth me, let not St. Peter deny me. Weather follows:

**V. 5. Do not withdraw one from the other, except by the consent of
both for a time, that you may have leisure for fasting and prayer, and
come together again, lest Satan tempt you because of your unchastity.**

18 How poorly Saint Paul trusts in their chastity! He knows the devil
and his wiles well, and also the weakness of the flesh. Here you see
that married people are so closely bound to each other that one cannot
escape the other.

1038 Eri. si, Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the Corinthians. W.
vm, ivss-iE. 4039

He can also be drawn to fasting or praying without the other\'s will, so
that he will have given up both fasting and praying before one of them
should become powerful enough in his body to deny the other. Now prayer
is a highly, deliciously good work, and must give way to such a low (as
it appears) work; this makes all the law of love, in which they are
joined.

\(19\) This fasting and praying is spoken of as a special fasting and
praying that is accepted; as when husband and wife become one, to fast
and pray for three, four, six days, or a week or two, as each one may
freely accept such fasting for 1) himself, to mortify the body as long
as he wishes, without all law and activity of the authorities.
Otherwise, married people as well as all other Christians are obliged to
fast and pray in an evangelical way. For Christ has said to all
Christians \[Luc. 18:1\], \"Pray without ceasing.\" This fasting is to
eat and drink moderately. So praying is groaning and crying out with the
heart 2c.

\(20\) But as to what is the withdrawal among married people, and what
causes occur, I will let them interpret for themselves. I can well
believe that they are of various kinds, as befits the state, which is
created and appointed for evil days and not for good days. Anger and
dissension will also run along; sometimes 2) superfluous clergy will
also want to rule there. St. Paul sets only one; more may \[neither\] I,
nor anyone set. This is that both agree to fast harder for several days
in a special way, and to pray all the more diligently, especially where
there is a need. For strong prayer also requires strong fasting.
However, St. Paul leaves it free, and gives no law about it, but puts it
in both\'s discretion. Therefore, no one can be forced by commandments
to fast and pray as has been done up to now. Let this be said of it.

\(21\) Now St. Paul takes before him the three states of chastity,
namely, widowhood, matrimony, and virginity, and teaches further what is
necessary to know about them, saying:

1\) Wittenberg: through. Latin: pro.

2\) Weimarsche: at times, It will etc. w.

**The first part.**

**From the widowhood: 3)**

**V. 6. 7. But I say these things out of favor, and not out of command.
I would rather all men were like me, but each one has his own gift from
God, one otherwise, the other so.**

22\. above \[v. 2\] he said by commandment, \"Let every man have his own
wife for fornication\'s sake,\" and he also commanded conjugal
concubinage. How then does he speak here: he does not say this out of
commandment, but out of favor? Without doubt he wants that it should be
free to become married, that not, as in the Old Testament, everyone must
become married; therefore he does not give anyone the right to become
married, but grants it to everyone. But when they have become married,
he gives them the right to keep their marriage. Even where there is no
grace, that one may be free to become married or not, there also
marriage is commanded, yes, more than commanded.

23 How that he also saith, I would that all men were as I am. Is this
not spoken against the married state, as if he did not want any man to
be married? Yes, of course, he wanted everyone to have the great grace
of chastity, to be freed from the worries and troubles of marriage, and
to be free to do only with God and his word as he pleased. And who would
not and should not grant this to everyone, since Christian love wishes
everyone everything good, both temporal and eternal? Love has no measure
to do good and to desire good, even though it is impossible. Just as he
desires to be banished from Christ for the sake of the Jews\' salvation
in Romans 9:3.

\(24\) \"But each one has his own gift from God, one otherwise, the
other so. Here he confesses that his wish may not come to pass, and that
God\'s will is not to give the high grace to everyone. And mark this
text well, for it has much in it, and marriage is not praised less than
chastity. For where marriage and virginity are held in opposition to
each other, chastity is certainly a nobler gift than marriage; but

3\) This caption is found only in the Jena edition.

[1040 **Erl. 51, 17-19. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 6. 7. W. VIII, I0S4-I087.**
1041]{.underline}

Nevertheless, marriage is a gift of God (says St. Paul) as well as
chastity. A man is also more noble than a woman; nevertheless, the woman
is a work of God as well as the man; for before God all things are
equal, which are nevertheless unequal among themselves. Everything that
he has created is called his Creator and Lord, and none is called more
or higher than the other, whether great or small. So marriage and
virginity are equal before him, because both are his divine gift,
although one is better than the other, to be counted against each other.

\(25\) From this it follows that those who make nuns out to be more
glorious and better in the sight of God than those who are married, and
invent special crowns, and I do not know how many other honors and
dignities, make them trustworthy, unchristian, godless people, who rely
more on their status and work than on Christ\'s faith and God\'s grace,
and despise marriage as much less, even in the sight of God, than their
status, and call themselves Christ\'s brides. Yes, they are the devil\'s
brides, because they do not need chastity for what it is needed; namely,
not that it is better before God, but that it makes people here on earth
freer and more skillful to wait on God\'s word than marriage.

\(26\) Now, since both are gifts of God, and marriage is given to
everyone as a common gift, but chastity is a peculiar, strange gift to
very few people, it is hereby indicated that each one must examine
whether he finds the common or the peculiar gift in him. And because St.
Paul freely concludes here that it is a gift, we must ever confess that
it is not our work, good or ability, therefore no one can vow or keep
the same. For I cannot pledge to God his own and his gift, for he has
given it to me beforehand, or be sure of his promise that he will give
it to me, as Jeremiah was. So we read no example in Scripture of vows,
without in the things that are already given to us, or are to be given
to us, as \[Deut. 27:2 ff.\]^1^ ) Deut. 30:3 ff. is written, as, of
houses, fields, money, cattle,

1\) In the Erlanger wrong: Numbers 27.

to mortify one\'s own body, with fasting or other discipline 2c.

27\. Since we are here in the place where Paul praises marriage so
highly and calls it a divine gift, let us look further into it and prove
that marriage is the most spiritual estate, and that some estates have
been wrongly and unjustly called spiritual orders, and marriage secular
estate; but it should be the other way around, that marriage is called
the right spiritual estate, as it is; and the orders should be called
the right secular estates, as they are. They have brought into the world
vain misuses of words, and have smeared the mouths of every one with
them, and deceived them, that spiritual must be called worldly, and
worldly must be called spiritual.

28 In the first place, nothing should be called spiritual without the
inward life of faith in the heart, where the spirit rules. But since
this is also called spiritual, which is done by heart in the body
through the spirit of faith, we want to see and grasp here evenly and
finely that the married state should rightly be called spiritual, and
the orders secular. But I am speaking of the orders and clergy that have
so far allowed themselves to be called and praised in this way. For
those who are right in the faith, and are truly spiritual, certainly
have the right spiritual state of chastity.

\(29\) Moreover, no one can deny that the works and nature of the clergy
are just as external, temporal, and bodily as those of the married. For
they are done through the body and its members as well as through the
married. But what is done through the body and its members must be a
bodily and outward work, yes, even the thoughts and ideas in the heart
of such outward, bodily works must also be and be called bodily. Now if
any state is to be called spiritual, something else and more must belong
to it than such outward works and beings, namely faith in the heart,
which is spirit, and makes everything spiritual that is in man, both
outwardly and inwardly.

\(30\) Now look at the clergy, who have been famous up to now, and you
will find, first of all, that they have the greatest need of the body.

1042 Erl. si, is-si. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, ws? imo. 1043

They have certain interest, food, clothes, house, and all kinds of
superfluous things, and are \"murdered and given to them through the
work and care of others, so that they neither have nor want to have any
danger of this. For no one becomes spiritual, nor wants to become
spiritual, if he knows that he will be taken care of physically for the
rest of his life; and that many also seek such things in monasteries and
the priesthood, so that their belly and skin have enough. But what is
this but to seek and have such a state, where one may not gape at
heaven, and wait for the daily bread of God, and trust that God will
feed them? Recently, faith has no room, nor place, nor time, nor work,
nor exercise in such booths. For they sit in sure full readiness and
cash, and there is not substantia rerum sperandarum \[Heb. 11, 1.\],
confidence of goods, which matt does not see, as is the nature of faith,
but certitudo rerum possessarum, certain security of present goods.

\(31\) But if you take a wife and marry, this is the first thing: where
will you support yourself, your wife and your child? And this lasts all
your life, so that the conjugal state is by nature such that it teaches
and drives to marriage by God\'s hand and grace, and at the same time
compels to faith. For we also see that where there is no faith in the
marriage state, there is a heavy, miserable being, full of worry and
fear and work. Again, the less faith the famous spiritual state has, the
better days it has. For his belly is freely supplied, may not look on
God\'s hands, nor wait for His goodness.

\(32\) Tell me, then, which state is properly called the spiritual,
whether it is not that in which faith is necessary, and has its own
work, and has daily exercise and cause to trust in God, and goes
according to the saying of the 145th Psalm, v. 15, 16: \"All eyes wait
upon thee, O Lord, and thou givest them their meat in due season. Thou
dost open thine hand, and dost fill all that liveth with good pleasure\"
2c. Now only the married state has such a cause and exercise of faith in
God, but no spiritual state has it; nor does anyone want it, nor are
they endowed for it, and assured that they may not have such a cause.

have thus cast out faith, and stopped up all holes, that it might not
come in unto them. Is it not a perverse sacrilege, then, that they
should boast of their spirituality, and present their estate as
spiritual, in which, by nature and estate, there cannot be a drop of
faith? that the spirit and such spiritual estate rhyme with each other,
as Christ and Belial, as day and night, as spirit and flesh, as
believing and feeling. For where faith is not, nor space, nor cause,
there can be no spirit, and must of necessity be a vain carnal, worldly,
bodily and outward thing, as experience gives and teaches in the
religious.

\(33\) Again, they make a fuss about the marriage state, as if it were
worldly and carnal, and do not see how it is set up by God in such a way
that it drives and promotes the spirit and faith, and there must be
almost one spirit if it is to be 1) well. For what is God\'s work and
business has been prepared in such a way that it should work in faith
and practice faith; if not, then it is a difficult, unpleasant thing.
But what men devise always works best without faith, because it wants to
be sure of things and to be provided for.

\(34\) Behold, you grasp here for the first that the marriage state is
by nature such that it drives, chases and forces man into the most
inward, highest, spiritual being, namely to faith, since there is no
higher inward being than faith. For it is only attached to God\'s word,
and is stripped naked of everything that is not God\'s word. Now there
is nothing higher and more inward, neither in heaven nor on earth, than
God\'s Word, which is also God Himself. Again, the spiritual state by
nature is of such a kind that it lures a man out, and pours him out
completely on temporal and external things, that he has enough in the
flesh, and does not want to be a spiritual state, because he has enough
externally, and is sure of things, that he does not need faith and trust
in God; so that you must say that such a spiritual state is by nature a
right earthly, worldly and pagan state, compared to the marriage state.

1\) Weimarsche: er.

1044 Erl. si, si-st. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 6-8. W. vm, imo-ioW. 1045

The marriage state, in turn, is a true heavenly, spiritual and divine
state, as opposed to the spiritual state.

35 For I say of a kind; for it is true that many of the married state
have not rightly need in faith, and make the good themselves evil by
unbelief. Again, it is not impossible for a man of the spiritual estate
to need well by his faith, and to make that which is evil good to
himself by his faith. But for the sake of such a good or evil custom, it
cannot be said that the married state is evil, or the spiritual state
good. For faith makes all things good, even death and all misfortunes:
unbelief makes all things evil and harmful, even life and God Himself.
Now we do not speak of the custom or abuse of the estates, but of the
nature and character of the estates themselves, and conclude that the
marital estate is gold, and the spiritual estate filth; therefore that
the former is conducive to faith, but the latter to unbelief.

\(36\) Secondly, the marriage state not only exercises the heart and
inner being before God through faith, but also the body outwardly in
works. So that the marriage state drives both faith and work, helps both
body and soul, provides for them, and leads them rightly. For the
marriage state by nature is of the kind that it must work and feed
itself with its hand, and actually goes in the words of God Genesis
3:19: \"In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread.\" He has to
dare that his work is not good for him, that he often suffers damage,
that he suffers much from his wife, child and servants; and who can tell
all the sweat of the face? That the body in the conjugal state also has
its part to do with work, care and toil, as the heart has to do with
faith; and yet it is always certain that it is all divine, and so
pleases God. But the spiritual state does not nourish itself with its
work, it is a lazy rascal, and does not exercise the body at all, but
lets others do the work for it, and feeds its belly on the sweat and
blood of others, and does not want to wait for a ride or damage to its
goods. That recently here is no sweat of the face, but its essence goes
in the saying, Ps. 73, 5: \"They are not in the

They do not work like other people, nor are they afflicted like other
people; therefore, their defiance must be a delicious thing\" 1) 2c. And
even though they pray and sing and do their spiritual works, none of
them is useful for the exercise of the body. Moreover, even if they are
done to the best of their ability, it is uncertain that they please God;
indeed, such things, because they are done without God\'s word, cannot
please God.

\(37\) Here you may say, If you will, it should be better that no one
remain chaste, and that everyone become conjugal; would that ever be
contrary to this text of St. Paul? Answer: I am now speaking of the
spiritual state as opposed to the conjugal state, and not of the chaste
state. The spiritual state is of no use, and it would be better that no
one should be spiritual, and everyone should be conjugal. But the chaste
state is another thing than the spiritual state; and St. Paul speaks
nothing of the spiritual state, but of the right chaste state. There is
no more unchaste estate than the spiritual estate, as one learns daily.
And even if some lived chastely in it, they do not need it, for which
St. Paul would have used it; that it is not chastity at all, of which
St. Paul teaches here. For they make of chastity a merit and glory and
honor before God and the world, and rely on it, which is contrary to
faith; but St. Paul makes of it a skill and service 2) to God\'s word
and faith. Further he speaks:

**V. 8. Though I say to the unmarried and widows, it is good for them if
they also abide as I do.**

38 From this text it follows that St. Paul had a wife, because he counts
himself among the widowers. For afterwards he speaks of virginity in
particular, since he does not count himself as such. Although many think
that he remained a virgin, because he says 1 Cor. 9:5, 6: \"Do we not
also have power to take a sister to wife with us, as the other apostles,
and the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? Or have not I and Barnabas
alone power to do this?\" But this does not compel, but

1\) Jena and Weimar: \"darum sind sie beladen mit Stolzheit\" instead
of: \"drum muß ihr Trotzen\" etc. w.

2\) Jenaer: merit. Latin: sorvitutein.

[1046 Erl. si, 24-ss. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, ivse-ivss. 1047]{.underline}

Rather, it indicates that he had a wife, but he did not want to take her
with him, as the other apostles did with their wives. Or does he ever so
much as say that he had no wife now, as the widowers had, and yet would
have her.

39 It is also probable that he had a wife. For in Judaism, everyone had
to be married, and chastity did not apply without a special leave and
exodus from God. To this he also agrees with Phil. 4, 3, where he says:
\"Yes, I also ask you, my faithful companion, to stand by them who have
fought together with me over the gospel.\" Many understand this faithful
companion to have been St. Paul\'s wife, because he is silent about the
name 1) and does not address anyone else in such a way that he calls him
a faithful companion. Which is read in Greek as pulling with him in one
yoke, and having a special alliance with him before others, like married
people, to the effect that he commands the same companion to accept
wives. To speak in this way, one must say that St. Paul\'s wife either
died when he wrote this epistle, and gave himself a widower; or she must
have left him with her will, that he did not lead her around with him,
and thus lived with her chastely in the conjugal state, as it says 2) in
the 9th chapter. Be it so, then, that his wife was dead or willingly
left him for the sake of the gospel, it is certain that he lived as a
widower at that time and was a married man. But now we want to look at
what this saying concludes the most.

**From the priest marriage. ^3^)**

40 There are some who are so far gone that they must confess that
priests and bishops may be conjugal, and conjugals may be priests,
because the Scripture compels them, that the apostles were almost all
conjugals, and many bishops afterward. But they look for a remedy, and
say: Yes, we do read that those who were married before became apostles
and bishops and priests; but if they are now apostles, bishops and
priests before

1\) Weimarsche: the name.

2\) Wittenberg, Jena and Weimar: er.

3\) This superscription is only in the Wittenberg.

of marriage, we do not read that they were married afterward; therefore
now the priests may not marry. To these this saying shall answer:

41\) First of all, because you confess for the first time that married
men have become bishops and priests, and may also be and become priests,
as the apostle teaches and enjoins by example, who are you that you will
not now let a married man become a priest? You drive from the priesthood
not only those who still want to be married, but also those who are
already married, which is contrary to Christ and all the apostles, and
also contrary to St. Paul\'s teaching (although he remained without
marriage), since he says that one should choose as bishop one who has
only one wife and chaste, obedient children. Now say, which shall we
believe to be wiser and holier? Christ, or you? Christ takes married
people as priests and confirms it through his apostles, but you reject
them. Here either Christ must be a fool and unrighteous, or you must be
antichrists and deceivers.

\(42\) Gentlemen, if you had only let the little piece remain that,
according to the example of the apostles and the teaching of Christ,
married people should be priests, and had not forbidden more than that
priests should not become married, there would not have been so much
need. For in this way many would have become married priests, and many
would have tried the married state before, and would have become less of
whoremongers. But now you pretend that you have not read that priests
have become married, and yet you reject the whole marriage state from
the priesthood, against God, nature, reason, and right, out of pure
sacrilege, without any cause, so that you make the world full of
fornication.

43 To the other: Why then have you not read this text and considered it
rightly? Does it not clearly say that a priest may still be married? For
I suppose that St. Paul was a virgin or a widower; yet he says here that
he had a good right to take a wife with him. Tell me, was not St. Paul
then an apostle, bishop and priest? How is he so bold that he still
wants to have the right and power to marry? And if the high apostleship

1048 Erl. si, \[s-ss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 8. w. vm, 1049

suffer, remain conjugal and become conjugal, why should not the lesser
priesthood also suffer, both to remain conjugal and to become conjugal?

44 In addition, because St. Paul is a widower here, and still wants to
have the right to take a wife, he is certainly, according to papal law,
a digamus. law, he is a digamus, even though he does not ask for it. A
digamus, however, is such an evil thing in spiritual law that, even if
he were now without a wife, he still could not become a priest. But
digamus means one who has had two wives. This was such a man in the Old
Testament, who had two wives at the same time. But the spiritual law has
now interpreted the sayings differently, and invents three digamos: The
first, if someone twice in succession frees, whether they are both
virgins. The second, if a man marries only once and takes a wife. The
third, if someone takes a woman who is crazy, even if he did not know
it, and has taken a virgin for 1). These are all called digami, or
two-woman men, by the priest, and none may ever become priests after the
death of such wives. But even if he violated a hundred wives, weakened a
hundred virgins, and kept a hundred whores with him every day, he can
be, remain, and become a priest; so perfectly holy is this priesthood.
No sin nor disgrace is so great, and so much in all the world, that
prevents him from being and becoming a priest, without only holy
matrimony, which they call a sacrament and God\'s business 2) itself and
confess; that some work of God must not be able to be in the priesthood.

45 Now tell me, how does such an abominable outrage rhyme with St.
Paul\'s teaching, who is a widower, and wants to have right to free, and
gives power to free to all widowers and widowesses, no one excluded,
neither priest nor layman? What else can we say here, but that such
human statutes, so publicly and shamefully raging against God\'s word,
do not consider us other than sticks and blocks, that we should believe
that fornication is better than conjugal life? And what else is sought
by this, but that God\'s business, 2) marriage, is desecrated, and
fornication is only freely given room for?

1\) \"for\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

2\) Business - creature. Latin: orsadura - that which God created.

As Daniel proclaimed about the end of the Christian reign, and said Cap.
12 \[11, 37\]: \"He will not respect the love of women\"; as if he
should say: He will respect vain harlots.

46 Thirdly: Since they must then confess that the apostles remained in
marriage after the apostleship, I would like to know why marriage is
also not to be approached in the priesthood, and is valid after the
priesthood. 3) Is then the poor marriage so much a devilish thing when
it comes after the priesthood, and so much divine when it comes before?
Should it have such a great change for the sake of its procedure and
offspring? Truly all reason must confess, and everyone must grasp, that
everything that can remain divine with the priesthood and after the
priesthood, may also certainly be accepted in the priesthood and begun
before the priesthood.

\(47\) It is also a shameful pretense to profess that marriage is a
divine thing and a holy sacrament, and yet not to allow a divine thing
and holy sacrament to stand with priestly holiness. How is it that God
must be against Himself here? That one of his works cannot stand the
other, and one holiness persecutes the other, and one sacrament condemns
the other? O impudent, blind abominations, that one should have such an
unskillful thing not only persuade people, but also lead them to
consider it the best, and still consider it? How would this always have
been possible to end, 4) if God\'s wrath had not thus blinded and
punished the world?

\(48\) But let us remain here with St. Paul, who will not deceive us,
and establish that widowers may be free, God granting that they may be
priests or not; item, that they may take wives, they may be virgins or
widows; that nothing may be detrimental to the priest\'s status if he
takes a widow, and nothing may be detrimental if he takes a virgin. All
these things shall be free among Christians. For St. Paul wrote this
epistle not only to the laity, but also to the bishops and to all
Christians at Corinth.

3\) Wittenberg and Weimar: apply.

4\) \"end\" - lead out.

1050 Erl. sr, 28-sv. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, wW-nm. 1051

and because he does not single out any person or class, it does not
behoove us 1) to interpret or apply his words to the laity or to any
special person or class.

He knew well, St. Paul, that Christ did not want to break or hinder
God\'s creation and work through his teaching and rule. Now a man is
created for God\'s creatures and works, to be sown and multiplied,
Genesis 1:28. Therefore, through his gospel and priesthood, he does not
want to make a wood or stone out of the man, nor hinder his natural
works, which God has implanted. For what else is it said where priests
are forbidden to marry, but that a man is not a man, and that God\'s
creation and work should be abolished and cease for the sake of human
sin and commandment? God alone, who created him, can also accomplish
such things through His gifts and works; human law and free will, or
diligence, is lost and in vain here. Now says St. Paul:

**V. 8, 9: It is good for widows and widowers to remain as I do. But if
they do not abstain, let them go free. It is better to be free than to
burn. ^3^)**

\(50\) It is good, of course, to remain as St. Paul says; but he adds
why it is not good to remain thus, and better to be free again than to
remain a widow. And St. Paul has indeed here poured out in one heap all
the cause of freeing, and put the end to all the glory of chastity,
since he says: \"But if they cannot keep, let them free.\" So this is
said a lot: Necessity means you to become conjugal. No matter how highly
chastity is praised, and how noble the gift of chastity is, necessity
still hinders that very few can go to it, for they cannot keep it. For
though we are Christians, and have the Spirit of God in faith, yet is
not God\'s creation abolished, that thou art a woman, and I am a man;
and yet the Spirit doth not allow the

1\) Weimarsche: nothing.

2\) \"den\" is missing in the Jenaer, in the Erlanger and in the
Weimarschen.

3\) The words: \"It\... brennen\" are missing in the Wittenberger.

The Christian body has its own nature and natural works, so that it
eats, drinks, sleeps, feeds and ejects like the body of another human
being. So he does not take from man a female or male form, member, seed
and fruit, so that a Christian\'s body must inseminate and multiply and
discipline itself as well as other men, birds and all animals, for which
it was created by God, Genesis 1:28. So that because of necessity a man
must keep himself as a woman and a woman as a man, if God does not
perform miracles through a special gift and stop his creature.

This is what St. Paul means here: \"He who cannot keep himself free. As
if he should say: To whom God does not give the special grace, but
leaves his body its kind and nature, it is better, yes, necessary to be
free, and remain neither a widow nor a virgin. Now God does not intend
to make such special grace common, but the free shall be common, as he
has once established and created it in both bodies; he will not set
aside and deny to any man his creature.

52\) Above this, a Christian is spirit and flesh. Because of the spirit
he may not marry; but because his flesh is of the common flesh,
corrupted in Adam and Eve, and made full of evil desire, marriage is
also necessary to him because of the same disease, and it is not in his
power to contract it. For his flesh rages, burns, and swells as well as
another man\'s, if he does not help and ward it off with marriage as
with the necessary medicine. And God tolerates such rage for the sake of
marriage and fruit, for He well indicated in Genesis 3:16 what He would
tolerate in man, since He did not take away the blessing of multiplying,
but confirmed it, knowing full well that nature, corrupt and full of
evil desire, could not accomplish such a blessing without sin.

\(53\) To despise the married state and to encourage chastity, so that
it is full of misery and unwillingness, does not help and is not valid,
and is done foolishly and wickedly. For nothing is helped by this, but
necessity always lies in the way, and says: It cannot be, it will not
be, one cannot hold to heaven, as here.

[1052 Erl. si, so-ss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 8. 9. w. vm, noo-iioz.
1053]{.underline}

St. Paul says: \"He who cannot keep free\". Again, that one praises the
marriage state highly, as it is also a divine being, full of all
spiritual good, does not help either, because no one or even few can be
moved to give such good to themselves; nature shuns effort and work.

There are also many more reasons to free. Some free for the sake of
money and goods. A large number do so for the sake of avarice, to seek
pleasure and to atone for it. Some to beget heirs. But St. Paul
indicates some of these, and I know of none stronger or better, namely
necessity. 1) Necessity means that nature wants to come forth and beget
and multiply, and God does not want it apart from marriage. So everyone
must enter into marriage because of this need, if he wants to live with
a good conscience and go with God. If this necessity were true, 2) other
things would of course all make for a bad marriage, especially the
arrogance that drives fools to take such a serious, necessary, divine
position lightly, and then to realize very soon what they have done to
themselves. But what is this said?

**It is better free, because burn?**

\(55\) Doubtless every one that will live chastely without marriage and
without grace shall understand this word, and know what it is. For St.
Paul does not speak of secret things, but of the common, public feeling
of all those who live chastely without marriage, and yet do not have
grace. For he gives the burning bad to all who are without grace in
chastity, and shows no other remedy than marriage. If it were not such a
mean thing, or other advice, he would not have suggested marriage;
although in German it is called \"das heimliche Leiden\" (the secret
affliction), which saying would not be so mean if it were a secret evil.

\(56\) There is also no doubt that those who have the grace of chastity
still feel the evil desire at times and are challenged, but it is a
transition; therefore their thing is not burning. Recently, \"burn\" is

1\) \"Noth\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

2\) Latin: nisi Nase nrxsrst nsosssitas. Compare the note to § 12 of
this writing.

the heat of the flesh, which does not end with raging, and the daily
inclination toward the woman or the man, which is everywhere where there
is no desire and love for chastity; that one finds so few who are
without heat as one finds those who have God\'s grace for chastity. Now
such heat is harder in some, in some it is less; some also suffer it so
hard that they inseminate themselves. These all belong to the married
state, so that I may say: Where there is one chaste person, there shall
be more than a hundred thousand married ones.

Nothing better, but take an example before you. St. Jerome, who praises
chastity highly and most dangerously, confesses how he could not force
his flesh with any fasting or vigilance, that his chastity has turned
sour beyond measure. Oh how much good time he will have lost with carnal
thoughts! He also stood on the fact that chastity was to be worked out
with us, and was a common thing. Behold, the man is in heat, and should
have taken a wife. There you see what burning means. For he was in the
number of those who are to be married, and he himself did wrong and took
much trouble that he was not given in marriage. We read many more
examples of this in the lives of the fathers.

Thus St. Paul concludes: Where there is not God\'s special gift, there
must be either burning, or free. \"Now it is ever better (says Paul) to
free than to burn.\" Why? Because burning, even though it is not
followed by a work, is chastity lost, because it is not kept out of
desire and love, but with great unwillingness, unwillingness and
compulsion, so that it is counted as unchastity before God, since the
heart is unchaste and the body is not allowed to be unchaste. What is
the use, then, of keeping a lost and unchaste chastity with great, sour,
unpleasant effort? It would ever be better to be married, and to be
above such unpleasure. For though in matrimony there is also toil and
unpleasure, yet one can give the will to it, and at times have rest and
pleasure. But where there is no grace apart from marriage, it is
impossible to give the will to chastity and live with pleasure in it.

59\. see now what great teachers these are

1054 Erl. SI, SS-SS. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1103-HUS. 1055

and rulers are, who force the young people back and forth into
monasteries to chastity, and pretend that the more sour it becomes for
them, and the more unwilling 1) they are to it, the better chastity is.
So jest with other things, with chastity take another; for it cannot be
willing where special grace is not; everything else can be willing where
only faith is. They do just as the Jews did, who burned their children
in honor of the idol Moloch; that methinks. St. Paul also used the word
\"burn\" because he wanted to touch and interpret such an abomination.
For what is it different to let a young person in a monastery, or
otherwise, be stuck in such heat all his life, than to burn a child in
honor of the devil, who must keep a miserable, lost chastity?

I must tell here in honor of such teachers and rulers what I once heard
from a brave man, so that such coarse, blind heads may grasp how wisely
they go about their ruling. Once such a preacher had cried out how one
had to start something great, and almost hurt himself who wanted to do
God a service, and brought in from Vitis patrum as an example Simeon,
who stood a whole year on one leg on a high pillar, and always prayed,
neither ate nor drank, until maggots grew in his foot, which became
noble stones when they fell down. So you must attack yourself (said he)
if you want to serve GOD. For to preach such lies belongs to such
preachers, which no doubt the devil at that time invented to mock the
Christians through wicked men, so that he destroyed their miraculous
signs, of which they did much at that time, as if they were all such
jugglery. Such a fool preacher now met a fool for a disciple; as it is
said: A fool makes ten of them; who began to serve God, and wanted to
hurt him himself, and no longer let his urine. When he had lasted four
days and was ill, no one could talk him out of it, and so he wanted to
die, until finally God gave one in mind to praise and strengthen him in
his conduct, as he did right and well (as one must speak to fools what
they hold to be true).

1\) Wittenberg: willing. Latin: inviti.

But they say you do it for vain honor; if so, it is lost. And when he
heard it, he ceased, and said, Because they interpret it so unto me, I
will not keep it. 2)

\(61\) Well, this is a grossly foolish thing; but not to be despised
badly. God has indicated with it (as I say) what such teachers and
rulers do. And let us strike out this piece. It is true, as Scripture
and all experience teaches, that this life on earth is a miserable life,
full of misery and suffering, whatever state you choose (if it is
otherwise divine): nor is anyone so miserable, if he were commanded to
keep his urine or dung, he would rather choose the state than accept
such an impossible thing. And because no one is bound to such a
commandment, no one considers how good and delicious it is to keep urine
and dung from oneself, and in the meantime looks at and laments the
misery in one\'s state, which is not a tenth part as great and much as
this misery would be.

62 This is also the case with this burning. For those who are married
are now free, can extinguish what burns them, and no longer consider the
misery (just as a woman after childbirth thinks much differently than
before and during childbirth), and now no longer consider the trouble
and unpleasantness of her state. For good, when it is present, is not
regarded; evil, when it is past, is not remembered. But those who are
still in heat, and have no hope, how can they do otherwise than mock and
make fools of those who are in marriage, and yet complain of marriage?
For they must keep that which cannot be kept, and keep it in vain, and
lose all such sour toil. That is ever a miserable pity. How much would
they rather bear all the unpleasantness of marriage than such burning?

\(63\) Behold, St. Paul says here, \"It is better to marry than to
burn,\" as if to say, \"To marry is evil, but to burn is worse. And
summa: It is better the unfunny marriage than the unfunny chastity;
better a sour and heavy marriage than a sour and

2\) The same narrative in the Table Talks, Cap. Walch, St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XXII, 814.

[1056 Eri. 51, \[s-ss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 8-11. W. viir, iws-iio\".
1057]{.underline}

severe chastity. Cause: this must be lost; that can be useful.

64 Now this I say of the burning which they that keep it suffer; which
are almost few. For the more part suffereth not such burning, neither
keepeth it, but doeth as they do unto them, that they may be rid of it;
of which I will not write now. But if they get rid of it outside of
marriage, then conscience is there immediately; that is still the most
unbearable misery and the most miserable state on earth. Thus it must
finally happen that those who live without marriage and without the
grace of chastity are forced to sin with physical unchastity, and the
others are forced to live outwardly chaste and inwardly unchaste, and
thus the former must lead a damned, the latter an unholy, useless life.
And where are the spiritual and temporal rulers here who consider this
plight of the poor souls? Yes, they only help the devil to increase such
misery every day with their activities and coercion.

**The second part.**

**Of the marital status. 1)**

**V. 10, 11: But to the married I do not command, but the Lord, that the
wife not separate from the husband; but if she separate, that she remain
without marriage, or be reconciled to the husband, and that the husband
not leave the wife.**

\(65\) Hitherto he hath said of widowers and widowesses, among whom
there may be a man by a woman, and again; yea, it is good where they
have grace to abide by one another. But this cannot be admitted among
the married; for here is God\'s commandment, which compels to remain
with one another. But that widows and widowers remain from one another
is not a commandment of God nor a prohibition, but the apostle\'s good
counsel, and left them free before God, that they may again be free with
a good conscience, or so remain.

\(66\) But here the apostle allows a man and a woman to separate, so far
as they remain without marriage. So that he cancels the law

1\) The words: \"Von dem ehelichen Stande\" are found only in the
Jenaer.

For although Moses gave such a law to the Jews, as to those who were
hard-headed and pagan, it is not proper for Christians to do so.
Therefore Christ Himself abolished it, Matth. 19, 9. For in the Old
Testament there were not only such laws that served for spiritual rule,
but also for worldly rule, because God ruled the same people, both
spiritually and worldly. Just as even now in imperial law there are many
provisions for the secular that are not appropriate for Christians, such
as resisting violence with violence. 3)

\(67\) For many other laws are necessary to restrain and compel the
wicked, and many others to teach and govern the good. So this law also
was to restrain and compel the wicked, lest they kill their wives, or do
evil. But Christians should be devout in their hearts, so that they do
not need such a law, but keep their wives all their lives. But where
there are no Christians, or unrighteous, false Christians, it would
still be good today to keep this law, and they, like the pagans, divorce
their wives and take others, so that they would not have two hells with
their discordant lives, both here and there. But they should know that
by divorcing they would no longer be Christians, but pagans and in the
damned state.

68 But the apostle speaks of one cause of divorce, namely of anger, when
husband and wife cannot live together in harmony, that they live in
hatred and strife, so that they can neither pray nor do any good work.
The text makes this clear when it says, \"They should be reconciled and
remain undivorced, or live without marriage if they do not want to be
reconciled and divorced. But where reconciliation is commanded, there
will be

2\) Jena, Erlangen and Weimar: one.

3\) In the Weimar edition, the following still follows: \"Item für
gericht handeln\" 2c. The fact that these words are omitted in the
Wittenberg edition seems to indicate that Luther himself took part in
the composition of the text of the Wittenberg edition.

4\) Wittenberger: \"\"divorced. Latin: \[sparati.

1058 Erl. SI, S8-to. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1I08-NI0. 1059

Anger and dissension are indicated. But the apostle certainly allows
such separations, that he sees the weakness of the Christians through
the fingers, because two do not like to behave with each other;
otherwise each one is obliged to bear the other\'s burden, and should
not separate from him. This is also the matter that he does not allow
the divorced to change, so that he leaves room for them to unite and
come together again, even forcing and urging them to unite again,
because they may not have the grace of chastity.

How? if one did not want to be reconciled with the other and remain
separate, and the other could not hold on and had to have a spouse, what
would it do? Would it change? Answer: Yes, without a doubt. For since he
is not commanded to live chastely, nor does he have grace, and his
spouse does not want to be with him, and so takes away his body, which
he cannot do without, God will not force him to do the impossible for
the sake of another transgression, and must act as if his spouse had
died to him; especially since there is no lack of him for them to come
together. But that which is unwilling shall remain without marriage, as
St. Paul says here. Further he speaks:

**But I say to others, not to the Lord, that if a brother has an
unbelieving wife, and she allows herself to live with him, he should not
separate from her. And if a woman have an unbelieving husband, and he
suffer him to dwell with her, let her not put her away from him.**

Because St. Paul here testifies that this piece is not spoken by the
Lord, but by himself, he indicates that it is not commanded by God, but
that he is free to do otherwise or to do so. For he distinguishes his
words from the word of the Lord, that the Lord\'s word is to be
commandment, but his word is to be counsel. And so he wants to say: The
other, that is, when there are no matters of anger between the spouses;
as when there are two spouses, one of whom is a Christian, 1) the other
an un-Christian (as often happened when the faith was preached anew
among the Gentiles, that the two were not Christians).

1\) In the old editions: \"Christians\" instead of: a Christian.

one converted, the other not), although here the Christian may divorce
the un-Christian, yet it is the apostle\'s counsel that he not divorce
him, as long as his un-Christian 2) spouse suffers and is content that
he may be a Christian, and does not hinder or prevent him from living
Christianly, and does not force him to deny Christ or to live
un-Christianly.

This is what St. Paul means by the word: \"and he allows him to dwell
with her\" 2c., that is, if the unchristian is content and wants to stay
with his Christian spouse, and allows him to do everything that is due
to a Christian 2c. For marriage is an outward, bodily thing, which
neither hinders nor promotes faith, and one may well be a Christian, the
other an un-Christian: just as a Christian may eat, drink, buy and
engage in all kinds of outward dealings with a heathen, a Jew, a Turk;
just as now a married spouse may be a right, pious Christian, and the
other a wicked and false Christian, so that for the sake of piety or
wickedness it is not necessary to break up the marriage. 3)

But where the unchristian did not want to suffer that his spouse was a
Christian, nor lived a Christian life, 4) and resisted and persecuted
him, here it would be time to keep Christ\'s saying in the flesh
\[Matth. 10, 37\]: \"Whoever loves his wife or child more than me is not
worthy of me. This is the beginning of divorce. But if it is divorce,
then there must be either reconciliation, or that without marriage
remains, which does not want to reconcile, and the other has power to
change, as is said above \[§ 69\]. For one must hold Christ, the soul\'s
spouse, higher than the physical spouse; and where one does not want to
suffer the other, remain with the soul\'s spouse, who is eternal, and
let the physical one go, taking another who may suffer the eternal one
next to him.

73\) So it should also happen now, that where a man wants to keep his
wife, or urge her to commit theft, adultery, or any wrong against God,
here also the same cause is to be divorced, and (where she is

2\) In the old editions: Unchristian.

3\) Weimarsche: \"die ehe nicht zureyssen nott ist.\"

4\) In the old editions: \"to be his spouse Christians, nor to live
Christian.\"

[1060 Eri. si, to-ts. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 12-14. W. vin, iiia-mz.
1061]{.underline}

not reconcile) power of the One to change. Hence it is that adultery
divorces and gives power to change. For in the Old Testament, Deut.
13:6-10, it was commanded that every man should help his wife, brother
and best friend to death, who would lead him or provoke him to do evil
against God. But in the New Testament, since one does not kill bodily,
it is enough to divorce him and let him go.

From this it follows that the examples which are read that some wives,
in order to save their husbands from death or from the prison sentence,
have broken marriage with the consent of their husbands, have not been
right; for God\'s commandment is to be kept, at the cost of man or
woman, body or goods, and no man has the right, for any reason, to
permit his wife to break marriage. Further, St. Paul speaks:

**V. 14 For the unbelieving man is sanctified through the woman, and the
unbelieving woman is sanctified through the man. Otherwise their
children would be unclean, but now they are holy.**

\(75\) This is spoken in the Hebrew way, according to St. Paul, that to
him who is holy all things are holy, as he says Titus 1:15: \"All things
are pure to the pure\"; and Romans 8:28: \"All things are for the good
of the saints. And thus he means to say: A Christian spouse must not
divorce, but may well remain with his unchristian spouse, and also beget
and bring up unchristian children. Reason is this: If the unchristian
spouse does not prevent his Christian spouse from living a Christian
life, then faith is such a powerful thing that it does him no harm to be
with unchristians, and is equally valid for him, whether holy or not, so
that he may go around. For even death, which is the most horrible thing,
is nevertheless a holy, blessed thing to a Christian. Faith can use all
things, whether evil or good, without unbelief and its fruits. For these
are directly contrary to faith, and do not allow it to remain.
Otherwise, what faith allows to remain becomes harmless, pure, holy,
useful and wholesome through the same faith, so that the believer can
handle it and remain with it without any danger. For if this were not
the case, no Christian would have to live, since he would have to live
among the wicked and unbelievers.

live with the people. But now that he does not follow them, but needs
them well, he may live with them and among them, so that they may also
become godly and Christians through him 2c.

\(76\) Thus, to a Christian, the whole world is holy, pure, useful and
pious; again, to an unbeliever, the whole world is unholy, unclean,
harmful and corrupt, even God Himself with all His goods, as the 18th
Psalm, v. 26, 27, says to God: \"With the holy you are holy, and with
the pious you are pious, and with the pure you are pure, but with the
perverse you are perverse\". Why is that? Because the saints, that is,
the faithful, can use all things holy and blessed, and sanctify and
purify themselves in them; but the unholy and unbelieving sin, desecrate
and defile themselves without ceasing in all things, for they cannot use
any of them rightly and divinely nor blessedly, which would serve them
to blessedness.

\(77\) So also the children are holy, though they be not baptized nor
Christians. They are not holy in their own person, of which holiness St.
Paul does not speak here, but they are holy to you, so that your
holiness can deal with them and raise them up, so that you are not
desecrated in them, as if they were a holy thing. For St. Paul wants to
say: If a Christian spouse had great children with an unchristian spouse
(as it often happened at that time), and the children did not yet want
to be baptized, nor become Christians; because no one should be forced
to believe, but be willingly drawn by God through the gospel: Therefore
the mother or father shall not leave the children, nor withhold or
neglect their maternal or paternal duty, as if they had sinned and
defiled themselves against the unbelieving children, but shall 1) have
bodily charge over them and care for them, even as if they were the most
holy Christians. For they are not unclean nor unholy, that is, your
faith may be exercised in them, that it may remain pure and holy.

78\. This is how it should be now and always: Where children did not
want to accept the gospel

1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: those.

1062 Erl. si, ts-is. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, iiis-nis. 1063

Therefore, they should not be abandoned or cast out, but cared for and
provided for, just as the very best Christians, and their faith should
be commanded by God, as long as they are otherwise obedient and pious in
other things that affect their outward nature. For parents should and
can prevent and punish outward evil behavior and works; unbelief and
inward evil behavior can be prevented and punished by no one but God
alone, so that this text of St. Paul may still be valid and powerful for
us, so that all things may be holy and pure for the faithful.

**V. 15 But if the unbeliever divorces himself, let him divorce himself.
The brother or sister is not caught in such cases.**

Here the apostle absolves and frees the Christian spouse, where his
unchristian spouse separates from him or does not want to allow him to
live as a Christian, and gives him the power and right to free another
spouse.

But what St. Paul speaks of a pagan spouse here is also to be understood
of a false Christian; that if he wanted to keep his spouse to
unchristian beings and not let him live Christianly: If he would keep
his spouse to an unchristian nature and not let him live a Christian
life, or if he would separate from him, that same Christian spouse would
be free to trust in another. For if this were not right, the Christian
spouse would have to run after his unchristian spouse, or live chastely
without his will and property, and thus be imprisoned for the sake of
another\'s transgression, and live in his soul\'s fate. Here St. Paul
denies this, and says: \"That in such cases the brother or sister is not
a prisoner nor his own. As if to say, \"In other matters, where husband
and wife remain together, as in conjugal duty and the like, one is bound
to the other and is his own, so that neither may change from the other;
but in these matters, where one spouse keeps the other unchristian to
live, or separates from him, he is not bound, nor is he bound to cling
to him. But if it is not bound, it is free and loosed; if it is free and
loosed, it may change, as if its spouse had died.

81 How, if the other spouse also

1\) Weimarsche: den.

If a man, who had been in evil, and also wanted to live a pagan or
unchristian life, keep his Christian spouse, or also run away from him;
and so on, the third, the fourth, how often such a case would happen;
would a man then have ten or more wives who were still alive and had run
away from him? and again, a wife have ten or more husbands who would
have run away from her? Answer: We cannot stop St. Paul\'s mouth, so we
cannot stop those who need his teaching as often as they want. His words
are clear that a brother or sister is free and loose if his spouse runs
away from him and does not want to live with him. And he does not say
that it should happen only once, but lets it stand and go as often as
necessity demands; for he does not want anyone to be caught up in the
road of unchastity for the sake of another\'s wickedness and wickedness.
2)

\(82\) How then should not the Christian spouse wait until his
unchristian spouse returns or dies, as has hitherto been the custom and
spiritual right? Answer: If he wants to wait for him, let it be in his
good will; because the apostle here speaks freely, he is not obliged to
wait for him, but may change in the name of God. And would God that this
teaching of St. Paul had been used until now, or that it had been
brought into the custom, where husband and wife run away from each
other, and one leaves the other behind, from which much fornication and
sin have followed. This was helped by the pernicious laws of the pope,
who, contrary to this text of St. Paul, forced and compelled one spouse,
in case of loss of the soul\'s bliss, not to change, but to wait for the
runaway spouse or to endure his death. In such a case, the brother or
sister has been badly imprisoned for the sake of another\'s wickedness
and wickedness, and has been driven without cause into the road of
unchastity.

But how if the runaway spouse came back, and now wanted to turn herself
in,

2\) Walch enclosed this entire paragraph in brackets and made the
erroneous remark that it was not in the very first edition. However, it
is missing only in the Wittenberg edition, but is found in the Jena,
Weimar and Latin editions. The Erlanger brings it in the margin as an
addition of Walch.

1064 Erl. s.l, 45-47. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 15. 16. W. VIII, IIIS-IIIS.
1065

should one also allow it again and accept it? Answer: Where this, which
is stayed, has not yet changed, it may receive him again, and it is to
be advised that they sit together again. But where this has changed, one
should let that go badly and not take it up again. And it may serve here
that Deut. 24, 3. 4. is written about the rejected wife, that the first
husband cannot have her again, even if she would get rid of the other
one by death or a bill of divorce. So should one do here also, that his
running may be punished. And where one did so, there would undoubtedly
be less running. But now that the pope opens the door to the runners,
and gives their wickedness and evil the power and right to come back, it
is no wonder that the world has become full of broken and single
marriages, yes, full of fornication, which the devil has sought through
the pope\'s 1) law.

\(84\) But if they are both guilty, and both run away from each other,
it is right that they should immediately take up with each other, and be
reconciled, and sit together. And this doctrine of St. Paul shall be
stretched so far as to comprehend all separations. As if a man or a
woman run away from each other, not only for the sake of Christian
faith, but also for whatever reason, be it anger or any other
unwillingness, that the guilty spouse should be reconciled or remain
without marriage, and the innocent one be free to go, and have power to
change, if the other does not want to be reconciled. For all this is an
unchristian and heathen thing, that a husband runs away from another for
anger or displeasure, and will not suffer good and evil, sweet and sour,
with his husband, as he is guilty; therefore such a husband is truly a
heathen and an unchristian. But in peace (he says) God has called us.

This is that we should live peaceably with one another: so that even a
Christian husband should not quarrel with his unchristian husband for
the sake of faith or unbelief, nor divorce him if his unchristian
husband lets him live Christianly,

1\) \"Pabsts\" is missing in the Weimar and the Erlanger.

but each should leave the other in his faith, and command the matter to
God. For no one should or can be forced or driven to faith, but God must
draw him by grace; to this end we should teach, admonish and ask, not
force. Therefore, a Christian spouse should conduct the outward affairs
of marital status in peace with his non-Christian spouse, and neither
defy nor oppose him, neither by running nor by chasing. For God is not a
God of strife, but of peace, Rom. 15, 33. Therefore He does not teach us
strife, but keeps us at peace. St. Paul continues:

**V. 16 But what do you know, you woman, whether you will save the man?
Or you man, how do you know if you will save the woman? But as God has
distributed to each one.**

That is why you should live peacefully with one another in marriage,
even with your unchristian spouses (if they do not hinder your Christian
nature), and not oppose them, nor force or compel them to believe. For
it is neither your work nor your power that anyone should believe, but
God\'s alone. Since you do not know whether or not you are worthy to be
saved by God through you, you should be at peace with them, and no man
should force his unbelieving wife or quarrel with her for the sake of
faith, nor a woman with her unbelieving husband. But if God wants to
convert her through you, he will help you to do so, and will distribute
grace and gifts among you that serve this purpose. This seems to me to
be the right mind of St. Paul in this place, that he does not want to
urge anyone to faith or godliness, but to live peacefully with everyone
until God converts through us with his grace those whom he wants to
convert; as St. Peter also teaches 1 Ep. 2, 12.

\(87\) So also a false Christian husband is to be dealt with, that his
evil life is to be tolerated in peace, and he is not to be defied nor
driven to goodness, but only to be kept and helped peaceably and kindly.
For you may not be worthy to make someone righteous. But if you are
worthy of it, God will grant and distribute it to you.

1066 Erl. SI, 47-so. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, IIIS-U2I. 1067

according to his will. However, you are sure that you live with your
unchristian or evil husband, as long as you do not follow or approve of
his unbelief or evil life, and he does not urge you or hold you to it,
but tolerate such unbelief and injustice in your husband, just as one
must tolerate it from all the world, even from devils, and always act
with good words and peaceful life toward him, until God gives his grace
that he also converts. Further:

**V. 17: Every man as the Lord hath called him, so let him walk. And so
I do in all the wicked.**

This is the conclusion of this part of the marriage state. To say, then,
that faith and the Christian state are such free things that they are
not bound to any state, but are above all states, 1) in all states, and
through all states. Therefore there is no need for you to accept or
leave any class in order to be saved; but in whatever class the gospel
and faith finds you, there you can remain and be saved. Therefore it is
not necessary for you to leave marriage and run away from your
unchristian spouse for the sake of faith or salvation. Again, it is not
necessary that you marry for the sake of faith or salvation. Finally, if
you are married, whether to a Christian or an unbeliever, to a pious or
a wicked person, you are neither saved nor damned. If thou art without
marriage, thou art neither saved nor damned; all this is free, free; 2)
but if thou be and remain a Christian, thou shalt be saved; and if thou
remain an unchristian, thou shalt be damned.

**That\'s how I create or order it in all the commons.**

That is, among all the Christians I preach. For I do not teach them to
leave their estates and make mischief, but to remain and live in peace.
There 3) you see that St. Paul does not let any state be a blessed state
without the one, the Christian state. The others he makes all free, so
that they may

1\) Weimarsche: \"above all estates\" and immediately following:
\"through all estates\".

2\) \"free\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

3\) Weimarsche: See, there.

They are neither blessed nor condemned by themselves, but may all be
blessed by faith and condemned by unbelief, even if they are considered
the very best for themselves. Where then will the monks and nuns and
other spiritual states remain, which elevate them to higher states of
blessedness, next to and above this one state of blessedness? They are
all lost, so they let them be free, that the consciences are not bound
to them, and are not kept for blessedness, but for the sake of temporal
exercise of the body, as I have often said.

**V. 18. 19. If anyone is called circumcised, let him not be
circumcised. If anyone is called in the foreskin, let him not be
circumcised. Circumcision is nothing, and the foreskin is nothing, but
keeping God\'s commandment.**

90 Here he sets forth several examples of the decree, that every man
should walk as the Lord hath called him. The first is of Jews and
Gentiles, saying, \"It is all the same whether you are a Jew or a
Gentile. If you are circumcised and under the Jewish law, do not think
that it is sin and wrong, and you must come out. For faith is above
circumcision and all laws, that thou mayest be circumcised or
uncircumcised, and need not be either unto salvation, but both are free
to abide therein; even as it is not necessary to be married, or to
remain without marriage, but both are free. So also, if you are a
Gentile, uncircumcised and without Jewish law, you must not think it is
wrong, and must be circumcised, but \[itj is free. Faith alone makes you
righteous, which also alone fulfills the commandments of God.

\(91\) These two words, \"Do not witness foreskin\" and \"Do not be
circumcised,\" are not to be understood as if St. Paul forbids
circumcision and foreskin. For who could keep them both at the same
time, since they are contrary to each other, being circumcised and
uncircumcised? And he himself also says here, \"Circumcision is
nothing.\" Which is contrary to what he says, \"Do not witness
foreskin.\" For, if he beget not foreskin, he must be circumcised; how
then can circumcision be nothing? So when he says, \"The

[1068 **Erl. 51, 50-52. Sermon on I Cor. 7, 18-21. W. VIII, II2I-II24.**
1069]{.underline}

Foreskin is nothing\" is contrary to \"Do not be circumcised. For if he
is not to be circumcised, he must beget the foreskin; how then can the
foreskin be nothing? but he pleads to have trouble, constraint, and
conscience about it, namely, that the work in himself is free, neither
right nor wrong. And so one should not beget a foreskin, as if one had
to be uncircumcised; again, one should not be circumcised, as if one had
to be circumcised. Neither is worth anything for salvation, and both may
be kept without conscience; so that both, Jewish and Gentile birth or
being, neither hinders nor promotes anything before God, but faith
alone.

\(92\) So it should also be said to our people now: To be married is
nothing; to be without marriage is also nothing. Having a pagan spouse
is nothing; having a Christian spouse is also nothing. He who is
married, let him remain married; he who is without marriage, let him not
be married, that is, let him leave his conscience unburdened, as if he
must be married or not married. Item, being a monk is nothing, being a
layman is also nothing; being a priest is nothing, being a nun is also
nothing. He who is a layman, let him not be a monk; he who is a monk,
let him not be a layman, that is, let him not make any trouble or
conscience of being a monk or a layman, but let him remain as he is, so
far as the faith remains pure and sure. For where faith cannot remain,
the monk should almost leave it, as a married spouse should leave his
unchristian spouse, who keeps and drives him from the Christian faith.

But here the Jews would say to Paul: You say that circumcision is
nothing, but keeping God\'s commandment. Now circumcision is hard
commanded by God for us Jews; how is it nothing? It is too long to talk
about it now, I have talked about it enough in other places. Finally,
all the laws in the Book of Moses are given except for Christ; when he
comes, he should teach and give faith and love. Where these are, all
commandments are fulfilled and abolished, and made free; so that after
Christ\'s coming no commandment is needed any more, except of faith or
love. Where love demands it, I should circumcise myself; where it does
not, I should leave it alone. Where love demands anger, I should be
angry; where not, I should not. Where love demands swear

If I swear, I shall swear; if not, I shall not swear. So from now on,
act in accordance with all God\'s and man\'s commandments. But what love
is, how it only looks at the neighbor\'s benefit and will, and what
faith is, has been said enough elsewhere.

**V. 20, 21: Let every man abide in the calling wherein he is called. If
you are called as a servant, do not worry; but if you can become free,
you will need it much more.**

Then he repeats the decision for the second time, and gives another 1)
example of a servant and a free man. For at that time there were many of
their own people, as there still are in some places, who are called
serfs; here St. Paul calls them servants. Now, just as a legitimate
husband should hold himself against his wife, because he is also a
bondman, so a servant should hold himself against his master, because he
is a bondman. That is, the fact that he is in bondage does not prevent
him from his Christian faith, and therefore he must not run away from
his master, but remain with him, whether the master is believing or
unbelieving, pious or wicked; unless his master wanted to keep him from
the faith and force him, or to follow his wicked life; for then it is
time to run and leave. And all that which is said above 70 ff.\] is said
of a Christian husband, how he should behave toward his unchristian
husband, that is also to be said here of a Christian servant, toward his
unchristian master.

95 And what Paul says here of a bondman is also to be held of all hired
servants, maids, day laborers, workers, and servants, against their
masters and wives; yea, of all vows, covenants, societies, and how one
may be related and bound to the other. In these matters, service,
loyalty and duty are to be kept by all, whether Christians or
un-Christians, pious or wicked; as long as they do not hinder faith and
justice, and let you live Christianly. For such states are all free, and
unhindered by the Christian faith. 2) As if the king of Poland or
Hungary united with the Turk, he shall keep it, and

1\) Weimarsche: still; this is missing in the other editions.

2\) The following sentence is missing in the Wittenberg.

[1070 Erl. si, es\--\". Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1:21-1128. 1071]{.underline}

say, as Paul teaches here, \"GOD has called us in peace.\"

96\) \"But if thou canst be free (says St. Paul), thou needest it much
more\". Not that you should steal and run away from your 1) master
without his knowledge and will, but that you do not understand St.
Paul\'s word, when he says that you should remain in the profession in
which you are called, as if you had to remain in bondage, although you
could become free with the knowledge and will of your master. St. Paul
only wants 2) to instruct your conscience, so that you know how it is
both free before God, whether you are bond or free. With this, he does
not want to prevent you from becoming free, if you can, with the favor
of your Lord, so that your conscience should apply equally, you become
free or bondage, if you can with God and with honor. For this is not
what the Christian faith teaches, to take from another what is his, but
rather to do all duty, even to those to whom we owe nothing, nor have
any right over us.

**V. 22: For he who is called a servant in the Lord is a soldier of the
Lord. In the same way, whoever is called a freeman is a servant of
Christ.**

97\. This is what is said: In the sight of God it is equal whether you
are free or bond; just as circumcision and foreskin are equal; neither
hinders faith and salvation. Just as when I say, \"It is all the same in
faith whether you are rich or poor, young or old, handsome or ugly,
learned or unlearned, layman or priest. For whoever is called poor is
rich before God; whoever is called rich is poor before God; whoever is
called young is old before God; whoever is called old is young before
God; whoever is called ugly is pretty before God. And again, he who is
called unlearned is learned before God; and again, he who is called a
layman is a priest before God. All of this is because faith makes us all
equal before God, and no distinction of person or status counts for
anything.

98 So also here: \"He who is called a servant is a freeman of the
Lord,\" that is, he

1\) Wittenberger: dem.

2\) Wittenberger: \"wie nu\" instead of: will nur.

is as much before him as if he were free, and not a servant. Again, \"He
that is called a freeman is Christ\'s servant,\" that is, he is no
better than one that is a servant. For here it is, as St. Paul Gal. 3,
28. says: \"Here is no Jew, no Gentile, no servant, no free, no male, no
female, but all and all Christ.\" For there is equal faith, equal goods,
equal inheritance, and all things equal. So you might also say, \"He who
is called a man is a woman before God; and he who is called a woman is a
man before God. Therefore the word \"a servant of Christ\" cannot be
said here of the service done to Christ, but it is called a servant
among men on earth, because the same belongs to Christ and is under him,
so he is as much counted as a freeman, and a freeman as a servant; and
yet is Christ\'s own, in that he is a servant.

**V. 23. You are bought with great price; do not become servants of
men.**

99\. What is this saying? Now he has taught that one should remain a
servant, and that this does not hinder the Christian faith; but here he
declares that one should not become a servant. He undoubtedly says this
as a common saying against the teachings of men, which nullify such
freedom and equality of faith, and tighten the consciences; namely,
whoever teaches that a Christian should not take an un-Christian woman
in marriage and stay with her, as the spiritual law does, hinders this
freedom, taught by St. Paul here, and makes people have to be more
obedient to him than to God\'s words. That is what he calls human
service here. For they think they are becoming servants of God and
serving Him, and yet this is the doctrine of men, and so they become
servants of men. So did those who preached that Christians must
circumcise themselves, and in doing so they also abolished the freedom
mentioned above. So Paul fights for Christian freedom at all ends,
against the ropes and dungeons of human statutes.

100 But that this is his opinion is proved by his saying, \"Ye are
bought with a price. There he means Christ, who bought us with his own
blood from all sins and laws and made us free,

1072 **Eri. bt, S4-S7. Sermon on I Cor. 7, 23. 24. W. VIII, II2K-IIW.**
1073

Gal. 5, 1. Now this purchase does not take place in a worldly way, nor
does it affect the alliances that men have with one another, such as the
servant against the master, the wife against the husband. He leaves such
covenants and wants them kept, but goes spiritually in conscience, so
that before God no law binds us anymore, nor sows us, but there we are
all free in all things. For before we were bound in sins, but now all
sins are gone. But what alliance or freedom remains outwardly, that is
neither sin nor merit, but outward estate or trouble, suffering or joy,
as other bodily good and evil, in both of which we could live free and
without sin.

**V. 24. Every man, brethren, in what he is called, let him abide with
God.**

Then he repeats for the third time this decision about Christian
freedom, that all external things are free before God, and a Christian
may use them as he pleases, he may accept them or let them go. And he
adds: 2) \"By God,\" that is, as much as is between you and God. For you
do no service to God, 3) to be free, to remain without marriage, to be a
servant, to be free, to become this or that, to eat this or that; again,
you do him no displeasure or sin, where you let the one go or stand by.
Finally, you owe nothing to God except to believe and confess. In all
other matters he releases you and sets you free, so that you may do as
you please, without all the trials of conscience; 4) so also that he
does not inquire on his account whether you have let your wife go, have
left the Lord, and have not kept a covenant; for what does he gain from
your doing or not doing these things? But because you are bound to your
neighbor, because you have become his own, God does not want to take
away his own by his freedom, but wants to keep it for your neighbor. For
although God respects nothing for his own sake, he respects it for your
neighbor\'s sake. This is what he means when he says, \"By God,\" as if
to say:

1\) In the old editions: \"Such alliance\".

2\) Weimarsche: Hiezu.

3\) Thus the Jena, Weimar and Latin: okssHuiuin. In the other German
editions: Verdienst.

4\) Weimarsche: \"gefähr des gewissen\".

With man, or with your neighbor, I will not set you free; for I will not
take from him what is his, until he himself also sets you free; but with
me you are set free, and can by no means spoil it, you leave or keep
what is external.

Therefore, notice and discern this freedom correctly, that it is not
between God and you as it is between you and your neighbor; there this
freedom is, here it is not. The reason for this is that God gives you
this freedom only in what is yours, not in what is your neighbor\'s.
Separate therefore from one another what is yours and what is your
neighbor\'s. Therefore the man cannot leave the woman, because his body
is not his but the woman\'s. Again. Item: The servant with his body is
not his own, but his master\'s. In the sight of God there is nothing to
be gained by a man leaving his wife, for the body is not joined to God,
but is freely given by Him for all outward things, and is only inwardly
God\'s own through faith; but before men the covenant is to be kept.
This is Summa Summarum: We owe nothing to anyone but to love, and
through love to serve our neighbor. Where there is love, that makes it
one\'s own, so that there is no driving of conscience or sin before God,
living with food, drink, clothing or otherwise, without it being against
one\'s neighbor; one cannot sin against God here, but against one\'s
neighbor.

103\. And it is to be known that this little word \"call\" here does not
mean the state in which one is called; as it is said: The marriage state
is your call; the priesthood is your call; and so on. Everyone has his
call from God. St. Paul does not speak of such a call here, but he
speaks of the gospel call, so that it is said: Remain in the profession
in which you are called, that is: As the gospel meets you, and as its
call finds you, so remain. If it calls thee in matrimony, abide in the
same call wherein it finds thee; if it calls thee in bondage, abide in
the bondage wherein thou art called.

\(104\) How then, if it were to befall me in a sinful state, should I
remain in it? Answer: If you are in faith and love, that is, if you are
in the call of the gospel, do it,

[1074 Erl. 51, 57-5\". Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, II2S-IIS2. 1075]{.underline}

But how can you sin if you believe and love? Because it is enough for
God through faith, and for your neighbor through love. Therefore it is
impossible that you should be called and remain in the sinful state. But
if you remain in it, you are not yet called, or have not yet grasped the
call. For this call causes you to come out of the sinful state into a
godly state, and makes you so that you cannot sin if you remain within,
and are free from all things with God through faith; but with men you
are everyone\'s servant, through the

From this you can see that monasticism and spiritualism are unjust in
our times, for they join themselves before God to external things, since
God freely gives them away, and thus strive against the freedom of faith
and God\'s order; again, since they should be joined, namely, before
men, and serve everyone through love, they make themselves free, so that
they serve no one, nor are they useful except to themselves, and thus
strive against love. So they are a perverse people, perverting all the
rights of God; they want to be free, since they are bound, and to be
bound, since they are free; and yet they hope for much higher seats in
heaven than the common Christian man. Yes, they will sit in the abyss of
hell, who turn the heavenly freedom into such a hellish prison, and the
lovely servitude into a hostile freedom.

**The third part.**

**Of virginity.**

**V. 25. 26. But of the virgins I have no commandment of the Lord. But I
speak my mind, as I have obtained mercy from the Lord to be faithful. So
I think it is good for the present need, that it is good for a man to be
so.**

We have now heard enough praise for the married state; now we should
also preach its misfortune, and honor virginity. But if it were not for
St. Paul, it would be quite annoying that he praises the noble state of
virginity so scantily 1).

1\) In the old editions: kercklich.

and narrow price. First of all, he says: \"It is not commanded by the
Lord, as little as the marriage state, that is, it should be free for
everyone; but with this he takes away all the honor that has been given
to him by the high preachers. For where there is no commandment, there
is neither merit nor reward before God, but a free being for himself.
For it counts the same before God, whether you are a virgin or not. And
as he says above \[v. 22\], \"He who is called a servant is a freeman of
the Lord,\" so it may also be said here, \"He who is called a virgin is
a woman before God; and he who is called a woman before God is a virgin
before God. For all things are equal before God, and there is no
distinction of person or merit of works, but only the same faith in all
and by all.

For this reason the Holy Spirit said through St. Paul that virginity is
a precious and noble thing, highly esteemed on earth, so that no one
should think himself better and higher before God than another bad
Christian because of the greatness and height of such status, but should
remain in the simplicity of faith, which makes us all equal before God.
For the poisonous nature cannot refrain from making itself seem superior
before God through works, and the higher the work, the more it wants to
be considered superior. For this reason, it is almost blinded by the
fine splendor of virginity, because no work is greater or more beautiful
on earth, so that it does not respect a higher status before God than
virginity, and thinks that just as a virgin is much more valid on earth
than a wife, so it should also be so in heaven.

\(108\) Hence come the foolish teachers of the devil, who forge special
crowns in heaven for nuns and all virgins, and make them brides of
Christ, just as if other Christians were not brides of Christ. Then the
poor, foolish young people fall down and want to make everyone into
these little crowns, and want to make heaven full of virgins and
Christ\'s brides. Meanwhile the Christian faith goes into contempt and
oblivion, and dies out, which alone acquires the crown and makes
Christ\'s brides. But know, and be sure, that such crowned virgins, who
rely on such doctrine, and in such

1076 Erl.si, \"g-M. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 25-28. W. vm, iiW-iisi. 1077

The first is to pretend virginity, and not, as St. Paul teaches here,
that certainly none of them is or remains a pure virgin, 1) and will
finally be found neither a virgin nor Christ\'s bride.

On the other hand, virginity, according to his faithful opinion, is good
for the sake of the present need. This is the first price of St. Paul\'s
virginity. And there you see of what \"good\" 2) St. Paul also spoke
above \[v. 1\], when he said: It is good not to touch a woman, that he
does not speak a word of merit or reward in heaven; as St. Jerome also
missed here, and understood and interpreted Paul wrongly; but of the
\"good\" 2) on this temporal life, as will follow more. So this is a
good reason to remain a virgin and to avoid the arduous marriage, that
persecution is always on a Christian\'s neck for the sake of the gospel,
and that he is in danger every hour that he must risk his goods, his
friends and his life, and be driven away or strangled. This is what St.
Paul calls the present distress.

Now tell me, where will you find a virgin in all the monasteries, as far
as the pope has ruled, who have remained virgins for such a cause 3)?
Where is their property, life and limb in the driving? They are so
highly liberated and assured of their goods, life and friendship, both
by imperial and papal authority, that no safer people on earth ever
came; that everyone must confess that they remain virgins, not for the
sake of distress and danger, but for the sake of security, and that
there should be no distress with them; like the contradiction of this
cause, which St. Paul sets here. For you should well see 4) where one
would have to wait in the monasteries for such distress and trouble,
where now a thousand and a thousand monasteries stand, there would not
stand one stick. But 5) What am I talking about? One can see what
monasteries, together with the entire papal

1\) The thread in this sentence is this: \"But you know that of such
crowned virgins certainly none is a pure virgin\" 2c.

2\) Erlanger: Good.

3\) In Latin better than in German: psrnmirssrit.

4\) Thus the Weimar. Wittenberg: solst.

5\) Weimarsche: And.

thum for hardship and suffering in body and soul; they are all fattening
sows.

111 Thus you say: Married people must be in trouble and distress for the
sake of the gospel, just as virgins are; for as the gospel is common to
all Christians, so also is the cross and persecution. Did Abraham have
to leave his father and his property with his Sarah in such distress and
risk his life with her at all times? Answer: St. Paul does not say that
anyone should or must remain a virgin for the sake of such distress, but
he says, \"It is good and profitable to remain so. The need is common,
but virgins are better off than married women. For if Abraham had not
had his Sarah, he would have been spared many troubles and sorrows, and
would have passed through more easily. A virgin is only one body and may
not care for anyone; a married person is attached to another, and there
is much care and trouble, and many things are involved, as experience
teaches.

112\. but they will make shameful eyes, and will pout a lot that they
have kept their chastity in vain, because they should not be higher
before God than all other Christians. But by this it will also be
noticed that they are the foolish virgins who spilled the oil \[Matth.
25, 8.\], because they did not remain virgins out of a Christian, simple
opinion, but for the sake of reward, fame, height and honor; not
considering that it is good to remain like that, as St. Paul says here,
but to acquire something good by it in that life in the first place 7).
And so they have made a use of their virginity, so that they want to
make a profit with it before God, and not be satisfied with the temporal
advantage of chastity, and with the eternal good of faith; therefore it
must grieve them, because it has become sour to them, and yet they have
kept a lost chastity.

**V. 27, 28: If you are bound to a wife, do not seek to be loosed. But
if thou art loosed from a wife, seek no wife. But if you are free, you
have not sinned. And such a**

6\) In the old editions: \"Mestsew\".

7\) \"to\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

1078 Erl. 51, ei-\"4. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1134-1137. 1079

**Virgin freed, she does not sin. But such will have bodily tribulation.
But I spared yours gladly.**

\(113\) There you have it both that there is no sin, free and not free.
For the apostle thinks most highly of consciences, to instruct them;
after that also, what is profitable and best here on earth. And why it
is good not to be free, he points out in brief words, saying, \"The
married must have tribulation in the flesh. This is the cry that all the
world sings, says and writes about the conjugal life, that for the sake
of good days no one may become conjugal, there must be much trouble and
evil days in the state; all of which virgins are above. But I cannot yet
tell you about the tribulations of married life, for I am told that I
know nothing about them and have not experienced them.

114 Well, then, I believe here Sanct Paulo. But I know two of these
tribulations from the Scriptures: The first, when God said to Adam, Gen.
3, 19: \"In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread, and in
sorrow shalt thou eat upon the earth all the days of thy life.\" A man
is burdened with the misery of feeding himself and his wife, and faith
suffers hardship because poverty is painful. Here belongs the misfortune
with the household, the danger of the cattle and the goods; finally the
cunning and unfaithfulness of the people with whom he must live and
deal. For he has to keep himself very low, and often keep still and bite
off evil tricks, because he is bound to his wife, whom he otherwise
would not look at, where he would be free. Thus is the woman\'s
affliction, that she must bear children, beget and give birth with
pain, 1) not sleep at night, and even often break off her own, and
suffer all good things, which she would not be allowed to do if she
remained a virgin, as God also says to her, Gen. 3, 16: \"You shall bear
children with pain\" 2c.

The other is that St. Peter says that a woman is a weak and frail thing,
and that a man must bear much with her if they are to remain one. From
which error it comes that one so rarely has a good marriage.

1\) Weimarsche: des weybs \"über diß seyn trübsal mit linder tragen,
zeugen, geperen mit schmerzen, und\".

as love and peace is within. Again, the woman God, 2) Gen. 3, 16, is
subject to the man, that she must go and be where the man goes and
wants, that her mind must also often be broken. If there is something
more sinister, and you want to know it, then take a woman. I consider
these two to be the greatest, for they understand a great deal in
themselves. But all this is neither sin nor evil in the sight of God,
but only a temporal, external adversity in this life, which must be
considered by anyone who wants or needs to be married. Of course, the
apostle suggests that no one should despise such a state because of its
inconvenience, as if it did not please God or was not to serve God in
it, as the false teachers did, who put all worship and good works
outside this state and praised it.

For this reason St. Paul also moderates his word and says: Tribulation
of the flesh, not of the spirit, because the tribulation of the spirit
is sin and an evil conscience; but the tribulation of the flesh is
outward trouble, toil and unpleasure. And what St. Paul calls \"of the
flesh\" in the Hebrew way, we call \"bodily,\" so that bodily affliction
is as much as bodily affliction. Not that in the body, like a disease,
but it is tribulation in the things, so that we have to deal bodily, and
as for the body, as wife and child, servants, house and farm, cattle and
property, and all beings among the people, in the false, evil world.

Whoever then has the grace to remain chaste, let him keep his pride, and
beware of the marital state, and do not enter into such trouble, for
necessity compels him; as St. Paul here faithfully counsels, and is also
to be advised. For it is a great, noble freedom to be without marriage,
and it saves much trouble, trouble and suffering, which St. Paul grants
to everyone, as he says here, \"I spared you gladly.\" Behold, this is
rightly praising virginity, not putting on her merit and height before
God, but praising her rest and good estate in this life. For one also
finds those who become married out of sheer pride, without need, who
otherwise might well remain chaste.

2\) Wittenberg, Jena and Weimar: by GOtt. The latter remarks: \"Luther
probably wanted to write: \'von GOtt, dem man Unterthan ist\'\".

[1080 **Eri. 51, S4-6S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 7, 27-35. W. VIII. II37-IIM.**
1081]{.underline}

They wrestle after evil days without restraint, and it serves them right
where they find them.

**But I say this, brethren, that the time is short. This is also the
opinion: Those who have wives are as if they had none. And they that
weep, as if they wept not. And they that rejoice, as if they rejoiced
not. And they that buy, as if they kept not. And they that need this
world, that they abuse not the same. For the things of this world
perish.**

This is a common teaching for all Christians, that they should be aware
of their eternal good, which they possess in faith, and despise this
life, so that they do not sink too deeply into it with love and lust, or
with sorrow and unpleasure, but keep themselves as guests on earth, so
that they only need everything for a short time for need, and not for
lust. That is, to have a wife, as if I did not have one, when in my
heart I would rather be without a wife, and yet, for the sake of
avoiding sin, a wife is necessary to me. But he that seeketh not only
need, but also pleasure in it, hath not a wife, but is wholly possessed
of a wife. In the same way, a Christian should be careful in all other
things, so that he only saves the need with it, and does not atone for
the lust and feed the Adam.

**V. 32, 33, 34: But I would that ye were without care. He who is single
cares for what belongs to the 1) Lord, as he pleases the Lord. But he
that is free careth for the things that pertain to the world, as he
pleaseth the woman. There is a difference between a woman and a virgin.
She who is not free (2) cares for what belongs to the Lord, that she may
be holy, both in body and in spirit. But she that is free careth for the
things that pertain to the world, that she may please the man.**

1\) In the old editions, \"angehören\" is always construed with the
accusative.

2\) The text reads in the redaction, which the Weimar edition brings:
\"wie er dem weybe gefalle, und ist zur teylet \[Vulgate: st \[st
äivisus\^. Eh\" weyb und eyn Jungfraw, die on ehe ist, sorget\" 2c. The
interpretation, of course, refers to this text, so there are significant
deviations from the text of the Wittenberg edition in the two following
paragraphs. Otherwise, our text agrees almost word for word with that of
the Weimar edition.

This is the other fruit and benefit of chastity on earth, that one can
care for God all the more, not with their singing and reading, as the
clergy now think, for there is no more worship with them; but that one
can hang on to the word of God with good rest, reading, praying, acting
and preaching daily; 3) as St. Paul admonishes Timothy. For a married
man cannot wholly devote himself to reading and praying. Therefore there
is a difference, as St. Paul speaks here, between a wife and a virgin. A
wife must devote a large part of her life to making sure that she is
right with her spouse, and so, like Martha, she is bound by many of the
worries that married life demands. A virgin, however, is free from such
worries; therefore, she can give herself completely to God.

120 But the apostle does not want to condemn the married state for this
reason. For he does not say that a married man has vain care for the
world or is separated from God, but that there is a difference between
him and a single man, namely, that he must have much care and cannot
always pray and handle the word of God. Although his care and work are
good, it is much better to be free to pray and to handle the word of
God; for in this way he is useful and comforting to many people, and
indeed to all of Christendom: that this is a great and noble thing, to
keep anyone from marrying who has grace. But our clergy, who neither
pray, nor teach, nor learn the word of God, but torment themselves with
the laws of men, and murmur and howl in the choir, would do better to
guard the swine in the marriage state.

**V. 35. But these things I say for your benefit; not that I should cast
a snare about your necks, but that it may be well done, and that ye may
always serve the Lord without hindrance.**

\(121\) This is: I do not command chastity, but leave it free, nor do I
advise it, as if you should be ashamed if you do not remain chaste and
would rather be married; for I do not want anyone to be entangled or
entangled with it.

3\) Thus the Jena, the Weimar and the Latin. Wittenberg and Erlangen:
\"read and pray and act, preach.

1082 Er!. 5\>, ö\"-\"g. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1139-1143. 1083

have bound. I alone say that it is a fine and free thing about the state
of virginity; whoever is willing and able, let him accept it. Here you
see that in this matter there is no rope to be laid, nor anyone to be
forced to chastity by commandments or vows. So it is certain that Paul
writes these words to all Christians in Corinth, not only to the laity;
and does not yet bring up any merit of virginity before God, but praises
that it is good and useful in this life, as he did above \[v. 26\].

**V. 36 But if anyone thinks it is not right with his virgin, because
she is manly, and it will not be otherwise, let him do as he pleases; he
does not sin, he sets her free.**

This is a strange text, that even a man may give a virgin in marriage,
but it is considered that he is mocked with his virgin, as having gone
too long. St. Paul wants everyone to be free in this and to do what is
good and useful for him. If it will not be otherwise, he says, that is,
it must be done, and so it is the way in your city and among your people
that one is ashamed if one lets old virgins become, then he does what he
wants, he gives them up, or despises the shame. Truly virginity is not
esteemed, if the apostle, even to avoid a little shame or ridicule,
gives it away; he will not have known the virgin\'s little crown.

**V.37. But if a man, being at liberty and having free will, resolves in
his heart to let his virgin remain so, he does well.**

123\. hard above \[v. 36.\], where he says: \"If someone with his
virgin\" 2c., and here: \"Who will thus let his virgin remain\" 2c., he
speaks of father, mother, brothers, or who the guardians are. This
indicates that children are not to be married or remain virgins of their
own free will, but those under whose authority they are are to forgive
or keep them. But where these are not, or do not take care of them, they
may go as they may. But what he says here about free will is to be
understood in such a way that no one keeps his virgin without her will;

because where she does not want, he does not have a free will to let her
remain a virgin. So also, where otherwise a thing would be that he would
be forced by others to give her up, as that he would be ashamed with his
old virgin, or would be forced by friends or authorities.

**V. 38. Finally, he who marries does well, but he who does not conceal
does better.**

Now the power of the parents over the children is expressed, that they
may not marry without their will, nor remain without marriage, as I have
often written about it. This \"good\" and this \"better\" is sufficient
above.

50 ff\] said that it is to be understood from the \"good\" here on earth
that the married state is good, that is, without sin and pleasing to
God, and free is everyone, but the chaste state is calmer and freer.

**V. 39, 40 A woman is bound by the law as long as her husband lives,
but if her husband passes away, she is free to marry whom she pleases,
only that it may be in the Lord. In my opinion, she is more blessed
where she remains. But I think I also have the Spirit of God.**

He also tells this piece in Rom. 7, 1. ff. and goes with it to a
spiritual likeness, which he leaves standing here and continues
there. 1) But it is the conclusion of this chapter that the marriage
state is a captive thing before the world, but free before God. Just as
he says above \[v. 22\] of the servant that he is free before God, even
though he is in bondage before the world. But those who live without
marriage are both free and unchained before God and the world. Therefore
he calls their state more blessed than that of the married, not
according to eternal blessedness, since faith alone is greater or more
valid, according to which it is, but according to this life, that it has
less trouble, worry, driving and work.

This, then, is the sum of this chapter: it is good not to be free unless
necessary; but it is necessary when God does not give the strange, noble
gift of chastity. For no man was created for chastity, but we are all
created to beget children, and the

1\) Wittenberger: vorführet. Latin: sxxlicnt.

1084 Eri.si, öss. Sermon on I Cor. 7, 39. 40. w.vm, ii4sf. 1085

If someone should not be in this trouble, neither commandment, nor vow,
nor intention, but only God\'s grace and miraculous hand shall take him
out. If he does not, it may be lifted up, but it will not gain a good
end.

For this reason, they are terrible murderers of souls, who push the
young people into the monasteries and keep them in by force, just as if
chastity were a thing, like putting on and taking off shoes, and in our
hands; even though they find themselves otherwise, and drive others
there, which they have never touched with a finger, nor are able to. It
is soon said, Be chaste; yea, why art thou not also chaste? It is a good
thing: Eat and drink thou, and bid me fast always. But it is said enough
to those who let them say; the

but do not hear, what more can be said to them? God enlighten them, or
forbid them, so that they do not strangle the souls. Amen.

^1^) In the end, everyone shall know at once^2^ ) that everything that
goes out with my will and knowledge, that such has been inspected
beforehand by those who are due, as not only imperial, but also our
university order and order holds. But what goes out behind me elsewhere
shall not be attributed to me.

1\) This postscript is missing in the Wittenberg and Erlangen editions,
but is found in the Jena, Weimar and Latin editions. It refers to the
edict issued in February 1583 at the Imperial Diet in Nuremberg, which
enjoins a censorship: \"to ensure that the said Luther and his followers
do not write or truck anything new until the future council. Cf. De
Wette, vol. II, p. 357. Walch, old edition, vol. XV, appendix, no. 102,
s 2. Weim. Ausg., vol. XII, p. 59.

2\) \"at once\" \-- once and for all.

**B. D. Martin Luther\'s interpretation of the fifteenth chapter of the
first epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.**

From the resurrection of the dead.\*)

Preached in 1533, published in 1534.

**Letter from D. Caspar Cruciger.**

> To the most illustrious, highborn prince and lord, Mr. Johann
> Friederichen, Archmarshall and Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, Duke
> of Saxony, Landgrave of Thuringia, and Margrave of Meissen, my most
> gracious lord, grace and peace from God through Christ our Lord.

Most Serene, Highborn Prince, Most Gracious Lord! Having learned from
credible sources how the sermons of the Venerable D. Martin Luther,
which he preached in the 15th century, are still in use, I have to say
that I am very grateful to him.

The more the first chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians about
the resurrection of the dead, here in Wittenberg, also some of which
were done in the castle before E. C. F. G., desired by many good people,
and demanded, also E. C. F. G. himself should have wanted and liked to
read them, the more I am caused to omit the same, as best as I could
have comprehended them, by the printing. 3) And

3\) \"Prince Hans Frederick has read the same interpretation of the 15th
chapter of Corinthians with pleasure. Tischreden, cap. 49, § 4. Walch,
St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 1322.

\*Luther preached these sermons in Wittenberg in 1533, some of them
before the Elector John Frederick at the castle of Wittenberg, while he
was there from about June 15-23, 1533 (on June 25, he was already in
Schmalkalden to consult with Philip of Hesse and Duke Ernst of
Brunswick), others later. Cf. § 275. The cause of the Elector\'s
presence in Wittenberg was this: The pope and the emperor had agreed in
Bologna that a council should be held. The former had therefore prepared
eight articles and \"sent\" them to the Elector through his nuncio, Hugo
Rango, Bishop of Reggio. These articles are found in Walch, old edition,
vol. XVI, 2268 ff. The bishop was accompanied by the imperial orator. On
June 3

1086 Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the Corinthians. W.viii.ntrs.
1087

In order to encourage more people to read them, I have attributed them
to E. C. F. G. for subservient service, and with this E. C. F. G. name I
want to decorate them and make them more respectable. Therefore, we
humbly request that E. C. F. G. graciously allow this to please Her
Grace. For it is almost necessary in the ungrateful world to present and
adorn the Word of God in all kinds of ways, so that they will have no
excuse to

It is not to be reproached, as if it had not been presented in the most
diligent manner and with all kinds of ways to entice and provoke the
lazy hearts. May Christ, our Lord, strengthen the work he has begun in
E. C. F. G. heart, both, to the exaltation of His holy word, and to
blessed peaceful government, Amen.

E. C. F. G.

> subservient

Caspar Creuziger, D.

In 1533, the papal nuncio presented these eight articles to the Elector
at Weimar. The next day, he received a message that the Elector wanted
to hold a meeting with his \"fellow relatives\" in Schmalkalden \"on the
eve of St. John\'s Day\" and would then give his answer (I. a. 2270 ff.
The final answer on June 30, 1533, I. 6. 2281 ff.). After the Elector
had negotiated with the legate and the imperial orator in Weimar, he
went to Wittenberg, where he arrived on June 15 to confer personally
with his theologians. Luther reported to Nicolaus Hausmann on June 16,
1533 (Walch, old edition, vol. XVI, 2280 and \[Dupücats vol. XXI, 1406)
that he had to preach daily before the Elector and negotiate with him
about the answer to be given to the envoys of the Pope and the Emperor,
through whom the Pope had ordered some articles about holding a council
to be handed over. In this matter there is a dark point. Both Seckendorf
(Hist. Dutk., Ind. Ill, p. 47b) and De Wette, (Vol. I V, p. 456) ask the
question in reference to Luther\'s second concern, \"Why sixteen
\[articles? There were 8 articles,\" and Köstlin, Martin Luther, vol.
II, p. 663 ad p. 293 \"unclear is the counting of .sixteen\' papal
articles Br. 4, 458 instead of eight.\" So far it has been assumed that
in the four objections Luther raised in this matter (the four signatures
under the third objection Walch, I. o. 2279; De Wette I. e. p. 460 are
missing in the original), only one set of articles is mentioned, namely
the eight articles of the pope. This assumption is erroneous. Luther\'s
first concern, however, is about these eight articles. The second
concern, however, is about another set of sixteen articles, which \"on
the following Wednesday\" (June 11, 1533) were delivered to the
Emperor\'s and the Pope\'s envoys \"at their request in Latin, signed by
his electoral grace\" (Walch I. a. Col. 2268). These sixteen articles
are missing in Walch\'s edition, so the words \"vermöge hernach folgende
Artikel\" have been taken to refer to the following eight papal
articles. Whether the sixteen articles are actually printed in the
original edition of 1533 (Walch, Inhalt des sechzehnten Bandes, p. 65a)
we do not know, but on the title these two series of articles are
indicated: \"Die Artikel dazumal seiner churfürstlichen Gnaden durch den
päbstlichen Geschickten zugestellt. Article of the Elector\'s answer to
it, delivered to the same two sent ones\". Luther\'s first two concerns
were sent from Wittenberg to Weimar by Luther between June 4 (on June 3
the nuncio delivered the eight articles of the pope) and June 10 (on
June 11 the sixteen articles, signed by the Elector, were delivered to
the two envoys). Thereupon the Elector personally consulted with Luther
and the other theologians in Wittenberg from June 15 until St. John\'s
Day. From June 25 on, the Elector consulted with his co-religionists in
Schmalkalden, and it is during this time that the last two reservations
concerning the final response of the Princes to the Emperor and the Pope
are to be placed. This is dated June 30, 1533 (Walch, Vol. XVI, 2281
ff.). These last two concerns were sent from Wittenberg to Schmalkalden.
The sixteen articles seem to have been proposed by the two envoys in
Weimar, and they were signed by the Elector, according to Luther\'s
advice, even though they were \"presented on roguishness.\" It is not
the place here to elaborate further on this matter, but we do not want
to pass it by. We only want to note that our solution of the question
avoids several inconsistencies that had to be accepted so far. Luther
says in his second objection (Walch, I. a. 2275): \"My advice and good
opinion is that one should not object to the sixteen articles, but
confidently accept them.\" \"Therefore we keep the glimpses where we
accept the sixteen articles cheerfully and without refusal,\" and yet is
said to have said in the same concern with reference to the same
articles: \"Where we now consent to such first articles, we have already
revoked and denied our confession and apology, and disgraced and
destroyed all our doctrine and Thun, hitherto practiced.\" On Luther\'s
advice, the Elector accepted the sixteen articles, signed them and
delivered them to the envoys (Walch, l. c. Col. 2268), and yet a few
days later, in his final reply, he is said to have said about the same
articles (Walch, I. a. 2287): \"Therefore, we hereby wish to indicate
and testify and condition that we cannot nor may we consent to the
content of the articles sent over by Pope Clementis, which you have
presented to us, the Elector of Saxony. For we can by no means renounce
the true and righteous doctrine of the Gospel by blaspheming Christ\'s
teaching, even if it is condemned by the pope and his followers and
those entangled with them.\" - Cruciger, who had received his doctorate
in theology during the time of the Elector\'s presence in Wittenberg (on
June 16 and 17; under Luther\'s presidency the disputation took place,
which the Elector attended from beginning to end). Köstlin, Martin
Luther, Vol. II, p. 288), had transcribed Luther\'s sermons and
published them in 1534 with a letter to the Elector. The first single
edition, which was followed by several more in the same year, was
published by Joseph Klug in Wittenberg. Still in 1733, a single print of
the same appeared in Berlin. In the collections: Wittenberger (1556),
vol. I, p. 353; Jenaer (1568), vol. VI, p. 207; Altenburger, vol. VI, p.
260; Leipziger, vol. X, p. 337 and Erlanger, vol. 51, p. 70. Vincentius
Obsopöus, schoolman in Ansbach, translated this interpretation into
Latin and published it in 1536 together with the interpretation of the
17th chapter of John. Luther adorned this translation with a preface,
dated June 7, 1536, which is found in the Latin Wittenberg edition,
Dorn, V, ch. 130. 130. We have translated this preface, which is missing
in the German editions, from the Latin and inserted it here. We give the
text of the interpretation according to Walch, who used the first
edition, comparing the Wittenberg, the Jena and the Erlangen, also the
Latin.

[1088 EU. 5i, 7t s. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15. w. vin, uik-nsv.
1089]{.underline}

**Luther\'s preface to the Latin translation of Vincentius Obsopoeus.**

Martin Luther wishes the orthodox brethren in the Lord grace and peace
in our Savior Jesus Christ.

I have gladly allowed that these two sermons of mine on St. I have
gladly allowed these two sermons on St. John and St. Paul, which I
preached before our congregation in Wittenberg, to be picked up by
others and published in print, not because I wanted to boast much about
great and wonderful things, or despise other people who are better than
I am, or that I should wish to distinguish myself, but because in these
exceedingly ungodly times so many pernicious and blasphemous books go
out under a great pretense, yielding great profit, but nevertheless
doing very great harm to the secular and church regiments. However, I am
aware that in these sermons, even if not everything as befits the cause
and the reader, I have at least acted faithfully and purely according to
my ability, and I like to see that also this my work before those wolves
and snakes.

and to make them see whether, warned by this, some might avoid the
corrupt spirits and be kept in Christ\'s sheepfold. Therefore, the
effort and diligence of my dear Vincentius pleases me exceedingly, who,
as I see, inflamed with the same zeal, desires that this also be
recognized in other languages and peoples, and that at the same time a
testimony be given to them as to how abominably those have lied who
accuse us of so many vices among their own, naturally in the cunning
(*vulpina*) confidence that they speak among those who understand
neither the things nor our language. But God, who has begun the good
work in us, will also accomplish it to the glory of His name and to the
overthrow of Satan and all his servants. Fare well in the Lord, dearest
brother, and the service which I render you through this work and
willingness, receive it for the best. Wittenberg, June 7, 1536.

**Luther\'s Borrede on the Interpretation of the Fifteenth Chapter of
the First Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.**

This chapter deals with the article of our faith concerning the
resurrection of the dead. But the cause of this was that the Corinthians
had got among themselves some of the spirit of the saints, who destroyed
their faith, and taught that the resurrection of the dead was nothing.
And some, who wanted to be clever and subtle, pretended that it had
happened long ago (as St. Paul reports elsewhere), and interpreted it to
mean that we were resurrected from sins through baptism and had entered
a new spiritual life. Finally, they came to believe (like the Sadducees
in Christ\'s time) that a man lived no longer than this life, like a cow
or other animal, and was created only to live blamelessly here on earth.
And so, from this doctrine, many good rude fellows, who badly knew
nothing of the resurrection

They believed in the life to come, and only made fun of it, and mocked
the Christians, all the same, as if they were pagans; as he himself
accuses them of saying, \"When we all rise again, what bodies will we
have? Where shall we all dwell, and have enough, when we shall dwell
together, and eat and drink, and beget wives and children, and do other
natural works of the body and of this life? 2c. And so the others also
began to puzzle about it afterwards, and wanted to work it out with
reason and their own cleverness, how it would rhyme, if we should all at
once, if ever we were born, rise again and come together alive, as we
are now 2c. And weakened the faith of the Christians in this article
with such chatter and blather, and made a fool\'s game of it. As it also

[1090 Erl. 51, 75-77. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, Iiso-IIS3. 1091]{.underline}

Now, unfortunately, it has already happened again among us that many of
them, both among peasants and burghers, and especially Junker Hans of
the nobility, talk clumsily, coarsely and heathenishly enough about it
when they begin to be clever, and get their heads into the Scriptures,
because they have now been taught by us in such a way that they are all
our masters, and everyone wants to be able to do everything.

2\) Against such disgraceful smart alecks, who also wanted to be praised
for being delicious teachers, St. Paul had to be there and defend that
such poison would not break in, and make a whole long chapter to prove
this 1) article strong and firm, and to displace their harmful talk. 2)
It has also served us in the future, so that we would be the more
strongly guarded and equipped to preserve this article, because it is so
powerfully, mightily and brightly founded here, especially because such
things were prophesied beforehand by the apostles themselves, that in
these last days many scoffers would arise in Christendom, who would make
a mockery out of our faith and article of the last day, resurrection and
life to come, and would ridicule us as the greatest fools, that we still
hope for it, and suffer all danger and hardship because of it, as we can
already see before our eyes.

3\. Now it is truly sin and shame, yes, a miserable plague, that it
should come to this in Christianity, not only now in the last basic soup
of the world, but that still in the apostles\' lives, and just in those,
3) where they themselves had been and taught shortly before, had planted
and founded Christianity, such misery should arise so soon that some
should stand up among them, as the disciples of the apostles, and preach
publicly that the resurrection and the life 4) to come are nothing, and
that those who wanted to be called Christians should deny such an
article and consider it a mockery, since they had been baptized into it
and had therefore become Christians, and all their hope and comfort
should be based on it, and thus had lost everything over it, and had
believed, done and suffered in vain. For where this article

1\) Erlanger: den.

2\) Erlanger: and.

3\) Erlanger: \"ja eben\" instead of: und eben bei denen.

4\) \"that\" is missing in the Erlanger.

is gone, there are also all others gone, and the main article, and the
5) whole Christ lost, or yes preached in vain 2c.

4\) For this is the end of our believing in Christ, being baptized,
preaching and practicing the sacrament, that we may hope in another life
to come to Christ and reign with him forever, delivered from sins, the
devil, death and all evil. Whoever does not think of this, or even
denies and scoffs at it, will certainly not be able to think much of
Christ and all that he has done, given and created. For what would we
have of him, if he would give us nothing better than this miserable
life, and let us trust in him in vain, and suffer all that the devil and
the world can put on us, and become a liar with his great promises to
us; as St. Paul himself will say afterwards, v. 19: \"If we hope in
Christ alone in this life, we are 7) the most miserable, wretched people
on earth.\" What greater shame could be said of Christians than that
such things should be preached among them, and that they should think no
more of their Christ than this? It still happened that the dear apostle
had to experience such things in his disciples, and to see and hear them
in his own church or diocese; that he was hurt in his heart, and could
not defend himself, without 8) having strengthened and preserved the
challenged faith of the small, right group by this epistle.

But it is written for our warning and admonition, that we watch and take
care, because we have the good word pure, that we judge ourselves well,
grasp it well, and hold fast to it, not becoming lazy, secure, and
overthinking 9); lest there come among us also the riffraff and the
clever, who destroy and take away from us such articles (in which is all
our salvation and blessedness). For because the disciples of Corinth,
St. Paul\'s own disciples, to whom he also preached the word purely and
taught

5\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

6\) Wittenberger: yes.

7\) Erlanger: yes.

8\) Wittenberg and Jena: what.

9\) Wittenberger and Jenaer: verdrossen. It is not expressed in Latin.

1092 **Erl. 51, 77-7S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15. W. VIII, IISS-I1SS.** 1093

have fallen so shamefully, a strong example is set before us, that we
remember the saying of St. Paul \[1 Cor. 10:12\]: \"Let him that
standeth take heed lest he fall,\" and not be too sure of his cause. And
when we see or hear of one who has become such a sow and heathen 1) that
we say with sorrow and prayer, Dear Lord, do not let me also fall like
this. For it is very soon that we are safe and without worry.

\(6\) For the devil is truly attacking us, and he is attacking us and
also great people, that they do not believe this article, or even that
they make it uncertain. Popes, cardinals, and such 2) great people
(especially in French-speaking countries), are also fine, wise,
reasonable, learned people; but if there are 3) three of them who
seriously believe this article, it is a lot. Therefore, we may well let
it be a joke that the most noble and almost the first church among the
Gentiles, where St. Paul had preached the longest, is cut as soon as he
turns his back, and falls into such redness that it is terrible to hear.
What shall we wait for, preaching now, because it happens to the high,
holy apostle from his disciples, against whom we are nothing? and in
addition, with his life, that he must defend and admonish with writings,
and as he can.

It is much more unfortunate, praise God, where error remains only among
the rabble, than now is the peasant in the village, the burgher in the
city, and the nobleman in the countryside, who live so wickedly that
they keep nothing of God and God\'s word. For they die as sows and cows,
as they have lived. Just as that farmer said to his priest, who came to
him when he was about to die, and asked if he wanted to be buried. No,
dear sir (he said), a farmer will die without the oelung. But this is
the evil devil, when such things come to the preaching chair, and the
article is challenged by those who are preachers, and step on the stool
after St. Paul, and rule Christianity in his place. If such

1\) Wittenberger: \"the such heathen, yes, a Saw\".

2\) dergleichen\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Erlanger: the three of you.

4\) Jenaer: they.

open their shameful mouths, and spread this among the people, they only
do murderous harm, especially if they are learned and highly reasonable
people. For if only the preachers remain right and the teaching is
preserved, God will give grace that there will always be some among the
multitude who accept it; for where the word is pure and true, it does
not go forth without fruit.

For this reason I have so often exhorted, and still exhort, that with
all diligence, whoever desires to be saved, please God give us (as
Christ Himself commands to pray \[Matth. 9, 38.\]) faithful workers and
such preachers who are serious and hold to the Word, so that, if God
wills, there will be no need for it. For the preaching chair alone can
and must preserve baptism, sacrament, doctrine, articles of faith, and
all estates pure. But if we do not pray, and anger God with our
certainty, ingratitude and ingratitude, He will send us in St. Paul\'s
and all righteous preachers\' place rough asses, who will snatch away
both Sacrament and Word, so that one must lose everything, both in
doctrine and ministry. As we can see now, it has already happened to
many countries and cities that have not only lost the word through such,
but have also been led into all misery. Just as the devil always leads
to murder and destruction through his lies and seduction. But where true
preachers would have remained, the pure doctrine would have remained,
and other misery would have remained, although the mob swarmed
hostilely. For I do not much mind that a rascal or a fool blasphemes, or
an unworthy Scharrhans rumbles and shouts, or some other rascal mocks;
for his sake, Christianity and the preaching chair will remain. But this
will do harm, if those who teach become red spirits themselves, and the
people should preserve themselves, and not only preserve themselves, but
also beware and take care of their own preachers; this is very difficult
to do. Without this, the poor people will soon be seduced and will not
be able to govern or lead themselves.

\(9\) Therefore, I say, let us think that such things are prescribed for
us as an abominable example, that we may take offense at them, and be
warned against them; and if such spirits rose up among us, that we
should not take heed of this article, let us not be afraid.

[1094 Eri. 51, 7S-8S. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, II55-IISS. 1095]{.underline}

nor allow them to be used. For I am, unfortunately, concerned that we
will, with our grave ingratitude, deserve that some will also appear
among us 1) and publicly deny this article. Therefore it is necessary
for us to pray earnestly and sincerely without ceasing that only the
preaching chair may remain pure, so that we may avoid or even endure
such misery. For it can still withstand all kinds of error and bear the
wickedness of the whole world. He that is to be converted, let him be
converted; he that will not, let him go away, and yet some shall remain.

10\) But when darkness comes over the whole world, that the Christians
are few, and the preaching stands are filled with useless, harmful
preachers, then thunder, lightning, and all the plagues of false
doctrine will not remain outside for long, yes, 2) thunder, lightning,
and all the plagues of false doctrine will break in unawares, before we
are aware of it, which neither these nor other doctrines have any
effect.

1\) \"among us\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Erlanger: \"and\" instead of: yes.

And will have to suffer such preachers, who seduce us by such loose talk
of reason, yes, of the coarse, beastly mind, which also the swine have,
and those also have led, 3) as we shall hear. Therefore St. Paul takes
the matter up with great seriousness, that he may keep his own
constantly in the faith of this article, against such shameful mobs, and
establishes the same most powerfully, so that 4) even the gates of hell
cannot overthrow it, where one wants to keep to the word, and does not
leave room for the blind, foolish reason to cope with it, which neither
knows nor can understand anything about such high things. And so we
begin:

3\) In the Wittenberg and Latin is inserted here: \"as happened to the
Corinthians\". Also in the foregoing, there are several changes in the
Wittenberg, but they have no influence on the meaning. We have not
considered it necessary to note them.

4\) So the Wittenbergers. The Jenaer has \"him\" at the edge. Erlanger:
\"that too\".

**\[Interpretation of the 15th chapter of the first epistle to the
Corinthians.\]**

**V. 1. But I remind you, brethren, of the gospel which I preached unto
you.**

\(11\) This is said immediately as a preface, so that he will soon draw
them back at the beginning from their arguing and disputing about this
article, to the word that he had preached to them, and admonish them to
think and stay with what they have heard, and not to turn away from it,
nor to let themselves be led otherwise. He gives them a secret sting,
although with fine, neat words, that they have let themselves be led so
far away from it and that it is necessary to remember it, which they
should not have forgotten, and it is a disgrace to them that one has to
reproach them with it again. But it happens, as I said before, where the
false teachers get room and break in, that one first gets tired of the
right teaching and does not pay attention to it, and thus gets further
and further away from it, until one even forgets it.

That is why he starts with these words: \"I remind you\" 2c. As if to
say: I see that it is necessary,

5\) Wittenberg and Jena: must.

That you always be reminded of what I preached to you in the first
place, so that you do not let it be put out of your sight or taken out
of your heart by other preaching and teaching. For where such things are
not always practiced and remembered, and the heart is not treated with
them, there is already door and window open, and room enough left for
all kinds of seduction to enter in, and to blot out and take away the
pure doctrine.

\(13\) But I remind you of the dear gospel which I, Paul, preached to
you. For I see that others also want to be called by the name of
preaching the gospel, and by this very name they want to diminish my
teaching, that what Paul preaches should be nothing; but they want to be
called the true apostles and masters of the gospel, and have only the
fame and profession of being able to preach it rightly. Therefore I must
remind you against this and awaken you, so that you may think back and
see what you have from me. For you have received and learned it from no
one else but from me, that you know what the gospel is, what Christ is,
what faith is, and everything. If you think according to this, then you
will certainly

1096 Eri. si, \[s f. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 1. 2. W. vm, nss-nso. 1097

stick to it, and don\'t let those boasts and chatter lead you to another
so soon.

\(14\) For if ye will rightly look to the gospel, and abide in it, ye
shall rightly look to that which was first preached unto you, and
planted by me, and accepted and believed of you. For I was the first to
bring you the preaching of Jesus Christ, and have no one to thank after
God but myself that you have come to such knowledge and into
Christianity. Therefore, you should not regard it so lightly, nor let
yourselves be turned away from it by those who want to boast about the
gospel against me, as if they wanted to teach it to you differently or
better, when you would not know how to speak of any gospel if I had not
been there: indeed, even they themselves, as much as they are, could not
speak a letter of it if they had not heard and learned it from me, but
now need it against me, and lead you away from it again under the same
name.

\(15\) For St. Paul 1) has just passed through our groups, as we are
now, after the gospel has been brought to light again through us, and
they themselves have first learned from us that they enter into our
work, and turn in, since the gospel has begun, and has been made room
through us; thus spoiling what we have rightly planted and taught, so
that 2) they want to be our masters, and make everything better, when
without us they would never have learned a word of it 3). So he also had
to suffer that among his disciples, as soon as he left, some arose who
4) thought themselves much wiser and more learned, wanted to reform and
master everything, as if his gospel were nothing, and yet, under the
name of the gospel, perverted and corrupted everything, and drove vain
seduction into the people.

**V. 1. 2. which also ye have received, in which also ye stand, by which
also ye are saved.**

1\) Erlanger: \"him\" instead of: St. Paulo.

2\) \"that\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) So the Erlanger and the Latin. Wittenberg and Jena: \"geleret\".

4\) Erlanger: \"and\" instead of: the.

16 Moreover, you know (he continues) that it was not only proclaimed to
you through me, but also did not come to you without fruit, nor did it
remain with you. For by the grace of God you have received it as the
true gospel, and have recognized that it is the true truth, and through
it have received the grace of God and the Spirit, and have believed in
Christ with all your hearts. And even so, as many of you as are still
Christians, you 5) stand alone by the same gospel which you received
from me; and not only this, but also by the same you are saved.
Therefore you should stick to it, and not let your mouths be opened to
gape at another, by others, who make you despise my preaching, as if it
were nothing, and as if they could do it much better. 6)

For if you have nothing else, look at the fruits that my gospel produces
among you, and contrast what they teach you, if they can give you
something better, you will have to grasp that you became Christians
through my gospel, were baptized into it, and believed, 7) and still
have to stand in the same faith and be saved. They have not accomplished
this with their preaching, nor can they do it yet, for they cannot come
up with any other better gospel that accomplishes more than mine did,
and still does. And if you want to follow a preacher of the gospel, you
should rather follow me.You should much rather follow me, who first
preached it to you, and they themselves must have learned it from me;
and you yourselves must bear me witness that I have preached it rightly,
and have thereby received the Spirit and much fruit; so that if they
boast at the same time, and despise me among you, yes, they cannot do
better, if they only did it so well, which, unfortunately, they are not
able to do, but pervert and extinguish everything, so that you lose both
the gospel and its fruit again. Why then do you want to be fooled and
deceived by their loose talk, and let yourselves be so shamefully
seduced?

5\) \"their\" is missing in the Erlanger.

6\) The Wittenbergers and the Jenaers. \"can\". Erlanger: \"as if they
can preach much higher\". Latin: hui lonAS sudlimiorn äoosrs sainut.

7\) In Walch\'s old edition and in the Erlanger: hat.

1098 Erl. 51, 83-8\". Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, IISI-IIW. 1099

18\) But when Paul and other true preachers boast (as they must boast of
their gospel) that they alone preach rightly, and the mobs hear this,
they become mad and foolish, and therefore go on with such a pretense:
\"How proud and hopeful is he! And to such cries they can pretend a
great appearance of special humility and great devotion, and nothing but
the spirit. Then the crowd falls in, thinking that it must certainly be
so.

19\) So 1) without this, the mobs have two great advantages among the
people; one is called arrogance, the other is called overconfidence.
These are two great gates, where the devil drives through with hay
wagons, yes, with the whole of hell, so that they say: Oh, can this one
preach nothing more than baptism, ten commandments, the Lord\'s Prayer
and faith, which even the children now know; what is it that he always
drowns us with the same sermon? Who cannot do that? One must not always
remain with one, but continue and come further 2c. That is, we have
grown tired and weary of the sermon. Junker Vorwitz suggests: \"Oh, we
must hear this one too, he is a fine, learned, pious man 2c.

\(20\) Then they stir up, and tickle such arrogance, after which their
ears itch, and say: Dear people, now you have always heard the same
thing for so long, you must also come higher, and not only hear and test
one, but also others. So he goes up, lets himself be scratched and
tickled, opens his mouth and eyes, and listens to everything that is
said to him. This means then, as Moses, 5th book, 29, 19, says: Absumit
ebria^2^ ) sitientem, that the drunk leads the thirsty, and both are
lost with each other. For the teacher is drunk and full of the wicked
devil, so that he is drunk and passes over; so they are forward, let
themselves be led and taught as each one wants, as those who are always
learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth, as St. Paul says.

1\) Erlanger: And.

2\) So in the Vulgate, in the Wittenberg and in the Jena. In the
Erlangen and Latin: \[drius; accordingly, the Erlanger has in the
immediately following translation: der Trunkene.

lus says. So it will also go after us, that such drunkards will spew out
everywhere among the poor rabble: Do you think that these knew it all,
or that you understood them right? You have to learn much more. With
this, such a preacher can lead a whole bunch into the abyss.

\(21\) Therefore let him who desires to be sure of this, and to walk
aright, receive this exhortation for a warning, that he also may
continue, and hold fast to this word which St. Paul preached, and not
consider what others may set up against it, though they make great
pretense and boast of their thing. For here you hear what fruit this
gospel of St. Paul has produced among them, and is still producing,
namely, that all have become Christians and saved through it, and must
still become so. Since we have these things through this gospel, what
further shall we seek, or be led astray, and be directed and led to
other things? For what instructs us otherwise must certainly not be so
good, but false and pure deception, because it pretends to what we have
before through this gospel, and thus denies or even despises everything.

\(22\) Therefore he speaks to them as if there were no need for further
admonition, except that they remember and see what they have received
and how they have become Christians. For if you look at this (he wants
to say), then you will probably stick to it and be safe from all kinds
of error. For you can easily make a distinction between what is mine and
what is theirs, and judge according to what you have of both doctrines,
whether they can come up with anything better than my gospel, by which
you may be saved. And notice here that he speaks with clear words of the
oral preaching of the gospel, done through Paul, and gives it such a
title and prize that they alone can stand and be saved through it,
against our blind spirits, who despise the outward word and sacrament,
and pretend their own imaginary spirituality for it. But he adds a
warning to this, as a precaution, since 3) he speaks:

**V. 2 If you have kept what I preached to you, you would have believed
in vain.**

3\) Erlanger: that. Latin: ndi.

1100 **Erl. SI, 86-88. Sermon On 1 Cor. 15, 2. W. VIII, II63-II6S.**
1101

23\. These are hard and sharp words, yet kindly and sweetly spoken, so
that you can see how faithfully and fatherly he means them and cares for
them: You know what I have preached to you, if you will only remember
and keep it, and not be moved by others; so you also hear what others
preach, if you keep it against one another; unless you have not kept it,
but have already let it be kept, and have believed in vain, as I hope
not.

\(24\) For he speaks like a stern preacher, who should hope for both the
best in them, and yet must worry beside them. At the same time he wants
to comfort them so that they do not despair, and if they are challenged
to fall away, to hold fast to it again, and yet also warn them that they
are not without worry, but think of the danger and harm that lies ahead
of them if they do not remain firm in what they have received from him.
As if to say, \"I tell you truly, if you do not hold to the gospel and
listen to others, I have preached in vain and you have believed in vain,
and everything you had before, baptism and Christ, is in vain and
ruined, so that you have no hope of salvation, and everything you have
ever done is lost and of no use. This is what you will get if you listen
to those who boast and pretend about something different and more
precious. Therefore I will have done my part and be excused, as I have
faithfully warned you of your harm and destruction. For if it is in vain
in you, and does not accomplish what it should, the guilt will not be
mine, but yours. For there is no lack of preaching, because I have given
you abundantly that which I have received (as he will subsequently say),
but there must be lack in you, because you have not kept it. But if ye
have kept it, ye know how and in what manner I preached it unto you. For
I did not preach it in the way they pretend and speak of it, in a human
way, according to reason and our understanding. For to preach such a
worldly form, or to judge according to it, certainly corrupts and loses
the gospel altogether. If then you have lost the form I preached, you
have also lost faith, and with it everything that belongs to your
salvation. That would be

terrible to say and hear both, and should be warning enough to hold fast
with care and all diligence to the gospel preached by the apostle Paul.

\(25\) Behold, the apostle, as I have said, will lead us at first from
all disputings and masters of reason, unto the word only, which he
received of Christ, and preached unto them, and thereby shew us how we
ought to proceed and do in all the articles of faith. I always say that
faith should have nothing but the word for itself, and should not suffer
any cleverness or thoughts, otherwise it is not possible for it to
remain and be preserved. For human wisdom and reason cannot go any
higher or further than judging and concluding as it sees and feels
before the eyes or understands with the senses; but faith must conclude
above and against such feeling and understanding, and adhere to that
which is presented to it through the word; This it cannot do by reason
and human ability, but is the work of the Holy Spirit in the heart;
otherwise it should nowhere have faith nor the Holy Spirit, if it could
sit down with reason, or should see and conclude according to what
rhymes or does not rhyme with it.

26\. as, in this article, that I should believe the resurrection of the
flesh, that all men should come to life again in one day, and that our
body and soul should come together as they are now with one another:
this indeed is not man\'s art nor ability. For the. Reason is there, and
does no more, for it looks badly into the work, as it is before its
eyes, that the world has stood so long, 1) and always dies one after the
other, and everything remains dead, decayed, and even pulverized in the
grave, and no one has ever come back; In addition, man dies and perishes
so miserably, more miserable and shameful than any cattle or carrion;
item, burned to powder or pulverized, a leg in England, an arm in
Germany, the skull in France, and so cut into many thousand pieces; as
one is used to show the bones of the saints. If she now gets into this
article and wants to think about it, it is certainly lost. For

1\) \"is\" is missing in the Erlanger.

[1102 Eri. 5i, 88-so. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vni, nss-ii68. 1103]{.underline}

so many strange, weird, inconsistent thoughts occur to her that she has
to say that there is nothing to it, just as in all other cases when
misfortune strikes, that 1) she is left to think and measure in 2)
God\'s word according to her understanding. As if a man 3) feels his sin
and conscience, and does not merely hold to the word of grace and
forgiveness through Christ, but takes it into his eyes, and thinks about
the law and works, and wants to beat and bite himself with it, he
certainly comes from forgiveness, and has lost the grace that he should
take by faith.

This is what has happened to all heretics in the high article of Christ.
Just as it still happens to our brethren concerning baptism and the
sacrament, because they do not merely believe the word, but speculate
and reflect with their reason, which cannot say otherwise than that
bread is bread, water is water; how can bread be Christ\'s body, or
water a bath for souls? For she cannot and will not abide in the word,
nor be caught up in it, but let her wisdom go with her, and herself
understand and master 2c. And because she sees that it is so contrary to
her understanding and all her senses and feelings, and contrary to
experience, she falls away and denies it; or, if she cannot get past it,
she twists and fiddles God\'s word with glosses, so that it must rhyme
with her understanding, and faith has no room, but must give way to
reason and perish. 4c.

\(28\) But against all these things which reason brings in, or which all
the senses feel and understand, we must learn to keep the word, and
judge evil by it, whether we see before our eyes that man is laid under
the earth, and that he should and must decay, and be given to worms to
eat, and at last be turned into dust. Item, although I feel the sins so
strongly press me, and the conscience so crushed that I cannot pass by;
still faith must close the contradiction, and hold firmly to the word in
these two pieces.

1\) Erlanger: when.

2\) Wittenberger: an.

3\) Erlanger: ,,who\" instead of: when a person.

4\) fiddern \-\-- stedern, to feather, to decorate.

29\) For if you want to judge according to what you see and feel, and
when God\'s word is held up to you, you want to hold your feeling
against it, and speak: You say many things to me, but my heart says many
things differently, and 5) if you felt what I feel, you would also say
differently 2c., then you do not have God\'s word in your heart, but it
is muffled and extinguished by your own thoughts, reason and
contemplation. In short, where you do not want to let the word apply any
more than all your feelings, eyes, senses and heart, then you must be
lost, and you can no longer be helped. For it is called an article of
faith, not of thy reason, nor of wisdom, nor of men\'s strength and
ability.

\(30\) Therefore, even here you must judge by the word alone, regardless
of what you feel or see. I also feel my sin and law, and the devil upon
my neck, that I lie under it as under a heavy burden; but what shall I
do? If I were to conclude according to such feelings and my ability, I
and all men would have to despair and perish. But if I want to be
helped, then I must truly turn around and look at the word and speak
according to it: I feel the wrath of God, the devil, death and hell; but
the Word says otherwise, that I have a gracious God through Christ, who
is my Lord over devils and all creatures. I feel and see that I and all
men must rot in the grave, but the Word says otherwise, that I shall
rise again with great glory and live forever.

31 This is called the art and wisdom of faith, which makes the wisdom of
the world foolishness, which holds such things to be sound preaching,
and therefore says, Yea, the gospel cannot say otherwise, but that we
are to be lords over death, sin, and all things; and yet see only the
contradiction in us and in all the world, that there is no life, but
only death, sin, and the power of the devil. This is the basis and
foundation of it, and says: Preach or not, and say what you will, but I
see much differently.

32\. therefore here must remain the two that

5\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

1104 **Erl. SI, M-S2. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 2. W. VIII, IIS8-II70.** 1105

we are lords of the devil and death, and yet at the same time lie under
his feet. One must be believed, the other felt. For the world, and what
belongs to its nature, must have the devil as its master, who clings to
us with all his might, and is far superior to us, for we are his guests,
as in a strange inn. Therefore, as much as is in us of the world and
this life, we must be subject to him in blood and flesh, that he may
deal with us according to his will.

33 Thus you speak: What do you preach and believe? If you yourself
confess that it cannot be felt or sensed, then your 1) preaching must be
nothing and a mere dream. For, should it be something, then experience
would also have to show something of it? Answer: That is what I say,
that it is bad to have believed through experience that which is not
humanly believable, and to have felt that which is not felt; so that
just in that the devil, according to feeling, is my master, he must be
my servant, and if I lie below, and all the world is superior to me,
then I lie above. How so? If it is to be true, then experience must come
to it and be felt? Yes, that\'s right; but it is said that feeling must
follow, but faith must be there first, without and above feeling. So my
conscience, in that it feels sin, and fears and is afraid of it, must
become a master and victor over sin; not in feeling nor in thought, but
in the faith of the word, and thereby comfort and sustain itself against
and over sin, so long as sin must pass away, and is no longer felt.

34 So also death is among us, that it cannot devour us nor hold us; but
nevertheless it clings to our necks with pestilence, sword, and all
manner of plagues, and throws us under itself into the grave, so that we
must rot there, and yet not remain in it at last, but will tear through
it and burst forth brighter than heaven with sun and stars. It had to be
the same in Christ; when he died and was buried, there was no feeling
nor waiting for life, and it was so difficult for the disciples to
believe that the Christ had died and was buried in the grave.

1\) Erlanger: the.

stus under the grave and sealed stones should be a HErr over death and
grave, as they themselves said Luc. 24, 21.: \"We hoped he should redeem
Israel.\"

35 Therefore everything is to be done, as St. Paul admonishes here. Paul
exhorts us to hold fast to the word we have received and always remember
it, and thus resist all questioning, arguing, and disputing, and not
allow the devil to enter in, whether by heart through his mobs or
inwardly in our own hearts; and so learn the power and might of God in
the same word, that by it we may be saved, and by it alone stand against
the devil\'s power and all error.

36\. For I want to stand in the faith that I am a Christian, God\'s
child and blessed, when I feel sin and evil conscience; and \[that I\]
live eternally 2) with a beautiful, glorious body, when I lie under the
earth: There belongs a divine, heavenly power and wisdom, which is not
based on feeling or seeing, but can look beyond the same, certain that
this is not a man\'s talk or dream, but God\'s word, which can do even
more than we understand and comprehend \[Eph. 3, 20.\] because he has
already raised our Lord Christ from the dead, although no one has been
so shamefully and blasphemously executed, nor has fallen into such a
desperate and (according to the law) cursed death 2c., that his name has
stunk more shamefully than any man on earth: nor has he proved that the
Scriptures are more than all men\'s thoughts, feelings and experiences.
For this no man could have conceived nor thought, that Christ should
live the third day, and there was not a particle in all the wisdom of
the world that knew any thing of it: neither is there the word that
speaks of him alive, while he yet lieth in the grave. And as it says, so
it must come to pass, though all the senses and understanding of the
world, and all things, be against it.

37 So also with us. The dead have long since rotted under the earth, or
have been eaten by maggots and all kinds of vermin, or have been
destroyed and flown away.

2\) This reading is found in the Wittenberg and is confirmed by the
Latin. Jenaer: \"eternal life\"; Erlanger: \"eternal life\".

[1106 Eri. SI, 9S-S4. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, II70-II7\". 1107]{.underline}

we believe and confess, they are certainly alive and risen. The world
has it and cannot do it, but the Word has it and can do it, and so it
must be done, for it is God\'s own power and might.

\(38\) We are to keep this in mind and take comfort in the fact that we
do not believe it as strongly as we should and do not want to feel it in
our hearts as much as we would like to, but that we only keep to it and
always keep it in mind and do not let it leave our hearts. Just as we
weakly believe that we are lords over the world and the devil through
Christ, but rather feel the contradiction. But of this we comfort
ourselves as much as we can, that we have the Word, which is above all
power and wisdom. So also, though I feel my sin, and cannot have a sure
and cheerful heart, as I would, yet shall I let the word prevail, that I
may say, I am a lord of sin, and will know no sin. Yes, let your own
conscience, which feels and experiences much differently, tell you that.
That is truly true, if it were according to the feeling, then I would be
lost; but the word is to apply above my and all the world\'s feeling and
remain true, however small it seems, and in addition weakly believed by
us; for we all see and experience the work, that sin condemns us badly,
and condemns us to hell, death devours us and all the world, that no one
can escape it. And you tell me of life and righteousness that I do not
see a speck, and indeed must be a weak life? Yes, indeed, a weak life,
because of our faith. But how weak it is, if only the word and the
little spark of faith remains in the heart, then such a fire of life
shall come out of it, which fills heaven and earth, and both consume
death and all misfortune, like a drop of water, and the weak faith shall
break through, so that one shall neither see nor feel sin or death
anymore. But there is a strong fight to keep the word against our
feeling and seeing.

\(39\) Therefore faith is not so small a thing as is thought, but an
excellent thing.

1\) \"wahr\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena. It is in the
Erlanger and in the Latin.

Hero, that he should hold to the word, which seems so small and nothing
that all the world would not give a penny for it, and yet does such a
great thing, and is so powerful that it will tear apart heaven and
earth, and open all graves in a moment. And if you only abide in it, you
shall live forever, and become a ruler over all things, even though your
faith is weak now, and your feeling strong; and live henceforth as
weakly as you live, that you only live not according to your thoughts
and reason, but according to the Scriptures. For the devil has so long
been at war with the Scriptures and the Word, but has never been able to
overcome or overthrow them. This he does, that he creeps around us on
all sides \[1 Petr. 5:8\], that he may snatch us away; but the word he
does not attack. And because thou hast the same in thine heart, he goeth
not right under thine eyes: he may make thee wriggle, but he winneth not
for thee.

40 Thus the Scripture says of the patriarch Jacob \[Wis. 10:12\]:
Certamen forte dedit ei, he made him fight a strong, chivalrous battle,
that he might learn by the battle and victory how mighty the word is.
For otherwise one will never realize what power is under the letter
until it comes to a meeting, when one learns that it can stand against
all error, sin, death and the devil. The world does not believe this,
and all who want to judge according to their own feelings and struggle
with heavy thoughts of sin and death, 3) until they get rid of their
thoughts and want to get others. 4) But nothing comes of it, there is no
other consolation, but to hold to the word that says: Do you hear that
Christ has risen for you, and has destroyed your sin and death 2c?
Summa, we cannot remain from sin, death, nor hell, without this gospel,
of which St. Paul here speaks, saying that by it we stand and are saved.
If he had known anything else to comfort and sustain us, no doubt he
would have given it to them.

41 Now he shows the easiest art to it, that \[it\] may neither cost nor
trouble; costs

2\) \"now\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Erlanger: \"und so lang umbgehen\".

4\) Erlanger: \"make\" instead of: want to get.

[1108 **Eri. 6i, S4-97. Sermon on I Cor. 1S, 2-7. w. vw, N7s-N7s.**
1109]{.underline}

No more than a word, with which we shall stand against death and all our
enemies; though we feel differently and are weak, nothing is at stake if
we only keep the word. 1) For the mother does not throw away her child
because it is weak and grim. It is weak, and cannot help itself, but
because it remains in its mother\'s bosom and arms, it has no redness;
but if it comes out of its mother\'s care, it is lost. So do thou also,
if thou wilt be saved; see, 2) That thou abide in the word only, whereby
God will sustain thee, and keep thee, that thou be not lost.

**V. 3-7 For I gave you first of all that which I also received, that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was
buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the
Scriptures. And that he was seen of Cephas; and after that of the
twelve; and after that he was seen of more than five hundred brethren at
one time, many of whom are yet alive, and some of whom are fallen
asleep. After this he was seen by Jacob, and then by all the apostles.**

\(42\) With these words, he indicates and repeats what his gospel was,
which he had preached to them, so that they would stand and be saved;
and (3) therefore makes a whole sermon on the resurrection of Christ,
which one might well read and act on Easter Day. For from this flows the
reason and cause of this article, which he made about the resurrection
of the dead. And the same proves his preaching truly strong and mighty,
both by testimony of the Scriptures and of many living people 2c. I will
say this much: I have given you nothing else than that which I myself
have received, nor do I know anything else to preach for the reason of
our salvation, but of the Lord Christ, how he truly both died and rose
again from the dead. This is the content and summa of my gospel, into
which I and you have been baptized, and stand. So I have not stolen it,
nor spun it out of my head, nor dreamed it, but I have

1\) Erlanger: \"you \... remain\".

2\) Erlanger: and see.

3\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

I have received it from Christ himself. Stings those false teachers with
it; as if he should say: If they preach something else to you, it must
not have been received from Christ, but be their own dreams and poems.
For they have never received it from us, nor from other apostles
(because^4^ ) we all agree and are unanimous in our preaching), much
less from Christ; therefore it must be vain deceit and deception.

\(43\) Just as he also boasts against the false apostles in Gal. 1:11,
12, 17, that he did not receive his teaching from men, nor from the
apostles themselves, nor preach from men\'s reason and art, but preaches
such a sermon, which no man invented, nor he knew or obtained from
himself, but had to receive by divine revelation, which they cannot
boast of nor prove. Indeed, he did nothing by his own understanding, nor
did he work to receive it, so that he first pursued it to the utmost and
raged against it like a raging, foolish dog. So much is God\'s word
above all reason, even above the apostles\' own art and wisdom, that no
one of his own strength or intellect can come to it, be silent, that he
should do or devise something better, as those in the Corinthians say.

44 But he bears two testimonies (contrary to their false teachers) to
his preaching, or gospel, which he preached of the resurrection of
Christ. First, that he took it from the Scriptures and proved it with
the same. Secondly, his own experience and that of many others who have
seen Christ resurrected. For this belongs to a true man, that what he
preaches or says he can also prove and testify; not only with words, but
also with works and examples, both his and others. 5) As he tells here
one after another the witnesses of the resurrection of Christ, by whom
he was seen; first, by Kepha or Petro; then, by the twelve apostles, to
all of whom he showed himself alive, that they had seen and heard him,
and had dealt with them.

4\) So the Latin and the Erlangen. Wittenberg and Jena: like.

5\) In the editions: andern. Latin: nlioruiu.

[1110 Erl. SI, 97-99. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, II78-II7S. 1111]{.underline}

is, according to outward, bodily nature. According to this, more than
five hundred brothers were gathered together. Then also especially of
Jacob, and finally of all the apostles. He calls all those who were sent
by Christ to preach apostles (other than the twelve). For the twelve he
specially chose (as something more than bad apostles or messengers) as
his witnesses, not only of the resurrection, but of his whole life,
words, and works, which they saw and heard, that through them the gospel
might be spread according to Christ. These are all witnesses, especially
beside me, of the things which we have seen and experienced, even as
they were spoken of before in the Scriptures.

45 And behold, how he again praises and exalts the testimony of the
Scriptures and the outward word, in that he so carries out and repeats
this word \"according to the Scriptures\"; of course, not without cause.
For the first reason, namely, that he may ward off the mad spirits who
despise the Scriptures and external preaching, and instead seek other
secret revelations, as there are now everywhere such spirits, destroyed
by the devil, who thus regard the Scriptures as a dead letter, and boast
of a vain spirit, and yet keep neither word nor spirit. But here you
will hear how St. Paul takes the Scriptures as his strongest witness,
and shows that there is no substance to preserve our doctrine and faith
but the bodily or written word, put into letters, and preached orally by
him or others, for it is clearly written here \"Scripture\",
\"Scripture\".

46 But Scripture is not spirit alone, because of which they slander that
the spirit alone must do it, that Scripture is a dead letter and cannot
give life. But it is said that although the bodily word 1) does not in
itself give life, it must be present and heard or received, and the Holy
Spirit must work in the heart through it, and the heart must be
preserved by the word and in the word in faith against the devil and all
temptation; or, if it forsakes this, it must soon lose Christ and the
Spirit altogether. Therefore, do not boast much about the Spirit unless
you have the manifest, outward word;

1\) Erlanger: the letter.

For it will certainly not be a good spirit, but the wicked devil from
hell. For the Holy Spirit has put His wisdom and counsel and all
mysteries into the Word and revealed them in the Scriptures, so that no
one has to excuse himself, nor to seek anything else, nor to search, and
there is nothing higher or better to learn or to attain, than what the
Scriptures teach of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our Savior, who died
for us and rose from the dead.

47 Secondly, he does it so that he also fights on the other side, as I
did above.

\[I have said that in this and other articles one should not consult
reason, nor listen to what the world, with its wisdom, wants to puzzle
out and sharply speculate about. For if they are questioned about it and
allowed to master it, faith will no longer have any room, but will be
taken for a sound sermon, and will become a loud mockery, as happened
with the Corinthians, as we shall hear further on. But we, who want to
be Christians and of faith, should not look at or ask what human wisdom
says here, or how it rhymes with reason; but what the Scriptures teach
us, by which such things were proclaimed before, and are now also
confirmed by public testimony and experience. Whoever does not want to
believe this, we always let him go, because he will certainly have
nothing of Christ or of the Gospel, nor will he believe.

48 For such a gospel will not come up for a long time, if he is so wise
and learned that he could prove his thing so irrefutably, both from the
Scriptures or God\'s Word, then also with people who have seen and
experienced such things; and you may cheerfully defy them to appear, and
bring forth their one.

49 For this is certainly the way of all the rotten ones, that they first
come rolling with their own thoughts, turned from reason; and though
they take Scripture before them, yet they have first drawn their own
thoughts and carried and brewed them into it, so that it must rhyme with
them, and be interpreted and stretched out according to them.

2\) Erlanger: still.

1112 **Erl. SI, 99-101. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 3-7. W. VIII, II7S-IISI.**
1113

\(50\) Just as we now see in ours concerning baptism and the sacrament;
they have first seen from their own minds that baptism is water like
other water, and because they have grasped this, and cannot look at it
any other way, they run to the Scriptures, where they have found that no
creature is to be trusted in; that outward things cannot help the soul.
Hence they spin their doctrine: water is water, and one should not trust
in it as in a creature; therefore baptism cannot be a bath for souls and
wash away sin. Then such sayings of the Scriptures, that one should not
believe in any creature, 2c., must serve them for their deception, and
give testimony to their dream and thought. Now this scripture is true
and certain; but behold, how shamefully they draw and lead it 1) to
baptism, that they would make of it a pure creature; which is not true;
for God himself, with Christ his dear Son, and the Holy Ghost, is in it.

\(51\) They do the same with the holy sacrament, which must be only
bread and wine to them; item, with the oral word and other divine
ordinances, as well as with worldly authority; item, with the marriage
state. Then they slander: \"Married life is a worldly, sinful life,
because it depends on creatures, wife and child, house and farm, but he
who wants to serve God must be pure from all creatures. When the
unintelligent hear this, they quickly fall to it, as if it were a
delicious thing, despising conjugal life, authority and all ranks,
ordered by God. For it is a beautiful thought, and the sayings of
Scripture have drawn upon it, that one should love God above all things,
house and home, and leave all things for His sake 2c. And yet it is
nothing, because first of all it was introduced from such a dream, that
the conjugal life is a carnal thing, from which one must become pure, as
reason regards it with its blind conceit, although Scripture praises and
exalts it as God\'s order and creature 2c., and yet it has a beautiful
2) appearance before the rabble, especially because they draw the
sayings of Scripture to it, 3) so that he cannot resist it.

1\) Erlanger: \"on what?\"

2\) \"beautiful\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

3\) Erlanger: stretch.

52\. but we say thus: let man and woman be as they please, to be seen by
the nose and by reason, yet they are adorned with the beautiful ornament
called the word of God, which created them for married life, and joined
them together and blessed them. This is the bond that binds them
together, that they should not run away from each other, but remain with
each other, out of God\'s command and commandment. And so the estate is
constituted in the word of God, and thereby sanctified and pure, that it
shall not be reproached carnally or sinfully. But to look at them only
by the veil and the hat, as the mad saints do out of their reason, a sow
could well do; for she would be so wise that she could say she saw
nothing holy in them. But he who looks to God\'s word to establish and
confirm his standing will not let such dreams and false interpretations
of Scripture go astray. For the word will teach him finely that it
cannot be a reprobate estate, but is pleasing and holy to God, as much
as there is in it, where one needs his only right; and can therefore
well conclude, because he has God\'s word and command, that one should
not forsake him.

053 And sayest thou, Is it not written, that one shall leave all things?
Yes, that is right; but how should one leave it? Certainly not in the
way God gave husband and wife together; why else would he have given
them together and put the commandment on them? but when it comes to
leaving either Christ and God\'s word, or wife and child, 2c. as Christ
clearly says \[Marc. 10, 29\]: \"For my sake and the sake of the
gospel\" 2c.

\(54\) I say this as an example, so that you may see how they do not
teach the Scriptures correctly, nor understand them themselves, as St.
Paul boasts of his teaching, which is powerfully attested by the
Scriptures; and also as a warning, that you beware, and do not much
question what reason says about it, nor listen to the fanatics and the
fools, but look only to the Scriptures. For if you do not hang on to the
Scriptures, both the critics and your own reason will soon have seduced
you. I myself am also a doctor and have read the Scriptures; it still
happens to me every day, if I am not standing properly in my armor and
am well armed with it, that

1114 Eri. si, im-ios. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1181-1183. 1115

I have had such thoughts that I should lose Christ and the gospel, and
yet I must always hold to the Scriptures so that I remain.

\(55\) How then will a man do, who 1) drives without Scripture at all
and according to pure reason? For what should I believe of this article,
that another life should follow after this one, if I want to follow it,
when it swarms me with its thoughts: Where does he go whom the ravens
eat up, or remains in the water and is also eaten by fish, and is thus
infinitely 2) consumed? Where do those remain who are burned to vain
ashes and powder, scatter and fly over the whole world? yes, every man
who is consumed to earth and by worms? Such thoughts I can also find in
all other articles, if I go according to my mind, even the least seem.
As, of the Virgin Mary, how she might have conceived without a man 2c.
But it is said: We preach such articles, which are not based on man\'s
reason and understanding, but on the Scriptures; therefore they are not
to be sought anywhere, nor spoken, 3) but in and from the Scriptures.

\(56\) Now this is one part, so that he refutes the false spirits, that
they raise their own conceit without Scripture, and can show no reason
for it. The other is that none of them can produce witnesses of their
own who could prove it from their own experience; as he also finely
paints Col. 2, 18, where he says of them, \"that they walk according to
their own choice, in humility and spirituality of angels, of which they
have never seen any, and without matter, puffed up in their carnal
mind\" 2c. As if to say, \"This is certainly the manner of all the mobs,
that all things which they bring forward no one has seen or experienced,
but just as they lack the Scriptures and the testimony of the Word, so
also they have no testimony of experience. \"But we (saith Christ \[John
3:11\]) speak that we know, and testify that we have seen.\"

1\) In the old editions: the.

2\) \"Infinite\" here probably as much as: completely. Latin: üspasti
sunt.

3\) örtern - to interpret, to explain. In the Latin translation even
widely: äiEoisuäos aut sxssquanüos sxanainailüosqus, yunM sto. - \"and
from\" is missing in the Erlanger.

And St. John 1 Ep. 1, 1. 2: \"That which we have heard, which we have
seen with unseeing eyes, which we have beheld, and our hands have
touched, of the word of life, this we preach unto you.\" So we preach
here also in this article (says St. Paul), which I and all the apostles,
together with five hundred brethren, have seen, and bear witness with me
unanimously.

57\. Now there are shameful spirits who are allowed to teach impudently,
of which they themselves know nothing, and neither Scripture nor example
can show, nor produce any testimony of doctrine or work, that it is only
twofold lies, both for the sake of doctrine and work, and more than
nothing at all, what they say: Yet they can shout and boast a great
deal, and persuade the people with fine, great words; yes, they swear to
it, so that one must think it is the truth; as ours have done of the
Sacrament, and still do. The same is the case with the pope\'s crowd,
monks and priests, with their doctrine of works. For this is all their
preaching: If a pious monk lives according to his rule, he will be
blessed, if God wills it. Item: If a man gives much alms and establishes
worship, he gets a good confidence in God that he will give him heaven
in return 2c.

\(58\) So they all preach and teach on uncertain delusions, which no one
has ever experienced, nor is able to find one who can testify to it and
say, \"Yes, I have experienced it. For I have also been such a devout
monk for fifteen years; yet I have never once been able, with all my
masses, prayers, fasting, vigils, chastity, to say: Now I am sure that
God is gracious to me; or: Now I have tried and experienced that my
order and strict life has helped me and is promoting me to heaven. Is it
not a hostile doctrine and a vexatious nuisance that people are mocked
and fooled with such talk, when they have no ground of Scripture nor
certain testimony? 4) As the devil bodily dazzles and enchants people
with a spectre before his eyes, which is nothing in itself.

4\) Blaring - dazzling.

1116 Eri.\", ros-ios. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 3-10. W. vm, iiW-iiM. 1117

\(59\) Therefore we should accept such words of St. Paul as an
admonition that we remain firm in the same doctrine and preaching, of
which we both have certain Scripture and also experience. These are to
be two testimonies, and like two touchstones of right doctrine. Whoever
does not believe these two, and still seeks other things, or clings to
others, since he finds none of these, will be deceived. It has not yet
helped, nor does it help among the great multitude who want to be
deceived and seduced, and only see where something new is brought, and
can pretend it with a pretty appearance. But he who wants to be wise,
and not to fail, let him see these two things: He who can show
[testimony to]{.underline} his doctrine [from Scripture]{.underline} and
[certain experience]{.underline}; how we can prove our doctrine and
preaching. For I too, praise God, can preach from experience that no
works can help nor comfort me against sin and God\'s judgment, but
Christ alone stills and comforts the heart and conscience, and have all
Scripture to witness to this, and many pious people as examples who also
say and have experienced it. On the other hand, all the rotten people
can neither prove nor testify anything, neither from their own nor other
people\'s experience.

60 Finally, it should be noted here how St. Paul describes and defines
his gospel, namely, that it is such a sermon in which we learn that
Christ died for our sins and rose from the dead, and that both of these
things are testified to by the Scriptures. There you have put it in the
shortest and purest way, so that you can judge all doctrine and life by
it, that whoever casts something else out for the teaching of the
gospel, or teaches something beside it, and adds to it what we have done
and our own holiness, he certainly deceives the people. For here you
hear no work preached at all, and nothing said about what I should do or
refrain from doing to atone for sin or to take it away, and to become
righteous before God, 2c. but about what Christ did for it, namely, that
he died and rose again. These are not my works, nor those of a saint
or 1) man.

1\) Erlanger: \"and of all\" instead of: or. Latin: ant ullius üorninis.

on earth. But how do I get it, that it may profit and help me? Not
otherwise than by faith, as he said, that they received it by faith, and
stand in it, and are saved; and soon after \[v. 11\] he will say again,
\"Thus we preached, and thus ye believed.\" Thus he everywhere sets
forth the two parts, as the chief article and summa of the gospel, by
which we become Christians and are saved, if we keep it otherwise, and
hold fast to it, and do not let it be preached in vain; as I have often
said of it, and much more.

**V. 8, 9, 10. Last of all, he was also seen of me, as of untimely
birth. For I am the least of the apostles, as I am not worthy to be
called an apostle, because I have persecuted the church of God. But by
the grace of God I am what I am, and His grace toward me has not been in
vain, but I have labored much more than they all; not I, but the grace
of God which is in me.**

\(61\) I have not received it from others, who were apostles before me,
and have seen and heard Christ, and eaten and drunk with him, but have
seen him myself, as well as all the others, and have been made an
apostle by him; that I may well boast of being an apostle, and ought
also to boast. For this is a right apostolic conditio or quality, which
every apostle can boast of, that he was sent without means by his Lord
himself, and that he has command. So he boasts everywhere that his
apostleship did not come from men, nor through men \[Gal. 1, 1\], but
from Christ, and through Christ Himself, that He appeared to him
especially after all the apostles, and gave special command to preach
the gospel among the Gentiles, as he testifies in Acts Cap. 22^2^ ) and
26. Item 1 Cor. 9 and 2 Cor. 12.

62\. but he calls himself, in fancy words, \"an untimely birth,\" that
is, a child born too soon, before it is even complete and mature, and,
as we say, unbaptized.

2\) \"22\" is missing in the Erlanger.

[111. 8 Eri. Sl, los-108. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1188-118S. 1119]{.underline}

remains. For just as such a child comes into the world before it is to
come, and cannot remain alive, nor see the sun (as the 58th Psalm, v.
9.nor be glad of this life: So it happened to me (he means to say), and
I came as a real immature or untimely rejected fruit from the mother,
which was the synagogue, or Judaism, in which I was and lived, who was
to give birth to me spiritually, and bring me to God\'s kingdom, that I
should live and bear fruit to God, and also beget spiritual children for
life, like the other apostles from the Jewish people; But an immature
and dead child came out of it, which persecuted Christ, and his
Christianity, that it went wrong with me, and not as it should go,
because it did not give birth to me as the people should be born under
the law, kept and closed under the law, as in the womb of the mother,
that it, being prepared for Christ, should learn to recognize and accept
him 2c.

63\) So with these words he 1) rejects all his own former holiness, as
if he should say: I have been a devout Jew, and have walked blamelessly
in the law (as he says Phil. 3, 6. and Gal. 1, 14.), as no one in my
generation, 2c. but I consider all this as an unripe, corrupt fruit,
which is nowhere fit, and will never see the sun until I am born again
by Christ. Just as such a child is rejected from its mother\'s womb, and
from that moment on is buried from one darkness into another: so all my
righteousness in the law is a purely rejected thing, which is good for
nothing before God, and only condemns me to damnation, so that I must
now be ashamed of it and condemn myself; which I nevertheless thought
was delicious, and thought I would earn much with God. Thus, 2) the Jews
and all Jewish saints are still untimely fruit, who do not see the sun,
which is our Lord Christ, but remain in darkness, and go from one death
to another. Therefore I cannot boast that through my holiness and merit
I have brought Christ to reveal Himself to me, and to receive grace and
apostleship, but I would be just such a dead, rejected fruit.

1\) Erlanger: thus discards.

2\) Erlanger: stay.

like the others who remained in their Judaism. But if I was to become
good fruit and fit for life, I had to be born in Christ through baptism
and brought, begotten, and grown up through the gospel 2c.

But he makes a 3) long detour 4) and departure from his office, before
he comes back to the article of the resurrection: I am the least of the
apostles (he says), but by God\'s grace I am that 2c. He wants his
apostleship to remain unnoticed, even though he was the last, and
unworthy of his person, and had persecuted the Christians before;
because God had accomplished much more through him than through the
other apostles, even the highest ones. For the spirits of the mob did to
him as they always do, and also said, as for their rule and chief art,
Is the Holy Spirit such a poor beggar that he can find no one but the
one Paul? Just as they now say, \"Are those at Wittenberg alone so wise?
Shall no one else know nothing, and the Spirit not also be with us? What
can they do more than we? And after them the grosser users also paw
along: \"If I am also a Christian, and have the spirit as well as my
pastor or doctor, should I not be able to preach and judge as well as
he? So they go along with a vain spirit in full swarm.

Now it is grievous to a true apostle and a called, faithful preacher to
hear and see such things, that the dear ministry and word are thus
despised, and evil thanked and overmastered. But what is one to do about
it? Nothing else will come of it, and it cannot be resisted, because
Christ himself could not be exalted and complain about it, as he says in
Matt. 11:19: \"Wisdom must be justified\" and led to school \"by her
children. And Solomon also complains that there is no cessation of
overmastering the right masters, and of making books upon books.

3\) even. Latin: \[ntis prolixnw.

4\) In Walch\'s old edition and in the Erlangen edition: \"Umscheif\";
but in the latter a b has been added from the original: \"Umbscheif\".
Cf. p. 22 of the introduction to the 20th volume of the St. Louis
edition.

[1120 Eri.sl,ios-,io. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 8-10. w. vin, nsg-nsi.
1121]{.underline}

And it must always happen in such a way that, where God gives grace that
someone starts something and does it right, a whole ulcer soon follows,
since everyone also wants to be clever and do everything better, so that
one does nothing, but only gives cause for the world to become full of
clever masters, As it has happened among schoolteachers up to now, when
the book Sententiarum appeared, and one or two had written about it,
then everything swarmed with scribes, and no one thought himself a
doctor, so he let his art be seen, and wrote a special book about it. It
is the same in all other arts, indeed, in all crafts, that the right
masters must suffer such bunglers and brewers, who always mix in, and
even if they can do nothing, still want to imitate everything and do it
better.

So Paul did not accomplish anything with his gospel, since he had
preached with all faithfulness, because he opened the useless mouths,
which could do nothing but despise and reproach him, and thus put on
airs: Dear friends, we are not jumped from a stone, yes, both baptized
and Christians, as St. Paul. What was he but a persecutor of
Christianity, as he himself must say, not a handsome person, small and
lean in body, as they also reproached him for his voice and his excuses.
So, on the other hand, they were great criers, as the rabble like to
hear, and could fill their ears; and so, all that they could find in
him, they destroyed and made contemptible, that they adorned themselves
with it, and made them a credit. Just as they do to us, and after us
much, who should not now untie our shoe laces, shall reproach and
diminish us to the highest degree, as if we were less than nothing.

67\) For this reason, he must put on this himself, as if he were to say,
\"I know well that they mock me with such crudeness 1) and color me with
such blackness, and boast that they are considered fine, skillful people
and are of great reputation; they reproach and scold me as the least of
them.

1\) In the old editions written \"Rhom\", that is cream, Abhub, dirt,
soot. In Latin: quu intsluius runoulu rus kMeiant.

and most unworthy of the apostles, indeed, not to be considered an
apostle. But what shall I do about it? I must command 2) the one who is
Christianity, baptism, the gospel, and everything; if he will not handle
and preserve it himself, my doing so will not help. I can do no more
than say what is the right gospel and God\'s word, and admonish and warn
besides. He who will not hear me and follow me, let him go on his own
adventure. As we must do for our own, and can do no more, than to warn
with all diligence and faithfulness, that only the doctrine may remain
pure. Whoever does not want to accept this, we must let him go and see
what he gains. If he does not want the right doctrine and apostles, then
he shall find plenty of rotten people, and the devil as well. However,
God will see to it that his Christianity remains, and it will not help
that they cry out in hostility that they are learned and disciples of
the apostles, but I am a country runner and a disowned apostle.

68 For I myself may well say (says Paul) that I have been a persecutor
and murderer of Christians, and have thereby perished, that I have cut
off all Christendom, and am not worthy to be called an apostle 2c. Just
as I, and many pious people with me, confess of ourselves that we were
desperate, damned people under the papacy, and spent our lives
shamefully in monasticism, since we blasphemed and desecrated God and
His dear Son daily with our masses and idolatrous services 2c.
Nevertheless, God has had mercy on us and has taken us into grace, and
has called us by His Holy Spirit, so that Christ is revealed through us,
and has given us many greater gifts than are given to others. And we can
boast with Paul that God has brought the gospel to light again through
us, and has spread it so far that they must nevertheless leave us the
defiance that we, before they came and preached the gospel, might not
know anything about it, if we had not brought it into the world before.
In short, we have been whoever we want to be, 3) so they must accept
this.

2\) ,.es\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Erlanger.

3\> So the Erlangen and the Latin. Wittenbergers and Jenaers: we are,
as.

[1122 Eri. si, llo-il2. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, nsi-nsi. 1123]{.underline}

They receive the gospel, absolution and sacrament from their pastors and
appointed preachers, and do not despise such divine order, as dear as
their blessedness is to them. For if God had wanted to do it
differently, he would have preferred them to speak before others, so
that we would have to be silent and listen to them.

69 God also chooses such poor sinners, as St. Paul and we were, to ward
off such clever presumption and arrogance. For he does not want to have
such sure, presumptuous spirits for this, but such people who have been
through the scroll before, tempted and broken, and must know and confess
that they have been bad boys, as St. Paul was. They must know and
confess that they have been bad boys, as St. Paul was, and burdened with
such sins, which are called great sins before God, as enemies of God and
of the Lord Christ; so that they may remain in humility, and not presume
or boast (as those untried spirits do) that they have been so pious,
holy, and learned that God has chosen them, but that He may always keep
the glory and defiance, so that He may say to them, even if they want to
become proud: Dear, what do you have that you want to insist on? or
against whom do you want to strut? Do you not know what kind of people
you have been, and what you have both done against me and against
Christianity, and have brought the blood of many people upon your necks?
Or do you want to forget what I have shown you for grace and mercy? So
he will have tied the dog\'s scruff to his neck, that every man may look
behind him, and think in what stink and filth he is put; and he shall
forget his pride and presumption.

70 Therefore, St. Paul says: \"If you despise and belittle me, saying
that I was a persecutor of Christians and a blasphemer, and nothing else
but a premature birth, and the least of the apostles, how do you like
this: Nevertheless, I am an apostle, and have been such a wicked man,
having done so much work, so much good, far above all others, even
though I am not righteous before God. But I can boast and say this
against and in defiance of my shouters and abusers:

l\) \"yet\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

Nevertheless, I have done more than you and others, even the great
apostles, whether you want to be better and more learned.

Thus you speak: Yes, I also have the spirit, as well as you. Answer: No,
that is not enough, and you shall not have it, that you may know it. For
(as I have said) if God had so ordained that thou shouldest be an
apostle or preacher, I should hear thee, and hold my peace: but now that
he hath ordained me, thou shalt hear me, and take me for thine apostle
or doctor. But if thou hast special gifts, spirit and understanding, and
canst interpret the Scriptures, then do it properly (as St. Paul teaches
1 Cor. 14:16 ff.) in the time and place where thou art called, not with
such defiance and boasting as thou now goest forth against thy rightly
called apostle. For by this you show that your spirit is not the Holy
Spirit, but the evil devil, and that you have never tasted or smelled
anything of God\'s spirit. For a devout Christian does not do so, but,
even if he hears something wrong preached, he proceeds with humility,
and admonishes the preacher kindly and brotherly, does not defy and
scold 2) so.

Therefore, it does not matter 3) whether they are of greater reputation
and can shout more, but it matters who faithfully does his ministry and
accomplishes much in it. Then see whether he is called, or 4) has begun
the teaching, as I (says St. Paul), who am sent by God to be your
preacher, and do not turn away from it how low I am; for you cannot
reproach me so badly, nor make me so despised, because of my former
life, I will confess it and say yes to it; but nevertheless the same
Paul, who before was a blasphemer, is now an apostle, and wants to be
taken for an apostle. For I am not to be regarded now according to the
person as I was, but according to the office in which I am now. For the
sake of my person, I can well suffer to be reviled and belittled, and it
is true that I am the least of these,

2\) pawing - to defy, to throb, to speak hopefully.

3\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: \"liegts nicht\". Latin: paruin rsksrt.

4\) Erlanger: \"and\" instead of: \"be, or\". In Latin: whether he
started the apprenticeship as a called one.

1124 **Erl. 51, 112-114. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 8-10. w. VIII, NS4-IIM.**
1125

and not worthy to be called an apostle, even a Christian, as he who
persecuted Christianity and God\'s children, and innocently helped to
murder them; but according to the ministry I was commanded to preach,
baptize 2c., I want to be destroyed by everyone and be unnoticed, and
the devil shall not resist me, and have no thanks for it. For as evil as
a man may ever be, his person is now forgiven, and by the grace of God I
am, and will be, and boast that I am now converted for my person, and
have become a Christian and an apostle from a blasphemer and persecutor,
who has established and planted the faith of Christ among the Gentiles.
For this I do not boast of, as of my own doing and dignity, as if I had
it from myself; it is not natural, nor man\'s ability, but only the
abundant grace of God, who, without any action or thought on my part,
took me into grace, absolved me from murder and blood, endowed me with
the knowledge of Christ and gifts of the Spirit, and placed me in the
highest office; therefore I will not despise it. If it were my work or
deed, I would gladly trample it underfoot, like my former nature and
Jewish holiness; but because it is the work and grace of God, I will
praise it and have it praised by everyone, in defiance of the devil and
all the world, or whoever despises it will be condemned to the abyss of
hell. In short, what is about our person we should and will suffer, but
what is grace, especially this ministry, which has and gives vain grace,
we will have honored by everyone, who else wants to be a Christian.

And here you see that St. Paul calls a good, right preacher a grace from
God, that it is not a human doing or ability to be or to make a
preacher; as also it is not a human thing to be a Christian, and to like
to hear the word or the sermon, but a divine thing and vain heavenly
gift and present, without and above, even contrary to nature, which God
alone works in us, without all our thoughts and doing. Such a man (he
says) am I, who brought you the gospel by God\'s grace (as I also
received it by the same), and am given to you by God, as a noble,
precious, and precious gift.

Jewel. For this you shall hold me and honor me, so that no one can boast
against me or come up to me as if it were my own thing, or as if I had
come from myself. For I am not, as those who make themselves preachers
and invade, as the creepers among the mobs, nor as the self-grown
scholars and preachers, but what I am and can do, what I have and bring,
that is and shall be only the grace of God. So Christians should boast,
if they want to boast, not like the presumptuous spirits, of their
spirit, or great art and own wisdom, holiness, or what we ourselves are
and can do.

But he makes such a boast with many words, saying, \"And the grace of
God toward me has not been in vain, but I have labored more than all of
them. This means that he defies even more their contempt, that he is a
poor, lowly person, and nothing compared to the others, and may not only
make himself equal to the others, but boast even more that God has
worked great things through him, and accomplished more than through none
of the others, as he goes on to say elsewhere. And he uses these words,
\"God\'s grace to me has not been in vain,\" against his and all kinds
of riffraff, who, although they have such an office of grace and sit in
it, do not remain in the same grace, but fall away from it and become
loose, useless talkers and ravishers, who shout and bluster a lot, but
neither do nor accomplish anything as their office demands, and so the
grace is in vain in them; but \"in me (he says) it has not been in vain.
For by the same I have brought the gospel through all the Gentiles, and
have converted many people; as he says elsewhere \[Rom. 15:19\], that he
has filled all things with the gospel from Asia even unto the Welsh
country; and can well defy them that despise and diminish me for my
person\'s sake, that they also may offer such things. For if it is to
boast, as they would like to boast against me, I have done more than
they all, and may boast it with God and honor. And whether they can
boast much, not of grace, but of their own art, or great gifts, I will
gladly let them, and give way. But for this

1126 \' Erl. si, ilt-ils. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vni, um-iiss. 1127

they shall not bring it that they have preached so much and produced so
much fruit as I have done by the grace of God.

\(75\) Now that he says, \"I have labored more than they all,\" might
well be interpreted as referring to all the apostles; as it is also
customary to interpret that he thereby exalts himself above other
apostles. But I think, because he speaks in groups, and calls them all
without distinction, that he does not mean the true apostles, but that
he is defying the spirits of the scourge. As if he were to say, \"If
they have done as much as I have, and boast as much, they have not all
done as much as I, who am considered a single man and the least of the
apostles; so that it remains in materia subjecta of those of whom he
speaks. For he does not mean to diminish the true apostles (among whom
he includes himself), but speaks against the other false apostles who
rebuked and destroyed him.

76 But if anyone wants to apply these words, \"I have labored more than
all of them,\" to all the apostles, he may interpret it in such a way
that his labor went further than that of all the others. For they had to
remain in Jerusalem and in the Jewish land, and were sent no further
than to their people. But St. Paul was set apart with Barnaba by the
Holy Spirit (Acts 13:2) as two special preachers to go into the Gentiles
throughout the world. So he came with his preaching through the whole
Roman Empire, which was twelve times as large and wide as Judaism.
Therefore, he may well boast that he worked more than all of them, that
is, traveled farther through his apostleship, or touched and preached to
more countries and people. Therefore he often calls himself an apostle
and teacher of the Gentiles, so that we consider him to be our father
and apostle, and his preaching chair is inherited by us. But
nevertheless, the apostle\'s main opinion remains, against his mobs,
that he wants to say, \"Let them have heartache with their boasting,
throbbing and pawing; yet I can boast and say that I am not only an
apostle, but also a useful apostle, and have the grace that I have
produced more benefit and fruit in Christendom than they have all spent
their lives on.

have done, or will do, a lot.

And lest anyone should think that he is a hopeful man with his boast, as
one who would exalt himself above all, even true apostles, by saying
that he alone has done the best, he quickly adds, \"Not I, but the grace
of God that is with me. And even points it from his person to the mere
grace, so that it cannot be spoken out of hope, but is a true Christian
humility. For he confesses that he is nothing, and yet he has a blessed
hope with him, which does not press on himself or on men or miss them,
but on God\'s work and grace, and does it all for the salvation and
blessedness of the people, so that they may not be deceived by the cries
and pressings of the mob, but that they may know what they have in him.
For this is useful and necessary for the people, that they may be warned
and deterred from the spirits of the mob, and be able to make such a
distinction between the preachers: This is our preacher, whom God has
given us, and has first preached God\'s word correctly, has done and
accomplished much good, and has proven himself by God\'s grace; the
other comes sneaking in, or has intruded himself without command, and
despises him, and no one knows who he is, or what to trust him with;
therefore let us listen to this one, whom God has given us, and stay
with him.

Behold, the right doctrine may be kept in the hearts of men, that they
may abide in that which God hath given them, and have known it. And so
it is written for us as an example. For so we must also boast against
the papacy and all the rot that God has given us his word and true
preachers of it; and although they may despise us and condemn us as
heretics, yet we are true preachers and Christ\'s servants, called and
appointed to teach by the pope himself, and should not despise such
glory and defiance; not that we are any better before God, but that our
doctrine may remain all the more firm among the people, and not be left
in doubt or wavering. For if we ourselves should waver and doubt whether
we are true preachers, the whole multitude must waver afterwards, and
become uncertain of the matter.

1128 E\". si, iis-no. Sermon On 1 Cor- 15, 8-15. W. vm, \"ss-120\". 1129

79\. Every man must have such glory in his state and life, and be sure
of it, that he pleases God. As for every father towards his child, even
if he is an unchristian and does not believe in the gospel, he has the
glory of being a father, and it is his duty to act as a father towards
his son, and he should not let himself be despised, even if he is poor,
infirm, or sick, as if he were not good enough to be a father to him,
but should say to him: Let me be what thou wilt, yet I am thy father,
and thou my son, and shalt not take away my fatherhood, nor draw thee
out of my obedience 2c. For I did not make myself a father to you out of
my own initiative or will, but God created you and gave you to me. In
the same way, every master of a house must boast to his servant, a ruler
or sovereign to his subject, and say, \"Even though I am clumsy and
infirm, 2c., I am still your master, and you are my servant or subject,
and you must hold me in high esteem and honor me, no matter how proud
you are, and have no thanks for it, not for my own sake, but for the
sake of God, who wills it so. But if I am infirm, that I please thee not
for my person, let that go its way; but for that thou shalt not say that
I am not thy lord, for that is not my business, 1) but God\'s work and
order.

80\. Since such glory is also necessary in worldly affairs, it must be
much more so in the spiritual office, which is indeed God\'s work and
rule, and yet everyone wants to master and despise it as he pleases, so
that one may confidently defy such insolent spirits on God\'s word and
order, and say: Reproach and despise me, whoever will, on account of my
person, but on account of my office you shall honor and exalt me, as
dear as Christ and your salvation and blessedness are to you; for you
are not my pastor nor preacher, but God has appointed me that you should
receive the gospel from me, and through my office come to God\'s
kingdom.

81 Behold, this is the detour which the apostle makes beforehand from
his ministry, the people.

1\) Business \-\-- creature, order.

He also uses this to confirm his sermon that he was called by God to do
this and that he has proven himself in this way, 2) that what he
preached and did was pure grace. And thus he bears three kinds of
testimony to his preaching. First, the Scriptures or God\'s Word.
Second, the experience of many people. Third, his ministry and the fruit
of it. Whoever does not want to accept or respect these things, let God
give him the fullness of the spirits of the mob, who will pour out their
spirit on him with vain runners. Therefore he decides:

**V. 11. Let it be I or they, so we preach, and so you have believed.**

82\. As if he should say: You have now heard what I am, and what I have
preached and done, what my office and teaching is, as a true apostle,
that I have preached the very things preached by the other apostles who
bear witness with me, and in addition have carried them further and
brought them into the world; So you also have accepted it, believed it,
and recognized that it is the doctrine and the gospel, from which this
article comes and has its reason; therefore you should stick to it, and
not let other preachers turn you away from it. Bring together, then, the
work or ministry that he had, and the fruit of it, that his preaching at
last was nothing else but of this article of the resurrection, according
to the Scriptures and many people\'s certain experience. Now he attacks
the article for himself, to substantiate and prove, and to displace
tremendously that error, which these poisoners had planted among the
Christians, that the resurrection was nothing, and says:

**V. 12-15 But if Christ is preached that he rose from the dead, how do
some of you say that the resurrection of the dead is nothing? But if the
resurrection of the dead is nothing, then neither is Christ risen. If
Christ is not risen, our preaching is in vain, and your faith is in
vain. We are also found to be false witnesses of God, that we have
sinned against God.**

2\) \"have\" is missing in the Erlanger.

1130 Eri. si, ns-isi. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, i-ou-isvs. 1131

**that he had raised Christ, whom he had not raised, since the dead do
not rise 2c.**

First of all, you see what pious little children they were, the tender
spirits of the saints, who promised St. Paul, and were allowed to impose
on him his little person and past life, as if they were full of the
Spirit and the most excellent saints, and yet were allowed to say and
preach that the resurrection is nothing, contrary to all the true
apostles\' preaching and testimony, both from Scripture and their own
experience. Is this not a shameful abomination, of those who want to be
called Christians, and boasted of a great spirit, as the first preachers
after the apostles, even some consecrated and appointed by St. Paul? and
preach this among his disciples, to whom he himself preached so long and
drove this 1) article.

\(84\) But he sets all things on the ground whereof he began, that
Christ is risen from the dead; which is the principal of Christian
doctrine, which no man can deny, who otherwise would be a Christian, or
a preacher of the gospel. I want to throw them off the scent with this,
and conclude: Because they deny the resurrection of the dead, they would
just as soon deny that Christ rose from the dead, for if the former were
not true, the latter must also be a lie. But since every Christian must
believe and confess that Christ is risen, he must soon come to the point
that he must also let the resurrection of the dead be true, or else he
must deny the whole gospel and all that is preached of Christ and of God
in one heap. For everything hangs on one another like a chain, so that
where one article remains, there they all remain. That is why he also
draws everything together here, and always deduces one thing from
another.

But it seems to be a weak dialectica or proof among the heathen and
unbelievers, who deny not only the article which he undertakes to prove,
but also all that he indicates for the same proof, and call it probare
negatum per negatum, and petere principium. Just as if

1\) Erlanger: den.

If someone sued someone in court and said, \"You are a prankster,\" and
if he were to prove it, repeated the same thing over and over again and
said, \"It is true, you are a prankster, and you remain a prankster of
your father and mother. That would not be called proof, but a vain
chatter. For if he wanted to prove it, he would have to go further,
bring witnesses, and other certain documents on him. So it also seems
here that he says: If the resurrection of the dead is nothing, then
Christ also did not rise from the dead. For if a heathen is told this,
he thinks as much of one as of the other, and believes as little that
Christ is risen as that we are risen. Therefore such an argument does
not bind him at all, and even if it were equally strong, it would no
longer be valid, for a particulari ad universale, and would not be a
correct consequence to conclude thus: Because the individual Christ was
resurrected, that therefore everyone must be resurrected. Just as it
would not follow if you were to say, This judge is a rogue; therefore
they are all rogues. A priest is a spirit of the mob; therefore they are
all heretics. That is not called masterly learned, if one wants to make
a whole summer out of one day, or to call all the world villains for the
sake of a prankster, in short, to make everything out of one. So it
seems to be proved here quite weakly: Where the dead do not rise, Christ
has not risen either. For even if one admits that the individual person,
Christ, the Son of God, has been resurrected, it is not yet decided that
we all must be resurrected.

But I have said that this is first of all a sermon for Christians who
believe the article of Christ\'s resurrection, and know and understand
his power, why he rose from the dead, namely, that by it death is
overcome, and we are brought out of it to live eternally with him. For
since he is our head, and we his body and members, he must also raise us
up by his resurrection, and put us into a new eternal life, as he often
shows elsewhere.

And yet, so that one may not blame his proof, he continues, and makes
the argument strong, weaves and ties the proof.

2\) \"yet\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

1132 Eri. si, isi-iss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 12-15. W. v,,. mvE. 1133

in each other, that it closes tremendously, and needs right the piece
from the dialectica, which one calls: reducere per impossibile. So, he
who wants to deny this article must deny much more, namely, first, that
you believe right. Secondly, that the word which ye believe was true.
Third, that we apostles preach rightly and are God\'s apostles. Fourth,
that God is true; and in sum, that God is God. For all these must follow
one another: Where my faith is false, the word must also be false. If
the word is wrong, then the preacher is also wrong; therefore, God who
sends the preachers must also be a false God. But if he is false, he is
not God. If anyone wants to say that God is not God, let him always go
away. For he who believes nothing everywhere and denies everything that
is said about God and the Word of God, we have nothing to do with him.
As is also taught in the schools: Contra negantem prima principia non
est disputandum, whoever may deny what nature teaches everyone, and all
men\'s reason and understanding must permit, one should not dispute with
him, but point him to a physician who will sweep his brain. For this is
just as much as if someone were to say that white is not white but
black, and two is not two but one.

We speak to those who consider God to be a true God, who is truthful and
does not lie, and the apostles to be his messengers and witnesses, who
preach his word and are to be heard as he himself, as Christ says \[Luc.
10:16\]: \"He who hears you hears me, and he who hears me hears my
Father\"; these are our principia, reasons and main points, on which the
whole Christian doctrine stands. For all Scripture says of God alone,
and of his Son and apostles, that their preaching is the true word of
God, and that whoever believes it will be saved. If you now 1) deny all
this, I have nothing to do with you. For he who denies God and his word,
his baptism and gospel, he also easily denies the resurrection of the
dead. May you say that

1\) \"mm\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena.

If you believe that God is not God, and that the apostles and
Christianity do not teach nor believe correctly, then you have done
well, and no better, than to completely knock the bottom out of the
barrel and say that there is no resurrection, no heaven nor hell, no
devil nor death, nor sin 2c. For what will you believe, if you do not
believe that God is anything?

89\. But if you want to be among the multitude who believe God and His
apostles, His word and Christianity to be true, we want to persuade you
to be forced to believe this article as well. For it is impossible that
what Christianity believes and the apostles preach should be a lie. It
is also impossible that the apostles are false witnesses of God,
otherwise God would not be true and would not have to be God. Since
these principia stand, the consequence is that you must believe in the
resurrection of the dead, as surely as God is God. For He has revealed
it through His Son in the Scriptures and preached it through the
apostles, and it has been accepted and believed by Christianity;
therefore it must be right and true.

90 Thus all things are bound together, the apostles and Christ\'s word,
Christianity\'s faith and confession, and God\'s truth and majesty, so
that one cannot be accused of lying without the other. And because this
is certain and remains true, it must also be certain that those who die
will rise again, because it is contained in God\'s word and the faith of
Christians. And thus makes a chain, so that everything is connected to
each other, and goes out of each other, so that one must say: As certain
as this is true, that God lives, and Christ lives, and the faith and
preaching of Christianity is right and certain, so certain is this
article. But if there is still anyone 2) who may speak against it, let
him go to the devil, as he shall have no fellowship with us who believe
and have accepted the word, and in addition has seen by experience that
he has confirmed his word and gathered his 3) Christianity together, and
so far has preserved it, that there are many holy people confessed with
their blood, and by

2\) Wittenberger: nobody.

3\) Erlanger: one.

1134 Eri. si, iss-iss. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1212-1214. 1135

We have been tried and proven in the faith through all kinds of
opposition and temptation, and have died on this article. And because we
stand on this ground and keep these pieces, this article will remain
with us and not fall.

See, this text is a powerful argument and the right way to defend our
doctrine, for we cannot prove our faith and all articles in any other
way. For he who will not believe that God and Christianity, faith and
word, are one thing, will not be persuaded or persuaded, and all that is
said to him is in vain and lost, just as if you wanted to convict a Turk
with our faith, for he confesses nothing to you and denies all your
reasons. But against this we say to him: If you come to the point that
you do not want to accept Christ and his apostles and the Scriptures,
then the wretched devil will thank you for believing us. 1) For we do
not preach ourselves, nor anything that is invented or produced by men,
but the very word that is founded in the Scriptures from the beginning,
and promised to our first father, Adam, by God himself, of Christ, the
Son of God, and of his Christianity. Whoever does not want this, let him
seek another.

\(92\) But we will hold fast that Adam began, and all the holy fathers
and devout Christians believed, and have continued against all the
power, wisdom, and might of the world, and the gates of hell, and shall
continue as long as the world shall stand. And whoever accepts this will
also believe and keep this article with us. For with such a one I can
dispute finely and refer him: If you believe in Christ, that he rose
from the dead, how can you deny that the dead do not rise? 2c. For you
must be mad and foolish if you believe in Christ, and will not believe
his word and apostles. Summa, we know that Adam, our very first father,
began to believe this article when he was told \[Gen. 3:15\], \"The seed
of the woman shall bruise the serpent\'s head,\" and thus of him

1\) The last words are well rendered in Latin: non postrilnrnris
sinpliu\", ut nokis czuie\<zris.in ersäss \[so we no longer demand that
you believe us\^.

is brought upon us all, as he apprehended it, and passed through from
one to another, and ever more clearly preached and urged, from Adam to
Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, David 2c., and so on to Christ and the
apostles, and by them come upon us.

Thus St. Paul has established this article from the right and strongest
principles, that whoever denies the resurrection of the dead must also
deny that Christ has risen. But if he denies this, he has denied
everything, and considers God and Christ in all his words and works to
be a liar, yes, to be nothing at all, and is to be considered no
different than a wicked, godless heathen, whom neither God nor the world
can help or advise, and no one should have anything to do with him. I do
not know how to preach or establish it more strongly and powerfully.

\(94\) Therefore, we must grasp this reason and hold it firmly, so that
we may be certain of the matter and not rely on a loose delusion. For as
surely as you believe other articles, so surely must you also believe
this article. If you can believe that God is God, then you must not
doubt that after this life you will rise again from the dead; for God
would have to become a liar before that, and not be God, for you should
remain under the earth. But if it is certain that God cannot lie nor
forsake and deny His divinity, then this article must also become true
and as certain before God as if the resurrection had already happened,
although it seems much different now, because man lies under the earth,
and stinks like a rotten carcass, and is consumed by maggots and worms.

For he that will believe must not regard what the five senses understand
and show. For God sees and judges nothing by it, but how his word comes
true, that he says: \"Death, I will be your death\", I will eat you, and
whom you have eaten, I will make alive again, or will no longer be a
God. And as he sees not at all in the being which we have before us, how
that one lies ten fathoms in the earth, or under the earth, and the
other is burned to ashes, and scattered to the four winds, or is eaten
up with beasts, and with birds, and with worms, but is life itself
before his eyes, because he wills a new eternal life.

1136 **Eri. SI, ISS-127. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 12-19. W. VIII,
I2I4-I2N.** 1137

To make life out of this temporal death and decay: so we must also take
it into our eyes, and judge it against our feelings, according to what
God says, as surely as if it had already happened, and only beware that
we do not put such into any doubt.

For think for yourself what a sin it is to doubt this 1) article,
because St. Paul says that it is just as much as to deny God and Christ
altogether, to revoke your faith, baptism and gospel, and to tell lies,
and to say: I believe that there is no God, no Christ, and that
everything that is said about faith is false. With this you should graft
a joyful heart and strong faith into your heart, if you imagined it and
thought, \"Oh, this would be a terrible, horrible thing, and the most
serious blasphemy, that I should not believe the article, because with
it (says St. Paul) I would also have denied that Christ has risen from
the dead and that God is true; so God forbid that I should say such
things and let such horrible blasphemy come into my heart. Therefore, I
will have no doubt about this article, but I will consider it more
certain than my own life, and I will boldly go away, so that when I lie
in death and rot, I will come forth again, more beautiful and brighter
than this sun.

97\) So this text serves both to strengthen the faithful and to frighten
the others, 2) so that they know how great blasphemy is committed by
those who deny this article. As if he wanted to say: Dear Corinthians,
you must not make a joke or a joke out of it; for if you deny this
piece, you are not denying a small thing, nor a single article, but you
are doing just as much as if you 3) punish God in the mouth, and say:
God is not God, Christ is nothing 2c. But if you think something of God
and Christ (as you must do, where you want to be Christians and have
them preach to you), you cannot deny it. For the consequence will be
that you will have to say, \"Truly, if Christ has preached it through
his apostles, and has proved it by deed, there can be no doubt about it.
Therefore, only be fresh and well\--

1\) Erlanger: dem.

2\) Wittenberger: strengthen.

3\) In the German editions: lügenstrafet.

and drove away on this article, that when we are now long dead and
decayed, and the beautiful trumpet will sound, and say (like Christ to
Lazaro): Petre, Paule, come forth; that we will drive away in a moment
as a spark, more beautiful than the whole heaven, with the whole body
and all limbs brought together again, God grant, we are now burned to
powder, or consumed in water, torn apart by wolves, or eaten by ravens.

**V. 16-19 For if the dead rise not, neither is Christ risen. But if
Christ is not risen, your faith is vain, you are still in your sins. So
also those who have fallen asleep in Christ are lost. If we hope in
Christ alone in this life, we are the most miserable of all men.**

He concludes the previous argument, and pushes it even further and
stronger, and puts everything on one heap, which would have to follow
from it, where one should not be certain of this article in
Christianity, so that he ever keeps his Corinthians firm and certain,
against their false teachers, so that one sees, how they were not
serious, and St. Paul has been annoyed that they have handled the
article so coldly, even doubting some of them so lightly, even
heathenishly. Paul 5) that they have treated the article so coldly and
laxly, doubting it, yes, some have spoken of it so lightly and even
paganly, as if it were nothing at all. There are also many who believe
nothing of it in their hearts and secretly think it is a laughing
matter, especially those who want to be clever and highly intelligent,
as if they measured and judged God\'s word according to their own
understanding, just as the Sadducees and their disciples had sown such
poison among God\'s people in Christ\'s time, and had already broken it
wide open. As it must then follow and go (especially where there are red
spirits who arouse such things and spit them into the people), that the
great part remain in such shameful unbelief, live in the hustle and
bustle, and ask neither for God nor that life, all the same as if there
were neither hell nor heaven, whether they are called Christians and are
baptized.

4\) In the editions: \"a spark\". But otherwise \"spark\" occurs in
Luther only as mMouIinum. Cf. Dietz, Wörterbuch zu Luthers deutschen
Schriften.

5\) Erlanger: \"him\" instead of: St. Pauium.

1138 Erl. si, is7-iso. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1217-wis. 1139

1\) And though they are preached to much, they take it to the wind, and
have their mocking out of it, as St. Paul will take their mocking out of
it afterward.

So here he sets the pieces one after another, and moves them around per
impossibile, as I have said. First, where the dead are not raised, it
follows that Christ is not raised either. Cause: for Christ is also one
of the dead, even the head of us all, and the firstfruits (as he says
afterwards, v. 20), who should rise; and if the article is not true in
him, it is true in no one.

Secondly, it would also have to follow that our preaching is in vain.
For why should we take so much trouble to preach, and risk life and limb
and all kinds of danger, when it would be nothing but a futile, loose,
and useless effort? Just as much we kept silent and left the preaching
chair with baptism, sacrament and scripture. For do you think that this
is why it began, how to force the peasants, how to govern the land and
the people, how to keep house and how to cultivate the land? which the
pagans knew well before they heard about Christ, when reason taught it,
and even necessity forced it, and you must not add to it any scripture
or preaching chair, any gospel, or even any knowledge of God.

Therefore, if we knew no other life, we would keep quiet and let people
live like cows and swine, who themselves know what is good for them; 3)
we would leave it at that, and only preach 4) and leave everything, so
that we would not do so much to create such a being in the world, where
it would be lost, and would serve and help neither this nor that life.
Therefore, if you do not desire or believe in any other life, stay away
from preaching. If you do not want to have God, you must not hear us; we
must not preach to you. For we are not so foolish, praise God, as to
want for nothing.

1\) \"whether they\... are\" are missing in the Wittenberg and in the
Jena.

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Jena.

3\) Latin: qui \"i sx usu ipsorurn sit.

4\) Erlanger: Predigtstuhl. Latin: oonolonibus.

We are not to do this doctrine, or only to govern this body and life,
which we have already seen to be best ordered by the Gentiles and by
reason, but this alone is to be done, how we (after we are baptized)
come from this life to that; to this end we must preach and exhort
daily. If then the resurrection were nothing, it would be a vain and
lost thing.

Thirdly, he said, your faith would also be vain, and nothing but a
loose, useless thought. For if the resurrection is nothing, and yet I
believe in it, what is that but a mere dream, since nothing follows
after it? and all Christianity, from the beginning of the world, would
be vain false faith, and poor enchanted people, who let themselves be
fooled and seduced by a loose dream and a ghost, yea, should suffer all
persecution, plague, and torture because of it; and if they had long
hoped and braved for it, and now should go to it and die, should be so
shamefully deceived. That it is true, as some say, if this article were
false, and nothing were to happen to that life, it would be the greatest
deception that ever came on earth. Just as many consider it a vain fable
and poem what is said about heaven and hell, thought up only to frighten
the coarse rabble, which otherwise cannot be tamed nor kept, and must
make the devil black and hell hot for them.

But nothing is done with this either. For if the people are not better
informed than from such loose delusion, they will remain as they are,
and both 5) live and die like swine, and believe just as much as that
sheriff who said to his priest when he was about to die, and the priest
had long argued with him about the resurrection, and would gladly have
persuaded him to believe it: I want to believe it 6) (he said), but you
will see that nothing will come of it. This is what most people in the
world still think.

104 But he who is a Christian must not stand so loosely with his faith
but

5\) \"both\" is missing in the Erlanger.

6\) In the editions: to wait\" instead of: zewarten or zwarten, that is,
indeed. Latin: in Zrutiuin qui6srn vostri crsNain.

1140 **Eri. si, iso-iss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 16-19. W. vm, 1219-1222.**
1141

1\) If you do not believe, go and find out, and you will soon have
finished with us; but there is one who can put up with your defiance; 2)
and even if you do not believe, he will still find people who believe;
but let us see who has deceived the other.

105\. fourthly, (saith he) if we also be false witnesses, who say and
teach that Christ is risen, 3) if the dead rise not. And just as faith
would be false, so we also would be nothing, but the devil\'s jugglers
and liars, who speak of themselves and make a noise of which they know
nothing, but invent of themselves as loose lying men and evil-doers, 4)
and defraud people of this life and all that they have. Now we are
Christ\'s apostles and faithful witnesses, and can prove that we are
called and sent by God, and preach the truth, that many people,
powerfully convinced, fall to us by themselves, and suffer over it all
that we encounter, 5) so that it is seen that we are serious, and do not
play a joke or a jugglery, as if we were country bumpkins or lottery
boys.

The fifth part, which follows: \"If the resurrection were nothing (he
says), you would all still be in your sins,\" both you and all who have
fallen asleep in Christ, and if Christ were of no help to you anywhere.
For what would you gain by preaching and believing that you have been
redeemed from sins and justified by his resurrection, if such a
resurrection were nothing, and if you should not also, having been
redeemed from death, rise again and live? Would it all be in vain that
you and all Christians from the beginning were baptized, heard the
gospel, and thus lived as Christians who were saved by the resurrection?

1\) Jenaer: other.

2\) \"to endure\" here probably as much as: to expel. Latin: qui
tsrooiurn tu um faoils eosreskit.

3\) Wittenbergers: we testify to God, because we say and teach that he
raised Christ, whom he did not raise, because the dead 2c.

4\) The words: \"as loose \... . Bösewichte\" are only in the Erlanger,
but are missing in the other editions, also in the Latin.

5\) The words: \"what we encounter\" are not expressed in Latin: nitrite
HON putiuntur.

their Lord\'s forgiveness of sins, and yet have nothing more than the
heathen and the unbelievers, and rush like cattle, which after death are
nothing more. 6) The Lord\'s forgiveness of sins. That would be shameful
to say that Christ is nothing and helps neither the living nor the dead.

The sixth and last is to conclude: \"If we hope in Christ alone in this
life, we are the most miserable of all men on earth. This is also said:
If it were true that no life should follow after this one, I would have
left baptism, the preaching chair and the whole of Christianity for a
good year.

For look at a Christian, and hold him up against other people who do not
believe, who live in drunkenness, have and do what they will, and when
they have lived it up, says Job, they go down in a moment, and do not
realize it, never knowing what is right suffering or grief, sorrow and
heartache. We, who want to be Christians, have to suffer all kinds of
plagues and misfortunes, because we are despised, reviled, scolded and
blasphemed, and are so bitterly hostile that the world does not allow us
to live on earth, and we have to wait daily for the worst that the devil
and the world can do to us. Who would be so foolish as to become a
Christian if the future life were nothing? Who could not say: Because
those have such good days and live in joy, I also want to do like the
others. 8) What am I ashamed of, that I allow myself to be so afflicted,
and endure such suffering, treachery, hatred and envy from the world?

109\) Without this, that a Christian must also have so much inner sorrow
and heartache, and suffer eternal fear and terror of death, sin and
God\'s wrath; these are only the right punishments. For that outward
suffering is still child\'s work, and only the ABC of the misery and
suffering of Christians, that the world persecutes them, drives them
away, and proves all kinds of wickedness; but this penetrates, the fear
and sorrow that they bear in their hearts before God\'s

6\) \"the\" is missing in the Erlanger.

7\) Erlanger: \"and not\" instead of: that the world does not.

8\) to accuse oneself - to blame oneself. In Latin: \<4ui6 SM tantuin 6s
ins eonnnsrui - To what have I become so indebted?

9\) Erlanger: \"such\" instead of: eternal. In Latin the latter is not
expressed.

[1142 Eri. si, E s. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the Corinthians.
W. vm, 1222-1224. 1143]{.underline}

Wrath, and fear of eternal death, lest they become companions 1) of the
devil in the abyss of hell, and lie day and night on their hearts, must
fight with it, that they might sweat bloody sweat; that I would much
rather lie in prison for a year, suffering hunger and thirst, than
suffer one day of such hellish anguish from the devil, so that he might
attack the Christians, who nevertheless believe and are certain of the
future resurrection and eternal life, which is ready for them; and again
of the judgment and eternal fierceness over the wicked. And for this
very reason, because they know this, they have no rest until they are
saved from this valley of tears.

For here they have the two ways before them, and in addition the devil
and their own conscience against them, which tells them that they are
not pious, and has the Scripture as a witness that we are all sinners
and guilty of damnation. The devil can use this to his advantage, and so
wear down the heart that a cold sweat breaks out over it, that he must
struggle and fight to stand against it in faith, so that he does not
sink in sorrow and fear, but remains confident that God is merciful to
him and wants to take him to heaven. The other large group knows nothing
of this, fearing neither God\'s wrath and judgment, nor the devil or
death, thinking nothing else than that if they have died, a cow has
died; but they are safe and cheerful, experiencing no such heartache
anywhere.

For this reason, a Christian is a very miserable person, and above all
that which can be called miserable, 4) that his heart must fry daily in
the fire, and always be frightened and tremble, 5) as often as the
thought of the death and severe judgment of God occurs to him, and 6)
worry that he has angered God and deserves hell, even though he is pious
and well-practiced in the faith;

1\) Erlanger: that they must be journeymen. Latin: quoü sooii 688k
ovAnntur.

2\) \"the heart\" sehlt in the Erlanger.

3\) In the German editions: trefflicher. Latin: innxiwe mi8siAdiIi8.

4\) Walch and the Erlanger: \"misery\". Latin: rniserriinuG.

5\) Erlanger: and must always have a frightened, stupid, trembling
heart.

6\) Erlanger: and must always.

Because the thoughts do not leave him, yes, feel much more and stronger
than the good thoughts. Therefore, one sees some people who are so
highly afflicted and shattered, in such anguish and sorrow of heart that
they can tell no one, and have no pleasure nor joy, nor can they desire
this life.

For this reason, says St. Paul, we would have to be foolish to put
ourselves in such misery, fear, sorrow and heartache, and not be sure of
death and hell for a moment, if we had nothing else but this life. What
could we have on earth, if we wanted to gain the same good as all the
world, that we should become Christians for it, and take such suffering
upon ourselves? Who would bear it, that he should have spent his life in
such a way with vain 7) sorrow and heartache, and get nothing else for
it but this life?

The pagans wisely said: Qui mortem metuit, quod vivit, perdit id ipsum,
he is a fool who is afraid of death, because he loses his own life. And
it would be well said who could do it. For everyone feels this himself,
that with such fear he accomplishes no more than to ruin this life
himself, that it is of no use to him, and will never be happy. As can be
seen in those who are in deep mourning, that they can have neither
comfort nor joy, if one were to give them all the gold, fill them with
the best food and drink, and bring forth all kinds of amusement and
string playing; for they feel nothing of life, but go about with vain
thoughts of death, and are already in death. Therefore they give the
advice: it is no better, than bad all such fear thrown from them, and
with force from the mind, and thought: What should we care for it? are
we dead, then we are dead. Just as they said (as St. Paul indicates in
v. 32): \"Let us eat and drink, today or tomorrow we are dead\" 2c. This
means that the matter is short-sighted, and God\'s wrath, hell and
damnation are purely extinguished.

7\) \"eitel\" sehlt in the Erlanger.

8\) Güldenstück - gold jewelry, also gold embroidered garment.

[1144 Eri. si, is\^is6. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 16-19. w. vin, 1221-1227.
1145]{.underline}

But Christians cannot do this, and cannot be thrown away from the heart
that would like to believe, but only feels stronger the more faith
struggles and wants to strengthen itself, so that it is not sure of life
for a moment, and always has God\'s judgment and the infernal pit before
its eyes. Such must be comforted with this sermon, saying: \"Dear man,
though you feel such things, and it pains you to live like this without
ceasing, and are ever a poor, miserable man; but suffer yourself, and
know that it is to be so, because you are a Christian; otherwise you
would not have the torture. But you must resist it, and hold fast to the
faith that your Christ rose from the dead, who also was in such distress
and anguish of hell, but by his resurrection overcame all. Therefore,
even though I am a sinner, worthy of death and hell, let this be my
comfort and victory, that my Lord Christ is alive and has risen from the
dead to finally save me from sin, death and hell.

With such faith, Christians must soothe and calm their suffering, and
control misfortune, otherwise it would be impossible to comfort a
sorrowful, frightened heart, nor to turn away thoughts with any joy on
earth. But it does, that the man Christ says he is the God and Savior of
the miserable. Not those who live securely in the world without all
fear, but those who fear the devil and hell, let them embrace baptism,
preaching, and the gospel, and so conclude: Because I feel that I am
afraid of hell and God\'s judgment, it is a sure sign that I am also a
Christian, and have something of faith; for he who is afraid of it must
certainly believe that there is hell and heaven. And again, he who is
not afraid of it believes nothing. Therefore I shall comfort myself in
such terror and fear of it, and cast myself about by faith, saying to
the devil and to my heart, Thou dost terrify me with sin and hell; but
Christ tells me of heaven, righteousness, life, and eternal blessedness;
which shall be more to me than all my feelings and thoughts. And always
thus fought and

1\) Erlanger: yes.

The article must be firmly grasped and held, as it will be necessary,
both in life and in death.

So you see that it is true that he says, \"If we hope in Christ alone in
this life, we are the most miserable people on earth,\" and the greatest
fools, that we alone forgive ourselves all the goods and possessions,
pleasures and joys of this life and all creatures, and surrender and put
ourselves in vain and in vain into all the dangers of body and life, and
also into the unspeakable heavy fear of hell, that we must live in all
contempt and misery before the world, and in eternal fear before God. Is
there no misfortune or plague, fire, rope and sword on earth to equal
this plague, and should we willingly give ourselves into it, or remain
in it? Just as much would we do, as the world, and now our rabble: What
sayest thou much of the gospel and faith? If I had money enough to count
2c. But go on, my dear brother, 3) with your troop, and have good
courage as long as it lasts; because you are not a Christian, and
believe nothing of God nor of the devil, you have a good life on the
loose, and no one challenges you. But if you also want to be a Christian
and earnestly strive for that life, you will certainly feel how the
devil will attack you and Christianity with all the creatures he can use
to frighten, deceive and strangle you, so that you may have neither day
nor night\'s rest, and you yourself will have to say from your own
experience that there is no more wretched being nor life on earth than
being a Christian.

For the sake of Christ, all sorrow and heartache are lifted up. That is
why the devil is hostile to him, his word and his rule, and to all
Christianity, so that we must now repay him and not think that we will
have joy and peace here on earth. But to the others he may well leave
good days and peace, though in the end he will reward them as the
executioner does his servant. However, we must always serve him as his
enemies, and daily listen to his spears, so that it is true:

2\) Erlanger: still.

3\) Wittenberger: Gesell.

4\) Erlanger: Baptism.

[1146 E-l. s\>, ISS-ISS. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, \>227-122\". 1147]{.underline}

The more pious people, the sooner they die. For, if God wants to
preserve a pious person, so that he lives a long time, a special power
and might belongs to it, greater and stronger than both, man and the
devil, otherwise he is probably so bitterly wicked that he slaughters
them and strangles them all in one pile, like the poor slaughter sheep.

**V. 20. But now Christ is risen, and has become the firstfruits of
those who sleep.**

\(118\) Then he sets the conclusion to the previous pieces, and
concludes that it is not as one would think by reason that the faith and
preaching of Christians is nothing, and that we are nothing but the most
miserable people on earth, and herewith gives the only right consolation
against such outward sight and feeling. For, as I have said, Christians
must have a greater comfort than gold and silver, or singing and
dancing, and all that the world has. A miser can be comforted with
money, a sick man with medicine, a beggar or a hungry man with a piece
of bread; but a Christian cannot be comforted with any of these. For
because he believes and knows that God has both heaven and hell, he is
soon frightened by God\'s wrath, and becomes a stupid, slain man.
Therefore, when he hears this article that Christ has risen from the
dead, he has no joy or consolation except in that life, that he may also
raise him up and bring him out of death and all unhappiness to eternal
joy.

119 It can be seen that St. Paul was serious and was particularly eager
to preach this article, as he does not push anyone so high as one who is
shrewd and learned by his own experience, that one must stick to this
alone with faith, and use reason together with all five senses, not
wanting to see or feel what one sees and feels: otherwise there is
nothing among Christians but vain mourning, weeping and crying, and one
misfortune over the other. Therefore we must have something else to
strengthen and refresh our heart, so that it looks elsewhere, because

1\) \"den\" in the Jena, missing in the other editions.

2\) Erlanger: \"dem Artikel\" instead of: demselben.

in 3) the wretched, miserable being. Now this happens through this
sermon alone. For to this we are baptized and called, and hear the
gospel: not how to become rich, get and keep goods and honor, which the
lawyers should teach and do; also not how to eat and drink, which our
parents should create; not how to govern and protect land and people,
which belongs to lords and princes, but that we set our hearts on
another life and being, which is not yet present, and yet is surely to
come.

120 Paul therefore saith, Let us be as miserable as there is no man on
earth, and let us be as afraid and as grieved as those things which are
able to terrify and afflict us, death, hell, and all calamities; and let
us be as wicked as ever we can be. But now is Christ risen, not from
sleep, but from death: for he died and was laid under the earth, as well
as others: but he came forth alive out of the hole wherein he was
buried, and hath choked and devoured both devil and death, which
devoured him, and hath rent his belly and the pits of hell; and is gone
up to heaven, where he sitteth in everlasting life and glory. Let this
be our consolation and our defiance. For in the same name we are
baptized, hearing and confessing his word. From him we are called
Christians, and for his sake we suffer all misfortune and heartache from
the devil; for it is not for us, but for himself and his kingdom, to
which he is hostile, and seeks how he may destroy it, and so carry us
along, and make us weary with chastisement, torment and strangle, that
we should let him go.

\(121\) But let us also confidently sit down against him, and say, No,
thou vile, wicked devil, thou shalt not make it so wicked, that for thy
sake I will forsake baptism and my Lord\'s name. If you can defy and
rage at your death, fire, water, pestilence and hell, we can defy this
Lord Christ, who has overcome you, and can choke you again, and cast you
eternally into hell (as he will do), and snatch us alive out of your
jaws. Dar-

3\) \"in\" is missing in the Erlanger.

(148 **Erl. 51, IS8-I40. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 20. W. VIII, I229-I2S2.**
1149

to devour us if you can, or chase us into the jaws of death, but soon
you shall see and feel what you have done, and want to make a rumbling
in your belly again, and tear through the ribs, that you should rather
have devoured a tower, yes, a whole forest. For you also ate one before
and brought him under the earth, who was too strong for you, and had to
give him back with all the shame, even though you defy and blaspheme:
\"He has helped others, now let him help himself. But now he defies with
you again, and has become your death and hell, and will soon overthrow
you completely through us on the last day.

\(122\) Yea, sayest thou, Christ hath well withstood the devil and
death, because he sitteth on high, that no man can hurt him: but what
have I in that? Or, how do I come to this, since I remain behind, and am
now in the power of the devil and death? To this St. Paul finely answers
in one word, saying, \"Christ is risen, and is the firstfruits of them
that sleep.\" For in the word \"firstfruits\" he gives to understand
that it is not he alone, but that more shall follow after. For you must
not regard this man as having been raised from the dead for his own sake
alone; otherwise we would have a poor consolation if he did not
continue, and it would be of no more use to us than if he had never been
made man.

For he would not have needed anything for himself to die, because he was
born without sin and the devil had no right over him, and he was the
Lord of the devil and death, so that he should not have attacked him and
defied him by bending a hair; just as he beat back the Jews in the
garden with one word, saying, \"Here I am\" \[John 18:6\]. But so must
he be regarded, that this dying and rising is to thee and to me: and as
he died for our sakes, and was laid under the earth, even as thou and I
die, and must be laid under the earth; so also he rose again for our
sakes, and hath 1) made change for us, that, as he was put to death by
us, so also he should die for us.

1\) has\" is missing in the Erlanger.

is, so that through him we come out of death to life again; for by his
death he swallowed up our death, that we also all may rise and live,
just as he rose and lives. Therefore he is called quite primitive, the
firstfruits of the dead, because he goes ahead and leads the whole
multitude after him. For where the first is called, there is more to it
than one person, but must be understood to include those who follow
after, the other, the third, and so on, all joined together, as many as
are asleep; otherwise he could not be called the first, if he alone had
risen, and no one should follow after him.

124 And notice that he does not call those who rise after Christ dead,
but calls him \"the firstfruits of those who sleep,\" when he says of
Christ that he rose again, not from sleep, but from the dead. For that
which before without Christ was a true, eternal death, is now, after
Christ passed through death and rose again, no longer a death, but only
a sleep, so that the Christians who lie in the earth are not called
dead, but sleepers, as they will certainly also rise again. For they are
called \"sleepers\" who lie there to awake and rise again, not those who
lie so that there is no hope of their rising again, who are called not
sleepers but dead corpses; so that in the very word \"sleep\" in
Scripture the future resurrection is indicated.

\(125\) And what is more, in calling Christ the firstfruits of those who
sleep, he wants to indicate that the resurrection is to be regarded and
understood as if it had already begun in Christ, indeed, as if it had
already happened more than halfway, that what is still present of death
is to be regarded as nothing but a deep sleep, and that the future
resurrection of our body is not to take place in any other way than as
one suddenly awakens from such a sleep. For the most noble and best part
of it has already taken place, namely that Christ, our head, has risen.
But because the head sits above and lives, he has no more need, and we
who cling to him must also go there as his body and members. For where
the head goes and remains, the body must go with all its members.

1150 Erl. 51, 14O-14S. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1232-1234. 1151

also go and remain with it. Just as in the birth of man and all animals
the head naturally comes forth first; and when that is born, the whole
body easily follows. Now that Christ has gone over, and reigns in heaven
over sin, death, the devil, and all things, and has done this for our
sake, that he should bring us to himself, we must no longer worry about
the resurrection and our life, even though we may go and rot under the
earth. For now it is called no more than a sleep, and is to be done
before him only for one night, that he may awake us out of sleep.

If then I know and believe these things, my heart, or conscience and
soul, is already with Christ in heaven through death and the grave, and
lives and rejoices in it. And thus have the two best pieces, and much
more than half of the resurrection gone. And because he makes the heart
alive and new through faith, he will also drag the slothful wretch
afterward, and put on the robe again, that we may see him before our
eyes, and live with him. For this is his word and work, that we are
baptized into it, and live and die. Therefore we shall surely not lack
it, even as he lacked it not. God grant that when or how we die, whether
in bed or otherwise in fire, water, rope or sword, the devil, as the
master of death and the slayer, will see to it 1) that he strangles us
and works out his handiwork so that we may not choose or paint a death
for ourselves; but as he executes us, it shall not hurt us. He may give
us a sour grape, as one gives to those who are put to sleep, so that
they no longer feel anything; but we want to wake up again and come out
on that day when the trumpet will sound. He shall not refuse, because we
are already more than half dead in Christ, that he cannot keep the poor
womb and maggot sack either.

\(127\) Behold, we must learn to look upon our treasure, and turn away
from the temporal things that are before the eyes and senses, and not be
so terrified of death and of the things that are before the eyes and
senses.

1\) \"wohl\" is missing in the Erlanger. Latin: enixe üadit opernm.

We are not to regard what the world has and is able to do, but to hold
up against it what we are and have in Christ. For our date is based on
the fact that he has risen from the dead, and that we already have life
with him and are no longer in the power of death. Therefore, let the
world be mad and foolish with its pawing and defiance of its money and
goods, and let the devil rage with his poisonous arrows in our
conscience, and put all kinds of plagues on us, so that some may be our
glory and defiance, that he is our firstfruits, and has begun the
resurrection, torn through the devil\'s kingdom, hell and death, and no
longer dies or sleeps, but reigns and rules forever above, so that he
may also help us out of this prison and death. With the firstfruits
shall be our money, our goods, and all that we have to plead for, in
such a place that neither the devil nor the world can\'t sniff it out.

Why then should we be frightened and despondent, when the devil is
already standing before us, reaching out as if to take everything from
us, strangling our wives and children, crushing our hearts with all
kinds of sorrow and grief, and finally executing our bodies, thinking
that he will have taken everything away with it; but he will not be able
to do that for a long time yet. He may take our life and limb now,
because we are lying here in his inn, where he does nothing but choke
and kill daily, as an executioner or butcher in a stable full of sheep.
And as far as we eat in such an inn, so we must also apply to him. 3) He
gives no other food but pestilence and all disease, and gives no other
wine or drink but poison; therefore we must wait for nothing else but
that he fill us with it, and then slaughter us and skin us. But if he
has already done all this, he has not yet taken anything from us.

129 For this is not our goods nor treasure, which we Christians have, as
the world seeks and has in this life on earth, but have already kept it
from him, that he might give it to us.

2\) \"neither\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) to give, to pay. Latin: numsranäuln.

1152 **Erl. 51, 142-145. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 20. 21. W. VIII,
1234-1237.** 1153

in this firstborn of the dead, which sitteth above, and is come up out
of the pit of murder, and hath taken away our life and all with him.
Then we defy and mock the devil, saying, \"Since you are so eager to eat
us Christians and think you can get a nice bite, choke us and slaughter
us, fry us and eat us, skin and hair; but lift up the back, and you will
have mustard and salt first. But what do you have more, if you have
already eaten us? You will not have atoned for your insatiable hunger by
a long shot. For you will not find what you seek and desire, which is
our best and greatest part, yes, our whole life and treasure, namely
this article of the resurrection in Christ. With this we are already out
of your teeth and set too high. For the treasure is not with us or in us
(otherwise you would soon have snatched it away), but up in Christ,
where you are to leave it untouched and standing, and have no thanks for
it. What harm is it to us that you are now strangling us bodily? For you
do nothing with this, unless you help this poor maggot out of his
misery, so that he may go where he is supposed to go, where the head,
heart and everything is, except all the misfortune that we daily wait
for and desire. Then thou shalt see and feel what thou hast eaten, and
none but thyself shall be most sore, that the very pestilence and poison
which thou hast given us thou shalt thyself eat and drink again, and
both thy throat and thy belly shall be torn, and thy raving shall cease.
Behold, we must therefore defend ourselves and resist all the terrors of
the grievous enemy, because he can do nothing else but put us to all our
miseries and heartaches, that he may turn our eyes and hearts to this
article only, and to the firstfruits, Christ, that we may not remember
what we are, or what we have, or what we are called. So now St. Paul has
proved that Christ\'s resurrection is the cause that we also have to
resurrect. He now continues and explains this by a similitude, and says:

**V. 21. Because through one man comes death, and through one man comes
the resurrection of the dead.**

\(130\) That is, just as Adam is the beginning and firstfruits, through
whom we must all die as he died, so Christ is the firstfruits, through
whom we must all rise to new life as he rose to the first. For these are
the two persons and two images, which the Scriptures set one against the
other, and which God has arranged in such a way that, just as through
One death passed over all men, and still passes, so through One the
resurrection from death should come. Therefore Adam is an image of
Christ (as he says in Rom. 5, 14, where he further describes and
emphasizes both of them), but in such a way that this image is much
better and different, even the opposite of what its counterpart, Adam,
did. For the latter has inherited nothing but death on all men, so that
both he and we must remain in it, and no one can escape it. But if this
were to be remedied, God would have to send another man to bring us out
of death and back to life.

131 Thus St. Paul sets these 1) two images against each other. Paul sets
these 1) two images against each other, and thus wants to say: That
through one man, who is called Adam, so much is established that all men
must die, both he and all of us together, who have neither done nor
forfeited sin, but only because we are born of him, come into sin and
death (although after the fall, and when we are born, it is no longer
someone else\'s sin, but our own), that is a pitiful act and a terribly
horrible judgment of God, and would be even more horrible if we were all
to remain eternally in death. But now God has set another man against
us, whose name is Christ, so that, just as we die for the sake of that
without our fault, so also for the sake of Christ without our merit we
should live; and as in Adam we all have to pay for the fact that we are
his members or blood and flesh, so here in Christ we also enjoy the fact
that he alone is our head; and it is a pure grace and gift that we have
nothing to boast of our works and merit, as our monks and false saints
teach. 2) We have nothing to boast of from our works and merit.

1\) Wittenberg and Jena: the.

2\) Wittenberger: That is why we have nothing 2c.

[1154 Eri. SI, I4S-147. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1237-1240. 4155]{.underline}

For what would we, who were born in sins and belong to death, because we
are of the flesh and blood of Adam, obtain by our caps or other works to
work us both out of sins and death? that we should come forth from dust
and ashes 1) alive, brighter and more beautiful than the sun and all
creatures? This cannot be human power, nor the ability, nor 2) of all
creatures, nor of the angels in heaven, but only of God Himself, and
must be another man who deserves and accomplishes this, who is called
Christ, the Son of God, and Lord over sin, death, the devil and all
things, as St. Paul will say of Him afterwards. He is the one who
obtained this article and began it in Himself, and gave it to us that we
might also obtain it through Him, solely because we were incorporated
into Him through baptism, and called and implanted into this article,
that we might rise and live through the same power and merit as He rose
and lives.

\(133\) Therefore, since these things are not in us at all, both that we
should come to death and eternal life, we have all the more comfort and
hope that we shall have life through Christ just as surely as we now
have and feel sin and death from Adam. For if it were to stand with us,
and be placed upon us, that we should work ourselves out of sin and
death by our own doing, and attain life, we could have no rest all our
days, and would have to toil and trouble ourselves with works without
ceasing; and if we had toiled ourselves to death with them, and a man
could accomplish all the holiness of the world, we could not be sure nor
certain that we had done enough, and accomplished so much, that God
would have to be satisfied with it. Therefore, God has given us grace
and placed it in the hands of a man who has already acquired and
accomplished everything without us and before us, so that 3) it is
certain for us and cannot be lacking, so that we come to it innocently,
and nothing that we do or are able to do helps us to attain grace and
resurrection, even if we have not attained it.

1\) \"should\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Erlanger: and.

3\) Erlanger: da.

Do and ought to do good works, just as we, through no fault of our own,
come to be sinners and must die. For we have done nothing to cause him
to eat the apple and fall, though we ourselves sin after the same. And
so everything that concerns sin and righteousness, death and life,
remains in the two men alone, as he now goes on to say.

**V.22. For as in Adam they all die, so in Christ they will all be made
alive.**

St. Paul speaks no more here than of those who are Christians, whom he
wants to teach and comfort with this article. For even though 4) all
unbelievers must also be resurrected, it will be neither comfort nor joy
for them, since they will not be resurrected to life but to judgment.
Therefore, even now it is not a comforting nor 5) joyful sermon to the
world and godless people to hear about the article, as I felt in myself
when I wanted to be a holy monk and was most pious, that I would much
rather have heard about all the devils in hell than about the last day,
and my hair stood on end when I thought about it. For if it were not for
the fact that all the world is so minded that it does not like to
forgive itself of this life and die, and is frightened when one speaks
of death or that life, we are all stuck in the mire of our own holiness,
and thought that with our lives and works we should satisfy God\'s
judgment and earn heaven, and yet we have done nothing with it, except
that we have only become worse and more hostile to that day. I will keep
silent about the other great, crude multitude, who only seek their joy
and comfort here, despise God\'s word, and do not give a penny for God
and His kingdom.

135\) Whether such people have this 7) plague that they do not like to
hear about the blessed resurrection, that is not a miracle; but to us
this sermon is vain comfort and joy, because we hear,

4\) Wittenberger: like.

S\) \"nor\" is missing in the Erlanger. Instead of \"none\" it says:
\"not one\".

6\) \"have\" is missing in the Erlanger.

7\) Instead of: \"such people these\" has the Erlanger: \^e such.

1156 **He.. Sl, \"7-I4S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 22. w. VIII, 1240-1242.**
1157

that our best treasure, which we have to rejoice in, is already up in
heaven, 1) and no more than the smallest piece remains behind, which he
will also raise up and drag down as easily as a man wakes up from sleep,
so that there will be no more sorrow or woe, and neither the world nor
the devil will afflict and afflict us any more, but because they now
persecute and torture us, then the game will be turned around, so that
they will cry out woe and pain forever, but we will rejoice forever. For
since Christ is to be a judge of both the pious and the wicked, they
must also come forth on that day to receive their judgment and
punishment for what they have done to Christ and to us, out of
unrepentant, devilish wickedness.

But it is a ridiculous sermon that St. Paul preaches here, where both
death and eternal life come from, and it can be considered a great,
strong lie, given prudent reason and worldly wisdom, that the whole
human race should die all at once for the sake of someone else\'s guilt.
For it seems too unreasonable and incongruous that God should attack the
game so expensively, and should take such a serious stand with his
judgment, that because Adam bites into an apple, he should have caused
so much that all men after him, until the end of the world, must be of
death. But what shall we do about it? That death comes upon us, we all
see before our eyes; but that it comes from a small sin, that is too
strange, and is indeed unequal, if one should strike it out with words,
and hold it against each other. For he has not yet committed murder or
adultery, nor stolen or robbed, nor blasphemed God, or anything like
that, as the world is now full of blasphemous, horrible sins, but
nothing more than having bitten into an apple, persuaded and deceived by
the devil, through the woman. Must one then (says reason) think so much
of the one apple, that the whole world should reward it, 3) and along
with so many fine ones,

1\) Erlanger: \"we have our best treasure \... in heaven\"; and
immediately following: \"back there, that he\".

2\) i.e. strange, odd.

3\) Instead of: \"desselben entgelten\" the Erlanger has: \"sterben
muß\", against it is missing: \"sterben müssen\" at the end of the
paragraph. The Latin agrees with the reading of the Erlanger.

wise people, yes, the Son of God Himself, along with all the prophets,
fathers, and saints, must die?

137\. Yes, if it were only death; as the world and wise men say, and
comfort themselves against death, that it is an end of all misfortune;
if something is afterwards that they should have it better (as they
hoped), they also accept it (although they nevertheless could not
conclude anything certain 4) about it 5) and knew nothing at all about
the resurrection): But that we all, for the sake of this 6) strange sin,
should have deserved eternal punishment and damnation, and suffer in
hell, and all through this one guilt, 7) this is much less acceptable to
a man\'s heart, for it seems to be judged too unreasonably and acted
unmercifully by such high majesty, which is the highest wisdom and
goodness.

Now we must all confess (as I said) how ridiculous it seems that we must
die; but that it comes from Adam, that we must learn to believe here.
For no man\'s heart nor wisdom hath devised, nor of himself invented,
that death is a punishment of sins; but 8) all have so thought and held,
as if it were a natural phenomenon, as a dog, or a sow, or some other
beast dieth, or as the sun riseth and riseth, and the grass groweth and
withereth, and 9) all things are by nature corruptible, and fall away as
they came. But the Scripture teaches us that our death and dying does
not come naturally, but is a fruit and punishment of the sin of our
father Adam, who offended so highly against the high Majesty that he,
and everything that comes from him and is born on earth, must be
eternally in death, and no one on earth can escape the calamity, nor
resist it.

139\) But again, it seems to the world so inconsistent and false, even
more unbelievable, that Paul says here, that in One

4\) \"nevertheless\" is missing in the Erlanger, Wittenberger and
Jenaer: gewissers.

5\) So the Jena and the Latin. Erlanger: \"can\". Wittenberger:
\"köndten\".

6\) \"this\" is missing in the Erlanger.

7\) and everything \... Guilt\" is missing in the Jena.

8\) \"have\" is missing in the Erlanger.

9\) Erlanger: \"that therefore\" instead of: and.

1158 Eri. si, Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the Corinthians. W.
viri, 1242-1244. 1159

All men shall rise from the dead, and all things, both death and life,
shall be in one man, and all the world shall neither do nor be able to
do anything, and no man\'s might nor power, no saint\'s life, virtue and
work shall be cause enough for him to rise from death, and badly out of
everyone\'s fortune and merit shall be placed on one man, who was
unknown and despised by the world, and who died most shamefully and
miserably; Let all the world do him honor, and hold him alone to be the
one through whom we are all resurrected, and no holy monk, Carthusian,
even prophet, apostle or martyr 1) do anything to it, nor deserve
anything, with all their being. That is a clumsy thing, if one wants to
think about it. And I myself have often looked at him strangely, and it
is truly 2) a difficult article to bring to the heart, when I see a man
dead and martyred, that I should go away with such a heart and thought,
that we will rise again with each other. From where or by what? Not
through me, or for any merit on earth, but through this one Christ; 3)
and that so certainly and much more surely than that I should be buried
there, or see another buried, which I know very certainly and have
before my eyes. Therefore it is called a sermon for Christians, and an
article of faith.

For what is worldly, it considers to be a loud deception, and concludes
that it cannot be true that God should act and judge so thorougly that
for the sake of one man he should condemn the whole world without
distinction; or again, for the sake of one, make all, without their
doing, 4) blessed. For according to their understanding, if one were to
judge rightly, it would have to be that each one dies or lives for
himself and for his own merit; just as one in the worldly regime 5)
hangs or beheads an evildoer for his own sake.

1\) \"nor martyr\" is missing in the Erlanger. In Latin, \"apostle nor
martyr\" is not expressed.

2\) \"verily\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Erlanger: \"man\". Latin: unius viri, usrnps OUristi.

4\) Erlanger: merit. Latin: irnrnorentss.

5\) \"in the secular regiment\" is missing in the Erlanger.

For the sake of iniquity, since 6) every man shall be saved or enjoyed
for his wickedness or piety, and there is nothing to be said that any
man should die or be given up for another\'s sake. So it would be 7)
right and just in the sight of the world; as it is now the belief of the
Turks, and indeed of the whole world (if it is best), that whoever has
been pious shall rise and live at the last day; and again. But that one
man shall count for all men, and we all die or live by other men\'s
merits, so that all is but of one Father, 8) without any other cause,
that is annoyingly and ridiculously taught and preached.

But it is also God\'s pleasure, who wants to deceive the world and make
fools of wise people, and to do his work in such a way that no one will
understand it. His work so that no one will understand it. For if he did
as I and you understand, and pretended to him, what honor would he have?
Or, what kind of God would he be, who should be taught by us, and should
judge and work according to our wisdom? But now he does it in such a way
that his wisdom remains higher than ours, and we have to give ourselves
up to it, and leave our cleverness, and say: According to my wisdom it
would not be fine; but because you say it, it is right and fine. Whoever
does not want this, but puts his wisdom before and above God\'s wisdom,
and judges him according to it, let him see what he does. But we should
and will leave our wisdom down here, above cows and horses, trees,
houses, fields 2c. Thou mayest be wise, judge, and rule as thou wilt,
and stay therein; but into his wisdom and rule we shall not take hold,
as that is too high and too far from us, because we are under him, and
he is above us, as our Creator and Lord. Therefore let us hear him and
believe what he says, so that he may keep his glory pure, and his grace
and mercy alone may prevail, without all the glory of our merit. 9)

142 This is the preaching that St. Paul likes to lead and do, but it
serves (as I always say) only for the Christians, who are

6\) Jenaer: and.

7\) Erlanger: that would be.

8\) \"therefore\... Father is\" is not given in Latin again\".

9\) Erlanger: without all our glory and merit.

1160 Erl. si, isi-isz. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 22. w. vm. 1244-1247. 1161

They are able to accept and believe in the article, as they feel their
sin and death, and experience and confess this part, how they were
thrown into sin through Adam, and under God\'s wrath and condemnation,
and sentenced to death, and they go and bear with it without ceasing,
and would like to be rid of it. And even though they have no desire to
die according to the flesh, they have the consolation that they would
like to be saved from it, and long for the resurrection, and suffer in
the hope of such horrors of sin and death that Christ will help them
from it, have nothing in their hearts but longing, inexpressible
groaning and crying out with all their might; as St. Paul Rom. 7:24, 25
says: \"Oh, who will deliver me from the body of this death? But I thank
God through Christ our Lord\" 2c. As if he were to say, \"I feel the
death and sorrow that I have from Adam, and it grieves me so much that
my heart wants to melt in my body; but on the other hand I cling to the
man Christ, and take comfort in the fact that I have life through him.

But it is a secret comfort, and feels very weak, to comfort oneself in
such deep sighing and longing, from which the heart beats, and feels
nothing but weighed down and pressed by sin and the fear of death, that
it must cry out, and yet 1) feels no more of it, nor can utter it, than
that he would gladly be rid of it and be blessed, and must therefore
abstain from sighing alone and take his ease. But it is for this purpose
that a Christian may learn to seek the right consolation in such
anguish; not in himself, nor in men, nor in some creatures, but in
Christ, through whom alone so much has been earned and attained that sin
and death, brought by Adam, shall not harm him, but through and from him
shall come into life. 2)

The unbelievers and faithless saints cannot do this, even though they
cry out and are in anguish when their hour comes. But they cannot rise
so high with thoughts, nor bring so deep a sigh from the heart, that God
should and would give them

1\) Erlanger: yet selbs.

2\) Erlanger: kommet.

3\) They are saved through Christ without their merit, but despair of
fear and trembling. For they do not know this doctrine, how one comes
out of death, namely, that it happens only through the one Christ, and
in the meantime they run to and fro with anxiety, now to this saint,
soon to that saint, seeking here a work, there a work. But a Christian
leaves all this to stand, as he has learned and experienced that there
is no help on earth against death, which is innate to us, and must also
bear and suffer it, like the others; and he is well afraid and in pain;
but cries out to God alone with such faith that he will help him from it
through Christ. By this he is refreshed daily until he comes out of this
life.

Moreover, we have the advantage, of which I also said above \[§ 125
ff.\], that death is already nothing in Christ, and a part of the
resurrection has taken place, which is the noblest and best, and we have
also received a taste of it in our hearts through Christ, and, praise
God, have come to the point that the enemy has almost lost his teeth and
his sword. For if you want to reckon it, he has already almost worn out
the world, and drunk the barrel to the lees, executed the largest part
of the human race, the head, breast, belly and leg, and almost also the
foot. For we are now nothing more than the last toes, as Daniel Cap. 2,
41, of the great image. For the four monarchies or emperors are already
gone, along with all the prophets and fathers, and Christ himself with
his apostles and saints. Summa, the largest part of the whole body of
Christianity, and in addition the greatest, wisest princes and lords and
kings, that no more than the last grain is still present, and to do a
little leap; just as when one has almost completely harvested the wine,
since no more than one grape or two remain; or when one shakes a tree,
and two or three apples remain on it, which is still nothing, compared
to the whole autumn and grape harvest. So also death has almost its

3\) Erlanger: of which.

4\) Autumn\-\--harvest.

1162 Erl. si, sol-iss. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1247-124.\" 1163

He is not yet able to get full until he has eaten up the remaining
little bit of pious people completely.

Again, in him and his saints, Christ has already brought about life, and
has directed it almost to the last. For he sits above as our head and
reigns over the whole human race, so mighty and great that all the world
is nothing compared to him, and he already has the noblest part of his
body, that is, Christianity, through faith in his resurrection, so that
nothing more needs to be done than a leap, even a moment, for his own,
who still lie in the earth after the body, to be fully resurrected. For
all of them, except a small number, have been taken out of this misery,
and more than half are alive in Christ, because they lived in faith and
remained in it; as Christ says \[Matth. 22, 32.Abraham and all the
saints are alive in the sight of God (even if they have already died to
this life), because we have one God, not of the dead, but of the living,
so that death has already been stripped of its power, and has almost
nothing left to strangle; for they have now almost all come here, and
now it is near that he will present us all quite alive, and cast death
and hell under our feet. Summa, we are already over the head, yes, over
the back and belly, shoulders and legs from death, and has nothing left
on us, which he can hold, without a little toe, which shall also soon
come through. Therefore we, who have now reached the end of the world,
have the defiance that there is still a little to do, and are now on the
last jump, and before we look around, all will stand with Christ and
live with him forever.

Therefore, if we believe God\'s word, we should not turn away from it,
whether it is ridiculous that St. Paul said here, that as we all die in
one man, so we should rise again in one man. For it has pleased God
according to His divine wisdom and goodness, because we have come into
sin through Adam without our fault, and none of us can help ourselves
out of it, that we on the other hand, through

A man without all sin, restored to righteousness and eternal life. 1)
For he did not intend that we should remain in sins and death, as would
have happened if Christ had not come; so that it is all grace, and we no
longer suffer any harm from dying in Adam, but would have more advantage
and much better life than we had before, if we were not allowed to die;
without that the outward man, that is our blood and flesh, is still
rotten and unwilling to go. For he cannot do otherwise, and is also just
a piece of the same, which is in him in the way, and has brought from
Adam, that he is afraid and afraid of it.

\(3\) But he can take comfort in the fact that he certainly has life in
Christ with all the saints who have gone before, who is already seated
above, and lives for himself and for all of them. Therefore we have
already brought it more than halfway, both in those who died before and
in ourselves; and yet have received all this in vain and for nothing,
that we do nothing to it, unless we are baptized, hear the gospel, and
cleave to Christ; all which is not our doing, but His grace. Just as we
do nothing to fall into Adam without being born of him through 4) father
and mother, and clinging to him as his blood and flesh. For he has led
us all after him, just as he who wants to go up a high mountain, and
falls back down over it, and takes with him all those 5) who followed
him. Therefore, as I came to death through him, so I come to life
through Christ, and for my own sake I must receive nothing unless I
accept or receive it by faith.

This is why grace, comfort and joy are so great here, and greater, than
sorrow and grief there, and this benefit is much greater than that harm.
If one person does me a little harm, and another makes ample
restitution, what do I have to do?

1\) Erlanger: come.

2\) Wittenberger: according to.

3\) In the issues: the.

4\) Erlanger: from.

5\) Erlanger: \"begets\.... to reason\".

[1164 Erl. SI, ISS-IS8. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 22. 23. W. VIII, I24S-I2S2.
1165]{.underline}

It is as if a thief had stolen ten guilders from me and a rich man had
returned a hundred guilders. So if the devil executes my body with all
kinds of plagues, Christ will restore it to me, much more glorious,
beautiful and clear than the bright sun. Therefore, we must not consider
how reluctant we are to die, but rather, we must put into our hearts the
joy and pleasure that will follow in that life, which will be
unspeakably greater and more glorious than this harm and sorrow that we
now have from Adam.

**V. 23: But each in his own order. The firstfruits of Christ, then
those who belong to Christ when he comes.**

150 St. Paul does not deal here with the question of whether some more
have been raised from the dead and are with Christ in heaven, but speaks
only of Christ as One Man. For he wants this article alone to be pure
and clear according to its substance, that the one man, Christ, is to be
an origin and beginner of life or resurrection. Therefore, whether some
saints before Christ, as Enoch and Elijah, ascended into heaven, or were
raised by him, or were raised with him, this is not the issue, since it
is not a matter of private resurrection, as one or two were raised, but
of the common resurrection, and of the head or cause of it, which is
Christ. For whether some have been specifically resurrected is not my
concern, but it is very important that we know that Christ has been
resurrected, and how 1) through him we also are to come and remain where
he is.

151\) He adds these words to this opinion, and holds together Christ and
all of us who are to rise from the dead, 2) that he is the head and the
beginning. This is what he says: \"Each in his own order,\" that is, one
after the other: first Christ, then us. And with this he also meets his
mobs, who give him the hair of the dog in this article, with all kinds
of gossip, and some said that

1\) The following reads in the Erlangen edition, agreeing with the
Latin: \"or if we are to come to it, namely, that we are to be led by
him out of thy valley of tears, and come where he is.\"

2\) \"so\" is missing in the Erlanger.

Resurrection would have happened long ago, and 3) not to wait until the
future. And they said: We hear that thou sayest how Christ is risen, and
wilt conclude that we also shall rise again; yea, when shall it be, or
which shall rise before or after? For we do not yet see anyone who has
been resurrected, not even Christ Himself. So they turned the article
into a joke and a mockery, as if there were nothing to it, or if it had
happened only spiritually. To such he will answer, saying, \"Yes, my
dear, let it be thus set before thee, that thou mayest look upon it as a
cow looks upon a new gate. The apostles also did not see Christ rise
from the dead when he hung on the cross and was laid in the grave, and
yet they had to wait for the time: so we also must believe it now, and
not see it, especially because we know that Christ is already risen, as
the head and the firstfruits, and yet we wait until the time comes that
we also should go to it.

For it was not to be so that Christ should take with him all those who
had died before him, nor that he should raise up one by one the
Christians who would die after him, but that he should be the forerunner
and the head, and acquire all the Christians, both before and after him,
so that in their time here on earth, according to the spiritual nature,
they should live in him; and when the time comes, he should come forth
again in one day and take with him all those who belong to him. For he
rose from the dead when his hour was at hand; so when our hour shall
come, we also shall rise from the dead, and follow him. For he will not
raise us up before they all come together who belong to him 4). And
because there are still many who are yet to be born, both we and those
who have died before us must wait until they also come to us, and the
death that now daily chokes us ceases altogether and is taken away; as
he will say soon after.

153\) This means here \"each in his own order\"; that is, that there is
a difference between his resurrection and ours. For this is what the
order demands, that he would be the first to

3\) Erlanger: \"or would be\" instead of: and.

4\) In the old editions: him.

1166 Erl. 51, 15S-1M. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1252-I2SS. 1167

He then gathered together all those who are his members and belong to
the resurrection, so that they all come forth at the same time on one
day, whom he has appointed for this purpose, and live with him
eternally. However, he alone remains primitiae, the firstfruits, and we,
who believe in him, live more than half in him, until he draws forth the
little piece, our flesh and blood, completely. So he remains in his
order, and we in ours, and have a certain hope, because he, as our head,
is gone before us, that the whole body in its time shall follow one
another, and remain where it is. For it shall not be done secretly, nor
in a corner, that one shall rise here, and one there; but it shall be a
public being in the sight of all the world, when both death, and sin,
and all unhappiness shall be taken away, and there shall be life and joy
in all things, and our bodies, with all creatures, shall have new glory,
as he hath promised. Therefore it is not to be drawn here (as I have
said) whether some have been specially resurrected, for with them it is
not yet evident, nor finally 1) in such a nature as it shall then be.

**V. 24. After this the end, when he will hand over the kingdom to God
the Father, when he will abolish all rule and all authority and power.**

When the hour shall come that we who belong to Christ shall rise from
the dead and follow him, then all things shall be accomplished, and the
end shall come, to which the Scripture points, that this worldly life
shall cease with all its miseries and misfortunes, and the grievous
devil with his rule, yea, and also both the worldly and the spiritual
office. Summa, there shall be an end of all things on earth, and that
which we with all the saints have desired and waited for from the
foundation of the world, that God Himself and only He shall be Lord, and
shall reign in us His children alone, and that there shall be no end
thereof, as He Himself interprets and interprets what He means by the
end, saying that He shall abolish all authority and power, and be all in
all.

1\) finally - finally, once and for all. In Latin, this phrase is not
expressed.

For that life shall not be so ordered as the temporal, that there shall
be husband and wife, and children, and house, and farm, and manservants,
and maidservants, and all that pertaineth unto the married state, or
cometh out of it, and rulers, and servants, and all the rest of the
persons and offices that are upon the earth. Husband and wife shall
remain, according to nature and person, but not so that they beget
children, keep house, or handle stomach food, that they have food,
drink, clothes, shoes, etc. All this remains in this life. All this
remains in this life, for which God has ordained the marriage state,
that man and woman must dwell together and bring up children, and after
that rule cities, country and people. For where the married state is,
all other things must also follow, as it brings with it everything that
belongs to the governing of the world. But because it will be no more,
all these things must also cease.

And then (says St. Paul) he, the Lord Christ, will hand over the kingdom
to God the Father 2c. What is this? Does not the Scripture everywhere
say that he shall remain king forever, and that his kingdom shall have
no end? How does it rhyme that he says here that he is to hand over the
kingdom and make himself subject to the Father, and put his crown,
scepter and everything into his lap? Answer: He speaks of the kingdom of
Christ now on earth, which is a kingdom of faith, in which he reigns
through the Word, not in a visible, public way, but is like seeing the
sun through a cloud, where you see the light, but you do not see the sun
itself; but when the clouds are gone, you see both light and sun at the
same time, in one way. So Christ now reigns with the Father undivided,
and is one kingdom; but the difference is that it is now dark and
hidden, or veiled and covered, even in faith and in word, that one sees
no more of it than baptism, sacrament, nor hears of it than the outward
word; this is all his power and might, by which he reigns and executes
all things.

157 We would also like him to rule like emperors or kings, with outward
splendor and violence, and to strike with fists among the wicked, but he
will not do it now, but will rule secretly and invisibly, in our hearts,
by word alone, and through

1168 Erl. si, iso-iss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 24. w. vin, ress-rM. 1169

To protect and preserve us in our weakness against the power and
authority of the world. And so the kingdom here on earth is the kingdom
that will be in heaven hereafter, without being covered up now and not
before our eyes. Just as a florin in a bag or pocket is a real florin,
and remains the same when I draw it out and have it in my hand, without
it now no longer being hidden; so he wants to bring out the treasure
that is now covered up for us, so that we no longer know anything about
it, without us hearing and believing, and publicly present it before the
eyes of all the world. Nevertheless, we have the same treasure for
certain, just as a merchant, if he has seals and letters, is as certain
of his money as if he had it in his pocket; So that here it is in faith
alone, through Word and Sacrament, that I hold without doubt that we are
God\'s children, and the Lord Christ\'s kingdom, and he our King, who
rules and protects us against all enemies, and helps us out of all
troubles, even though we do not see it, but feel the contradiction, that
sin presses us, the devil terrifies and torments us, death strangles us,
the world persecutes us, and everything overpowers and oppresses us. But
we are told not to see it, but to believe it; Do not grasp it with your
five senses, but keep them closed, listening only to what God\'s word
says to you, until the hour comes when Christ will put an end to it and
present himself publicly in his majesty and dominion, when you will see
and feel, what you now believe, sin blotted out and drowned, death
abolished and taken out of sight, the devil and the world at your feet,
and will be a manifest being with God, and everything clear before your
eyes, as an uncovered treasure, as we now desire and wait.

This is what St. Paul means when he says that Christ will deliver up the
kingdom to God the Father, that is, he will set aside faith and the
hidden nature, and present his own before God the Father, and thus set
us manifestly in the kingdom which he has established and is now daily
driving, so that we shall see him without cover and darkly, in the
clearest way; and it will then be called, not a kingdom of faith, but of
clarity and public nature. And although there is a

lei kingdom is both Christ\'s kingdom (who became man for the sake of
Christ in order to establish faith in Him) and God\'s kingdom (for he
who hears Christ hears God the Father Himself), but it is now actually
called the Lord Christ\'s kingdom, because God is now hidden in His
majesty and has given everything to Christ to bring us to Him through
His word and baptism; in addition, He has hidden Himself in Christ, so
that we should not seek and know God anywhere but in Him.

159\. But there it will actually be called God\'s kingdom, after Christ
has accomplished everything that he is to accomplish, and no longer
reigns under our weakness and repulsiveness, but has put away death and
sin, and everything that is against God, and has brought us to see him
with the Father in the divine majesty, and will no longer need his
gospel, baptism and forgiveness of sins, nor learn to recognize him, or
be afraid of 1) some calamities, but will be with us in the present,
visible being, the same God, eternal righteousness, blessedness and
life, and will communicate all these things to us, so that we will be as
he is.

160 Thus he himself interprets and explains it with the words that
follow: \"When he shall abolish all rule, and all authority, and all
power,\" 2c., that is, he shall put an end to everything, both to the
spiritual regime that he now leads in the world, which is baptism, the
chair of preaching, the sacrament, the key or absolution 2c., and also
the secular, with its statuses and offices, as father, mother, child,
servant, maid, lord, prince, peasant, burgher 2c., that one will not
need any of these. For since the spiritual regiment of word and faith is
to cease, the Emperor\'s and Master Hansen\'s with the sword must also
be gone, and only the one thing will remain, which will be called
God\'s: he will be himself, preacher, comforter, father, mother, lord
and emperor; and everything that we now have to beg piecemeal, here from
the father, there from the emperor and 2) princes, or spiritually from
the pastor and 2) preacher, will be there all at once in one heap.
Because now you have to beg some-

1\) Erlanger: Wider.

2\) Erlanger: or.

1170 Erl. S1, 16S-I64. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1257-1260. 1171

The father gives life and food; the emperor or prince gives peace and
protection; the schoolmaster gives art and teaching 2c. There, however,
nothing more will be needed, except that one has Him; then everything
will be there, which we now have to seek from many, and with great
effort and labor is obtained and maintained.

He nevertheless speaks of the two, the spiritual and the temporal
kingdom, with a difference. For of the spiritual kingdom he does not say
that he will abolish it, but that he will hand it over to God, so that
it will remain; but of the temporal kingdom he says that he will abolish
it and bring it to nothing. For the same is decreed, not for the sake of
the pious, but for the sake of the wicked, that their wickedness and
evil may be prevented and guarded, that the pious may abide before them
and have peace. When they are executed, he will also have to throw away
the same office and all that belongs to it, sword, gallows, death; but
this will remain, so that we will be able to boast and say: I loved God
and His word, and was baptized and became a Christian, and served my
neighbor through love. On the other hand, those will have to say: Now
our kingdom is over, and we have nothing of it everywhere. For it is
ordered for the sake of temporal life alone, and nothing yet belongs to
heaven; just as the spiritual government is directed solely so that we
may attain to that life. Therefore this temporal life will be abolished
altogether, and will be nothing more; but the spiritual will be changed
into a better and perfect being, that we may have all things eternal and
present, which we now wait for in faith.

162 But he uses three words when he says, \"All rule, all authority, and
all power; each may distinguish them as he wills. I distinguish them in
this way, so that he expresses three things that belong to the
government. For in every temporal authority one must have these three
parts. The first and highest he calls principatum, dominion, which is
the overlord, as the emperor in his empire, a prince in his country, a
count in his county, or also a mayor in a city, as the head from whom
all orders proceed. The other: potestates,

The first is the authority, i.e., those who take orders from the higher
authorities and have the power to give further orders, as officials and
judges. The third: virtutes, authority, who do it and execute it, as the
lords and princes servants, master Hans and city servants in cities. For
if both justice and punishment are to be carried out, people must be
employed to do this and carry it out. But if it is to be carried out,
then there must also be people who carry it out and call it ex officio.
But those who are to do it must also have a higher command, and not do
it out of their own head. Where this order exists, it is right that the
overlord orders and commands, the commander is called and commands, and
the servant orders and does.

So it must also be in a household regiment; there the husband must be
lord, and command the son or daughter what the servants are to do, so
that the command from the father of the household, as the head, goes
through the wife or child and servants. These are the three things that
St. Paul calls rule, authority and power; these are to be abolished in
all estates and regiments as far as the world goes, the highest with the
lowest and middle, so that we will all be equal, and no difference among
emperors, kings, nobility, citizens, peasants, and God alone will be
everything.

He shall do all these things (saith Paul), not we, nor the spiritual
leaders, who pretend that all things are equal, and that no man is above
another; who would abolish all authority, and take from Christ his
office, who alone shall do it. Therefore it must remain until he comes;
just as the spiritual offices, the preaching chair and baptism remain,
yes, as the sun and moon in the sky must remain. Therefore, no one
should oppose it, nor should he be obliged to change it. He will do it
himself without means, and say to emperors and princes: \"Be no more
emperor, prince, father, lord, wife,\" and no man shall rule or reign
any more, but all the world shall be subject to God alone.

**V. 25 But he must reign until he puts all his enemies under his
feet.**

If anyone should say, \"Why did he not do this soon after he was raised?

1172 **Erl. 51, IS4-1S7. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 25. W. VIII, I2M-I2W.**
1173

When he has already become Lord over all things, will he put all things
under his feet? Answered St. Paul, \"It is written, that he shall rule
and reign, beside the world\'s authority and government, by his
spiritual government: The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right
hand, until I put thine enemies under thy feet. Psalm 110:1 This is our
consolation, and it is good for us that he did not strike so soon among
the enemies a thousand years ago, but spared until we also came near;
for they are not yet all born who belong to his kingdom. But he must
rule, that he may gather the children of God together, as the Scripture
elsewhere says. Therefore he must first make his kingdom complete, not
before he destroys his enemies, but until he brings in all who belong to
it. After that he will abolish it all at once, and strike it in three at
once. Nevertheless, he lets his word be preached, and rules Christianity
spiritually, with word, sacrament, faith and spirit, among his enemies,
who press and afflict us, and keeps and protects us against them, with
the certain comfort that he will put them under his feet on that day,
even though he has already begun to do so and is doing it daily. For
through the gospel and Christianity he spiritually beats the mobs and
drives back the devil, pushes the tyrants from their seats, quells the
raging and fury of the world, takes away the power and authority of sin
and death 2c. This is his work, which he does and deals with until the
last day, without doing it now piecemeal and individually; but there he
will suddenly push the bottom out of the barrel, and put an end to it
all.

166 Thus we see how, from the beginning of Christianity, he has roiled
in the world, throwing the country and the people under the gospel,
overthrowing and reversing all who opposed it: here he raised up a king,
there he drove out a tyrant; as he has also now, in our remembrance,
often demonstrated mightily in such, and will do even more. For that is
why he begins to afflict them here, so that he finally removes them
there. For they also have the heartache: Because God has given them
dominion and authority, to rule over body and goods, that

They are to compel and punish the wicked, disobedient and unruly, keep
peace and protection for the pious, so they attack God Himself, misuse
their commanded office to plague and persecute the pious Christians 2c.,
do not want to hear the gospel nor suffer, blame it as if it brings
turmoil and destruction of the country and people. And so it happens 1)
but who is to blame? No one but themselves, because they do not want to
carry out the ministry commanded and imposed by God to punish the
wicked, and submit to punish God\'s children, and become disobedient and
rebellious against Him.

167 And it serves them right, that they thus run and are overthrown in
their own power. Just as God in Christ overthrew death and the devil,
they also had the power to catch and ensnare sinners with their nets;
but when they wanted to fall on Christ with their nets, they thought: I
have devoured her so much, I will devour this one also, they ran and
burned themselves. For he was not the game that belonged in their net,
and they were forbidden to attack him; therefore he passed through, and
rent the net, that it could no longer hold a Christian. \"For it was
impossible (saith St. Peter Acts 2:24) that He should be kept.\" So it
is also impossible that He or His own should let themselves be held by
the world, even though they cast the net over them, and have it in mind
to strangle them. But he goes to them and snatches them by their power
and force, and everything that wants to hold him, and makes a torn and
pierced net out of it; for he wants to be uncaught and unrestrained by
everyone. The world shall see and hold the peelers and knaves with its
net; but where it goes further, and wants to hold him, he goes through
it as through a spider\'s web, tears it away so that nothing remains of
it. As he did to the Jews in the first place, that they kept neither
land nor city, and were so utterly torn that they could not see a fox,
nor even a hound. For they would not be satisfied with the power that
God had given them over the land.

1\) indeed - verily. In Latin: vsrs.

1174 Eri. si, is7-isg. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, isez-i\'ss. 1175

the wicked, but attacked the pious, let go of Barabbam and wanted to see
and kill the Son of God Himself \[Matth. 27, 26. Marc. 15, 15. Luc. 23,
25.\].

The same happened to the Romans and the Greeks, who did not want to
remain in their commanded office, but captured and strangled the
Christians, leaving all idolatry and mischievousness unpunished. That is
why he broke them in such a way that it was destroyed 1) and ruined by
the Goths, the Wends and the Turks. The same will happen to us, because
our lords and princes, regardless of their office, rage against God\'s
word and persecute, chase away and murder the Christians, as if they had
nothing else to do, but to prove their authority and power against God;
otherwise they can suffer and let go all evil and wickedness; so that he
will also say to them: Thou shalt see villains and evil-doers, and there
punish them speedily, and set up thy office; then thou goest to with thy
mad head, and wilt see my word, which confirmeth thy office, and maketh
the people pious, and shoutest hostilely, that it maketh strife and
sedition, when thou thyself rageest against God, and livest most
shamefully. And because thou wilt have it so, thou shalt also have
enough sedition and discord, that thou shalt not keep a regiment nor a
land that is not rent asunder.

And indeed, he has already begun it over the Gospel. How in a few short
years the country of Hungary, and now Austria, has been torn apart and
ruined, both by enemy and friend, which neither they nor no one could
have foreseen! And how Germany stands now, that no one knows what will
become of it! For they are also struggling for it, and are so overdoing
it that they really deserve it, as those who knowingly rage against
God\'s word and known truth, that God can no longer suffer, and, as I
fear, will all too soon rumble among us, and tear the net with his dogs,
so that neither stocking nor head will remain of it. For he has now so
far turned back so much land and cities, which are also

1\) In the old editions written: \"zuloddert\", i.e. torn, spoiled,
ruined. Walch and the Erlangen edition: \"zulodert\".

2\) Stocking - hull.

The four great empires of the world, of which Daniel chapter 7 says,
were torn apart one after the other and finally destroyed, so that now
there are no more than the yeasts that he can destroy the last and
smallest piece soon. Without him having destroyed one thing after
another, one by one and one by one, and still destroying and striking
down our enemies, so that it is not thought that he is dead or even
powerless, as if we had no Lord to help us. That is why he tears and
throws it down piece by piece until it falls in a heap. Then it will be
found that it was our fault that the worldly authorities and government
have perished; not of the gospel, but of our great ingratitude and
contempt for God\'s word and grace, that we do not suffer him to be our
Lord; and because we will now hear neither warning nor cursing, he will
hear neither lamentation nor crying.

**V. 26. 27. The last enemy to be lifted up is death, for he has put all
things under his feet 2c.**

This is a fine, sweet text, and a comforting gloss, that it calls death
the last enemy of Christ. So I could not have crossed out this text,
that this word \"enemies\" would have to be interpreted as far as he
interprets it here to death. For otherwise the words, according to the
first appearance, read of the Jews and Gentiles alone, who plague the
Christians on earth; but St. Paul makes a lovely picture, as a right
painter and picture carver, and paints death as one should paint it, and
includes it in this saying of the Psalm \[Ps. 110:1, which says, \"Until
I make Your enemies Your footstool,\" so that we may learn to look upon
and know our Lord as an enemy of death, whose kingdom is set up to
strike at death and throw it under Him until He finally executes it. So
I like to hear him preach that he is not such a man who is angry and
punishes and treats people with cruelty, but that he is a king and has
taken his kingdom to fight with all his might.

3\) \"one\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

1176 Erl. 51, IS9-I7I. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 26. 27. W. VIII, I2K5-I268.
1177

against this last enemy, until he also puts him under his feet, that
this saying should be written cheaply with letters of gold, and should
always be a model for Christians.

Note that Christ is called an enemy of death, and again, death is called
Christ\'s enemy; and as he executes other his lesser enemies on earth
one by one, as I said above (165 ff.), so he will also execute this
great enemy. For he has also proved such enmity by the act of trampling
him underfoot in his own person, that he is no longer able to do
anything against him. And as he hath trodden him under foot, and
overcome him for his own person, so will he overcome him, and even
destroy him for all his kingdom, that he shall be laid at the feet of
all, rent and broken, that nothing shall be seen of him any more.

That is, the kingdom of Christ is rightly painted and gloriously
extolled, and the Scriptures powerfully interpreted, that he sits at the
right hand of the Father, and in office, contending with death, and
casting it under foot for all Christendom, as he has already done for
his own person; but not yet with us, but beginning now, and continuing
daily until the last day, as I said above \[§146\], that a Christian is
already more than half out of death. For his life on earth is nothing
but death; as soon as he is baptized, he is thrust into death, as St.
Paul Rom. 6, 4. And all who accept Christ are already sacrificed and
condemned, as those who have already died, and are waiting to be
resurrected, and are to learn their state and nature in comparison with
the life of the world, which is nothing else than a walk to death; yes,
like those who walk backwards to the grave, because they live in a rush,
and pay no attention to death, until they suddenly fall into it.

But a Christian is put to death by the very fact that he has become a
Christian, and bears himself with it every hour, wherever he goes and
stands, must wait for his every moment, because he lives here, since the
devil, the world and his own flesh give him no rest. But he has the
advantage that he is already out of the grave with his right leg, and
has a mighty helper who gives him his hand.

Namely, his Lord Christ, who has long since come out, and has taken him
by the fist, and has pulled out more than half, so that no more than the
left foot remains behind. For sin is already forgiven and wiped out,
God\'s wrath and hell are extinguished, and he already lives in and with
Christ according to the best part (which is the soul), partaking of
eternal life. Therefore death can no longer hold him, nor can it work on
him, without the remaining part, the old skin, flesh and blood,
decaying, so that it also becomes new, and can follow the soul;
otherwise we have already passed through into life, because Christ and
my soul is no longer in death.

The world knows nothing of such consolation and defiance, though they
boast and defy that they have much money and goods, great honor,
friendship, power; but tell me one who with all this could resist death
or work his way out. There has not yet been one who has taken with him a
thread or a hair, nor a grain or a drop of water. There they must lie,
cannot help themselves with a breath, and would probably lie there
forever in unpleasant stink, if one did not bury them under the earth.
And there is no worm so powerless that it is not mighty and eats away
the body. No king has ever become so rich and powerful, who would have
brought away a penny of all his crown and power, but must leave
everything they have ever had 1) out, and thus leave themselves
completely bare in the grave.

\(175\) But we, though some have not already come to life again with
Christ out of death and the grave, have a man who took all things with
him out of death, and lost nothing by his death, (2) and left not a hair
in it; yea, in the same he drew all things to himself (as he himself
says) and made them subject to him, so that we also must come out in and
through him, and also draw to ourselves all things that we leave here.
Of this we can boast and defy, contrary to all the world, even if it is
of faith.

1\) \"have\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) The words \"nothing - lost\" are missing in the Wittenberg and in
the Jena.

1178 Erl. SI. 17I-17S. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1288-1\'71. 1179

and Christianity, and rely on the fact that they now have enough money
and goods, and live as they please in their avarice and all kinds of
lusts. But it is said, \"Scrounge, be stingy, and gather confidently; it
is he who overpowers another that counts. If you have money and goods,
power and everything you desire: Defy, that thou mayest take with thee
one farthing. But I will show you a Lord who has left nothing everywhere
behind him in death, but has torn out everything purely, and gives me
his hand so that I can also tear myself out. Give me such a man also in
all the world, who ever took a thread with him, or brought it out of
death. What is the use of your pawing and throbbing over such a trifling
thing, that you are not powerful for a moment when death comes, as if
you wanted to have it forever, or to take everything with you?

176 Behold, thus he teacheth us to defy death by faith in Christ, as he
is a mighty enemy of it, that 1) he will purely destroy it, and utterly
destroy it. As he deserved, because he ran against him without cause and
attacked him to devour him. But he ran against him so that his throat
and belly were torn apart, and he must pay and restore all that he ate.
Now this, as I have begun to say, serves as a consolation against daily
temptation, so that one may learn to look at and picture Christ
properly, and not be frightened by such images and thoughts, inspired by
the devil, which want to make us sad and sorrowful, but can conclude
that this is not Christ (as the stupid conscience fears and thinks), but
Christ\'s enemies, the sorrowful death and devil. For here you see that
Christ is a king for this very reason, that he in short wants to destroy
death as his enemy; therefore it must certainly follow: What happens to
me because of death happens to me because of the enemy of the Lord
Christ, and it displeases him, 2) as much and more than myself, because
he is not called primarily my enemy, but Christ\'s, my Lord\'s, enemy.
But because I believe in Christ, he takes care of me against such his
enemy, so that what he does to me, he must do to me.

1\) Wittenberger: \"and\" instead of: that.

2\) \"yes\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

I will avenge myself on him as on his enemy; and as he has overcome him
for his own person, so that he may no longer smell or taste of him, so
he will completely destroy him through me and all Christians, so that he
may also be torn apart and destroyed in my body.

For this cause thou shalt not be anxious that Christ should terrify
thee, or afflict thee, as he that hath a desire to strangle or to kill:
but because he is so 3) hostile unto death, he will have neither terror
nor fear, but is hostile unto all that would afflict and terrify us.
This is the comfort that we Christians have in our dear Lord, which the
world does not have, which relies on its own things, and yet can take
nothing with it, but it, and all that it is able, is in the power of
death, and must leave it to him. But he shall not take all things from
us; and though he take much from us, he taketh that which we have on
earth, and keepeth that body a while in his tabernacle; but the soul he
must leave, and that which we have in Christ, and 4) the body at last
also, with all that he hath taken from us, he must restore.

But why does he call death the last enemy? Or, what more enemies does he
have? As we are wont to speak ill of them, so these are the three
enemies of Christ and ours: the world, the flesh, and the devil, which
we feel and understand. For \"the flesh is an enmity against God,\" says
St. Paul Rom. 8, 7. Therefore God will also put it to death (as he says
1 Cor. 6, 13) with its avarice and worry. So it is also certain that he
will turn the world around and has already ordered a fire in which they
shall burn and melt, 2 Petr. 3, 10. Likewise, he has already condemned
and damned the devil to eternal fire in hell; for this is his worst and
main enemy, who causes all misfortunes and plagues against his kingdom,
with lies and murder; item, with terror, despair, unbelief. He has the
three enemies, for they all do and fight against him; so he again
contends with them, and sets his whole kingdom against them alone. He
controls the flesh and its lusts with his word, sacrament and spirit;
likewise he controls the flesh and its lusts with his word, sacrament
and spirit.

3\) \"so\" is missing in the Erlanger.

4\) Wittenberger: on this.

1180 **Erl. oil, I7S-I7S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 26. 27. w. VIII,
1271-1273.** 1181

In this way, he fends off the devil and his poisonous injections and all
kinds of temptations, as well as the world with its raging.

But above these are other greater enemies, namely, the law, sin, and
death, by which Christians are most severely afflicted, without which
the other three would be useless. For if sin and death were not present,
both the world and the flesh, and the devil, would have to leave me in
peace. But these are the right ones, which are hardest for us, and by
which the others press and urge us. For \"the law is the power of sins\"
\[1 Cor. 15:56\], and \"only provokes wrath,\" says St. Paul \[Rom.
4:15\], and is called a manuscript \[Col. 2:14\], which is always
against us; and Moses he calls a minister and preacher of death \[2 Cor.
3:9.\], and his law a law of sins \[Rom. 3, 20.\], which does nothing
else 1) but reveals how evil man, flesh, world and devil are, otherwise
we would not know about it, as St. Paul says elsewhere \[Rom. 4, 15.\]:
\"Where there is no law, there is no transgression.\" But when sin is
revealed, it makes it great and heavy; then, when sin is felt, it brings
death as soon as it is felt.

These are the real enemies, which he names here and indicates from this
text: \"Until I set your enemies at your feet\" 2c. \[But death is
called the greatest and last enemy, because the others are all driven
upon him; and though we are rid of them all, yet he remains and holds us
captive. For if a man be buried, flesh and blood must cease from his
lusts, and can no more tempt him. For no adulterer or covetous man is
seen wandering about when he has died; so neither can the world dispute
him, nor any false doctrine, nor any spirit of the wicked, nor even the
devil himself. So the law together with sin must also leave him in
peace. Summa, these enemies he takes away 2) all with or with this life,
comforts and sustains us through his word, against the world and the
devil.

1\) In the German editions: \"nicht anders\"; Latin: niliil uliu6.

2\) Wittenberger: \"hebt Christus auf\" instead of: nimmt er hinweg. The
Latin stiinmt with our reading.

Item, through forgiveness of sin, against the law and God\'s wrath,
until we have to accept that these enemies can no longer deal with us
except here on earth, and must stop doing so; but death remains after
all, and keeps us in its power, so that we must remain eternally
imprisoned, and cannot come out. But this is our comfort, if we believe
that we have a Lord who is able and willing to undo even this last
enemy, to break his cords and bands, and to destroy and destroy him. And
we should not doubt that because he now puts down and subdues the other
enemies against us, so that the flesh, the devil and the world, sin and
the law cannot overpower us, he will certainly also rid us of the last
one and set us free, otherwise he would not have accomplished anything,
and all the rest would have been lost.

Therefore learn to understand this saying and make it useful to you for
the comfort and strength of your faith, so that you only know how to
reject all six of these enemies and turn them toward Christ, as they are
called and are primarily not our enemies, but Christ\'s enemies. For
they 3) do not particularly contest our nature, because 4) we, for our
own sake and apart from Christ, are already willingly subject and
obedient to the flesh, the world, and the devil; we pay no attention to
5) sin, law, or death, and are even under their ensign. But they are all
Christ\'s enemies, for he is also an enemy to them; whom they seek and
mean, and set themselves against him with all their might. And for his
sake they are also enemies to us who cling to him; and because they are
not able to do anything about his person, they attack us, intending to
weaken and destroy his kingdom.

Because we must now repay him, he must again take care of us, as his
members, and avenge himself on his enemies, so that everything is to be
drawn so that he fights with these enemies and stands in front. Now he
has escaped from the flesh, has risen too high for the world and the
devil, that they never saw him and 6) strangled him, nor 7)

3\) \"For they\" is missing in the Erlanger.

4\) Erlanger: because.

5\) Erlanger: the.

6\) Erlanger: still.

7\) Erlanger: or.

1182 Erl. si, 175-177. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1273-1?76. 1183

otherwise can harm. The law, together with sin and death, also
frightened him, but now they must lie condemned and damned at his feet,
and now he reigns in faith, smiting and slaying the same enemies in us
without ceasing, until that day when we shall see how he will so 1)
completely wear out death that it will no longer be felt, and will not
think otherwise than that there was never any death. Just as we should
now live in faith as if no sin, no law, no flesh and blood, no world, no
devil could harm us, because we have Christ, but should have a very
fine, happy conscience, certain that no one can overcome us, whether
they attack us hostilely, frighten and press us, but that our Lord
Christ has won in us and has kept the victory. And as he has already
slain the other enemies for his own person, but has made them weak in us
and beats them daily, so that they cannot win anything, so also here he
begins to weaken death in us, so that he no longer wins anything in us,
without taking away the broken pieces and only half of what is in us.

This is his work and his rule, which he always carries out, for which
reason he is seated at the right hand of God, as the Psalm says
\[110:1\]; and it is the highest art and wisdom of Christians to know
what we have from him, and to learn to understand our glory, which God
gives us in Christ, and to esteem the treasure great and precious, and
to despise the glory and splendor of the world, of money and goods,
honor, power, 2c. We should despise it, so that it makes a noise before
our eyes, as if it were a precious thing, so that we should leave our
treasure out of sight and forget it. But on the other hand we should be
wise and purify our eyes, so that we may recognize and magnify not only
the treasure, but also the eyes and mind, \"that we may know what has
been given to us by God,\" as St. Paul says in 1 Cor. 2:12, namely, such
gifts as are greater and more glorious than heaven and earth.

184 For what greater or more glorious thing can be thought and desired,
than

\"so\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) not over a city or country or kingdom, but over all our enemies,
flesh and blood, world and devil? which no emperor or king on earth has
or is able to do. For there is no one who can resist an evil thought, or
help so much that the world with its enmity, violence and power cannot
harm us. Yes, if we had the world with all its power with us and for us,
what could it help us, so that it would resist the devil against some
challenge, or resist and succumb? But a Christian alone is such a man,
who is man enough even for the devil and all his angels, just by
remaining in faith in Christ. This is a treasure that has no equal in
heaven and earth, whereas all the world with its wealth is not worthy to
be remembered.

185\. Therefore, we should not let such gifts in Christ be so small to
us, as the world and our flesh consider Christ, who looks upon him as a
bad man, 3) who sits above and does nothing with us, and considers us
Christians to be poor, weak, feeble, miserable people, but rather, as
this text teaches us, that we are lords with him over all that the
flesh, the world, sin, and the devil are able to do, and half over
death, but, as this text teaches us, that with him we are lords over all
that the flesh, the world, sin, and the devil are able to do, and half
over death, and that we have such defiance and hope against all the
world that we Christians are greater and more than all creatures; not in
or of ourselves, but by the gift of God, in Christ, against whom the
world is nothing, nor is it able, and in all its kingdom and
principality has nothing but vain parts, 4) which it must leave behind,
and perish with them.

Behold, St. Paul is able to preach, praise, and magnify the Lord Christ,
that we may see what he is and does, what is his office and rule over
us, that he may go about that we may be made partakers of his dominion,
and be victorious over the great enemies. For he calls and considers
them his enemies, not for his sake, but for ours, and accepts what
happens to us as if it happened to him, as he says in the prophet
Zachariah \[Cap. 2, 8\]: \"He who touches you, touches you.

2\) Jenaer: \"gentlemen\" instead of: a gentleman.

3\) d. i. Popanz, scarecrow.

4\) d. i. Begging pieces.

1184 Erl. si, 177-179. sermon on I Cor. 15, 26. 27. w. vm, 1276-1278.
1185

The apple of my eye,\" that is, \"whoever is an enemy to you, I will
also be an enemy to him. But if he is an enemy, he will save us and
destroy our enemies, for he is powerful enough to do so, so that his
kingdom is nothing else but to help us against our sin, law and
conscience, flesh and blood, the world, the devil, and especially death.
And is called one Lord, not whom we must serve, nor who will take from
us anything, but that he alone may serve us, and fight for us, and
defend us, that no enemy may harm us.

This is the text from which St. Paul also spins and draws an argument to
confirm 1) the article of the resurrection of the dead. For since death
is also called an enemy of Christ, and the last, he must take away death
altogether, and make alive again those whom he has devoured. Cause is as
he said here, and again repeated from the eighth Psalm, v. 7, saying,
\"For he hath put all things under his feet.\" But if all things are put
under his feet, then surely death must also be at his feet, not only for
his person, but for his whole Christianity, for whose sake he is set at
the right hand of God, that it may be his kingdom. And all this (he
says) was not done by himself, but is God the Father\'s work and
business, presented to us for our comfort, so that we may see his
Fatherly heart and gracious will, as he not only means and commands that
everything should be subject to him, but also puts everything under his
feet. 2)

For since he throws both sin and death, as his enemies, under his feet
and makes them his footstool, it is certain that this pleases him, that
sin and death should be abolished, and does not intend to strangle us or
condemn us, even though we are sinners and deserve death, but is
even-minded like Christ, that he will take away sin and death from us
and destroy them, so that we may come to eternal righteousness and life;
for for this reason he has placed Christ in the kingdom. So do not paint
the Son, Christ, alone, as I have shown above \[§186\], but also the
Father most lovingly.

1\) Wittenberg and Jena: shows. Latin: ooMZit.

2\) Wittenberger: thun.

The most gentle and kindest that a heart should desire, that we should
no longer regard him as a severe and angry judge, such as the devil and
our stupid consciences always model for Christians, but as a kindly
Father who wants to help us from all these enemies and takes care of us
as if they were his enemies, so that after his suffering and death he
sets his Son at his right hand and puts everything under his feet.
Therefore, if you believe in Christ, you must not flee from him or be
afraid; for here you hear and see that he has no other heart or mind or
thought than to save you from everything that troubles and oppresses
you, and to set you over all things with Christ.

But he who does not have such faith in Christ can never grasp such
thoughts, but must toil and torture himself to death with his own works,
so that he thinks to reconcile God. For sin and death remain on his
heart as a great millstone, so that he cannot rise above it, and must
remain under it, so that he feels nothing but God\'s wrath, as long as
he deals with works, and for the rest of his life he cannot think a
happy thought, nor can anyone advise or help him, until he even
despairs, and is pressed to death by such an unbearable burden.

\(190\) Thus are all those who want to serve God and deal with Him by
works. Turks, Papists, Carthusians and other false saints cannot regard
God in any other way than as an angry judge who does nothing more than
demand of them and punish them without ceasing. For they know nothing of
the Gospel, which holds Christ up to us and teaches us how the Father
Himself presented Him to us and gave Him to be a mediator, and set Him
at His right hand to take away all wrath, sin and death from us.
Therefore, they must remain burdened with the millstone of an evil
conscience all their lives, so that they can never lift up their hearts
to think a good thought against God. And the more they torture
themselves and fear to help themselves, the worse they make it, because
they want to bring themselves to Christ.

3\) \"the Christians\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

4\) \"for\" is missing in the Erlanger.

1186 Erl. bi, uz-iss. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 127s-iWi. 1187

and only anger God more because they come before Him without the
Mediator. But he who has faith and knows Christ as the man who sits
above and rules over sin and death can be freed from the heavy millstone
of his heart. For he knows that God is no longer angry with him because
of his sin, nor does He condemn him, but has set Christ beside him to
blot it out and destroy it, as an enemy of God, and now sees no more
than grace and life flowing out of the Father\'s heart without ceasing.

191 Therefore let this text be a command to you, that you may know well
the kingdom of the Lord Christ, and that you may give all good things to
God the Father, as He looks upon you kindly and with true favor, because
He creates these things in Christ, and holds them up to everyone by the
Word.

**V. 27, 28. But when he says that all things are subject to him, it is
evident that he is excepted who has all things subject to him. But when
all things shall be subject unto him, then shall the Son himself also be
subject unto him that hath all things subject unto him, that God may be
all in all.**

192\) Then he comes back to it, and concludes that he said how Christ
will hand over the kingdom to God the Father, when it will become a
different thing: from faith a 2) clear face, from the word 3) the
essence, from the dark mind a bright sun; when we will see all our
enemies presently, both of them that we now have on earth, and death as
well, completely executed and destroyed. And the word is always used
that the Father has all things subject to Christ, and that he is
excepted who has all things subject to him, and that the Son, when he
has made all things subject to him, will himself also be subject to him.
These seem to be vain words; but everything, as I have said, is said in
such a way that he makes a distinction between the kingdom of God and
the kingdom of Christ, although in him it is the same kingdom. But now
it is called Christ\'s, that we live here in faith, and do not see him
bodily nor hear him, as one sees a worldly kingdom.

1\) \"to\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Erlanger: \"ins\" instead of: ein.

3\) Erlanger: in.

We see the king sitting before our eyes in his kingdom, with the royal
crown and great, glorious splendor. For it is not yet revealed what we
have in him and are to obtain through the gospel, sacrament and faith.

After this it will be called the kingdom of God, when it will no longer
be hidden, but will be revealed to all creatures, and faith will cease.
Which is called handing over the kingdom to the Father, that is, making
us and all His Christianity manifest before the Father in eternal
clarity and glory, so that He Himself may reign without any cover.
Nevertheless, Christ will remain in his dominion and majesty, for he is
the same God and Lord, eternal and almighty with the Father. But because
he now so reigns by his Word, Sacrament 2c., that the world does not see
it, so it is called Christ\'s kingdom, and everything must be subject to
him, \"but except him who makes everything subject to him,\" until the
last day, when he will abolish everything, and then submit himself with
his whole kingdom to the Father, and say to him: I have hitherto reigned
with thee in faith; this I deliver unto thee, that they may now see me
in thee, and thee in me, together with the Holy Ghost, in one divine
majesty, and manifestly have and enjoy all things in thee, which they
have hitherto believed and waited for.

Then (he says) \"God will be all in all,\" 4) that is, each one will
have in God himself all that he now has in all things, so that when he
reveals himself, we will all have enough in soul and body, and will no
longer be allowed to have so many things as we now have to have on
earth; first, for the necessities and preservation of body and life,
father and mother, food and drink, house and yard, clothing and shoes,
in addition to princes and lords who protect us and make peace. Then, in
the spiritual regiment, pastors and preachers, who teach and administer
the sacraments, comfort in afflictions, and counsel in matters of
conscience 2c.; item. Sun and moon, air, fire and water for the whole
world. And who can tell all that a man has here on earth, for the sole
need of his body?

4\) In all German editions: \"allem\", although the text placed above
this section offers \"allen\".

1188 Erl. SI, 182-18\". Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 27. 28. W. VIII, IL8I-I28S.
1189

must? But there it will all be over, and none of them will be valid
anymore, but will have so much in God that no food, no drink or malt
liquor will be so delicious, nor so good to eat or drink, as God Himself
will do with a sight that you will always be strong and fresh, healthy
and cheerful, and brighter and more beautiful than the sun and the moon,
so that all the garments and jewels worn by a king or emperor will be
mere dung compared to when we alone will be illuminated by a divine
sight. In the same way, we shall have no patron, nor any authority, nor
money, nor goods, nor house, nor court, nor any other bodily
possessions, but shall have all things in him alone; so also we shall
have all spiritual possessions, eternal righteousness, comfort, and joy
of conscience, so that no one will frighten us any more, nor cause us to
err or be troubled. In sum, whatever we now have to take from all
creatures individually and piecemeal, even though it comes from him and
is given to us, we will have him alone without any means, without any
lack or cessation.

But this is not understood by the world and coarse people, who are stuck
in their thoughts of this life, as they are accustomed, and think that
the belly must truly eat and drink, and the body must have its need, if
it is to live otherwise; they cannot understand that God can nourish
better by His sight alone, than all the bread and food on earth, by
which He Himself now also 1) gives and nourishes life, and transforms it
into flesh and blood, marrow and bone 2c. Can he now do this through
bread and wine, which itself does not have life, should he not rather be
able to do it through himself, as the Creator and Lord of all creatures?
What would all food and nourishment do now, if he did not sustain us
through his word, as Christ says \[Matth. 4, 4.\] from the 5th book of
Moses Cap. 8, 3. For if 2) nothing more were added to 3) man\'s body but
bread and wine, he would not last long nor remain alive. The body must
first be alive, healthy and strong, have heat and strength to feed the
food; otherwise it is of no use to feed it all the time.

> 1\) itself\" is missing in the Wittenberg. Latin: ixss. 2)
> Wittenberger: er.
>
> 3\) \"ins\" - in des.

He filled him with bread for hours and poured all his drink into him. As
you can see when a man is sick and cannot eat, yes, in all the people
who die. Otherwise the rich and great lords would gather so much bread
that they would live forever, and no one could get anything before them.

Since we see here before our eyes that bodily food and drink will not do
if there is no God, what will happen there when God Himself reveals
Himself? There we will neither look at bread nor wine, nor be allowed to
desire any pharmacy or medicine, but will have enough just by looking at
it; it will make the whole body so beautiful, fresh and healthy, yes, so
light and nimble, that we will run like a spark, yes, like the sun
running in the sky, that we will be 4) in a moment on earth or up in the
sky. I do believe that everything will become much more beautiful,
water, trees and grass, and even a new earth; as St. Peter \[2. Epist.
3, 13.\] says, that it will be a pleasure to look at; but to preserve
soul and body, that God Himself will do, as He alone shall be everything
in all, and His sight will give more life, joy and pleasure than all
creatures are able, so that you will have to say: I would not give one
moment in heaven for all the world\'s good and joy, though it last a
thousand and a thousand years.

Therefore, as I have said, there shall be no more preaching or parish
office, nor princes or temporal rule and government, and in sum, there
shall be no more office nor estate. The persons, as man and woman, shall
remain, and wholly human race, as it is created; but of necessity none
belonging to this life, but each shall be a perfect man, and have all
things for himself in God, that he shall not need father, mother,
master, servant, food, raiment, house 2c.

Now think for yourself in your heart what you would like to have or
desire. Would you like to have money and goods, enough to eat and drink,
long life, a healthy body, beautiful clothes, a beautiful home, eternal
joy?

4\) Wittenberger: \"and\" instead of: that we.

[1190 Erl. oil, 184-I8S. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, I28S-I28S. 1191]{.underline}

and desire, in addition to perfect wisdom and understanding of all
things, dominion and honor have, then look only here, there you shall
get everything enough. He will clothe thee more beautifully than any
emperor may be clothed, yea, more beautifully than the sun and all the
precious things If thou wilt be a lord, he will give thee more than thou
canst desire. If thou wilt see and hear clearly, 1) through walls and
partitions, and be so light that in a moment thou mayest be where thou
wilt, here below on earth or above in the clouds: all this shall be yes;
and what more thou canst conceive, what thou wilt have in body and soul,
all this thou shalt have abundantly, if thou hast him.

For he may have for himself neither bread nor wine, manservant nor
maidservant, house nor farm, garment nor gold nor silver, ruler nor
preacher, but in himself he has all things eternally sufficient, for he
lives in him and through himself. Why then should he not also do it in
us, that we may have all things in and through himself alone, and may
have as few of the creatures as he may have some others 2)? And as he,
when he looks at the creature, has his delight, joy and pleasure in it,
so also we will not need the creature more than that we have joy in it,
as in a show meal, when we will look at the beautiful new heavens and
earths, and praise and love God in them; but in him we will have all
need and satisfaction.

But this is preached only to the Christians, who should believe it and
wait for the better life to come. The rest of the crowd and the rabble
believe nothing of it. For they are not worthy (because they despise
God\'s word) to recognize it, and God punishes them for going away in
foolishness and blindness, for not accepting it, and His wrath is
already upon them. For this is the highest and most terrible wrath, when
God does not give that one hears His word gladly nor respects it, that
one may not desire a greater plague. Therefore, one must also let them
go, where they cannot be corrected, and order God\'s judgments, because
they already have the curse away, higher and heavier than all men.

1\) Only in the Erlanger is added here: over a hundred miles, yes.

2\) Wittenberg and Jena: some others.

would like to curse them. And because they do not want to hear God, they
will not have Him either, but will be eternally in the hell of the
devil\'s own, have all woes, plagues, heartaches and miseries, burn
eternally, and not have a drop of water, so that they might refresh
themselves for a moment; in addition, they will have no light, 3) not a
handbreadth, not a thread, but will be deprived of both God and all His
grace and gifts, which the blessed will have, and in addition, all that
they have had on earth. Just as it is already the case here that they
will not have to enjoy their good cheerfully and then leave it behind
without giving thanks; much more will they lack everything that God is
and gives. How can they be more grievously and greatly afflicted? And
yet, alas, it is a common plague in all the world, among noble and base,
high and low, that such God\'s word, and what is said of that life, is
everywhere scorned and laughed at, and persecuted to the utmost. There
one sees already the punishment begun, and the infernal fire lighted,
and burning over their necks.

Therefore let such an example be a warning and a terror to us, and
strengthen our faith to think of another life, because we have such
great blessedness and unspeakable goods to wait for after this miserable
life, since God Himself wants to give everything and be whatever we may
desire. For this is His word and promise, so that He may so comfortingly
admonish and stimulate us that we do not allow ourselves to dispute the
temporal things that we have to gain or lose here, but rather learn to
esteem the future, the promised things, as the world despises them; and
in turn despise what it esteems great, be it money, goods, honor,
authority and power, and say: Dear prince, peasant or nobleman, you have
enough now, and defy riches and power, and live in a drunken stupor; but
go, and have a good courage; for such sows belong such dreamers; yet
before God you have nothing, and are despised and rejected. I have not
now your money, nor your goods, nor your power, but I know and wait for
another, of which you know nothing, as God has given me.

3\) \"no light\" is missing in the Wittenberg and in the Jena. Latin:
.VU Laeo nuüaM luosur visuri.

1192 **Erl. S1, 18S-1S8. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 27-30. W. VIII,
I2M-I29I.** 119Z

He has promised to bring me out of the earth and make me more beautiful
than the sun; I will have everything beyond all measure. I will insist
on the defiance, and let you burst forth to the highest, on your worldly
goods, which you must leave here today or tomorrow, and go away
completely bare and miserable.

Behold, we must strengthen and comfort ourselves against the unbelief
and security of the world, that it may cause great distress to the weak,
that we regard not the same, but what he says and promises: Believe only
in Christ my Son, and I will save thee out of death, when the world must
abide therein for ever; and I will give thee all that thy heart
desireth, and adorn thee, that thou mayest shine above all the stars,
when they shall abide in darkness for ever. Let this be better for you,
because you see how the world is defiant about its perishable things,
and despises God and his word much more than we can esteem our treasure
great. For we are also still flesh and blood, therefore we cannot rely
on and defy the eternal, imperishable treasure in God as much as they
despise it and insist on their own thing; but we must do this and graft
it into our hearts so that we always adhere to it and do not fall away
from it or despise it as the world does.

Behold, this is the comfort that we have in that life, that God Himself
shall be ours and all in us. For, if you take for granted all that you
would like to have, you will find nothing better nor dearer to desire
than to have God Himself, who is life and an inexhaustible abyss of all
good and eternal joy. Now there is no nobler thing on earth than life;
and all the world fears no thing more than death, and desires nothing
higher than 1) life. The treasure we shall have in him above all measure
and without ceasing; there shall heaven (if thou wilt) rain thee vain
Joachimsthaler and gold, the Elbe shall flow full of vain pearls and
precious stones, the earth shall bring forth all manner of delight, that
if thou wouldst say to a tree, it should bear vain silver leaves, and
golden apples and pears, and grass and flowers in the field, as

1\) \"that\" is missing, in the Erlanger.

Emeralds and all kinds of beautiful precious stones shine. Summa, in
which your heart will seek pleasure and joy, that shall be abundant. For
it is said that God Himself shall be all in all. But where God is, there
must be all the goods that one can ever desire.

**V.29. 30. Otherwise, what do those who are baptized over the dead do,
if the dead do not rise? Why are they baptized over the dead? And what
do we stand all hours in the road?**

So far he has established and proved this article; now he continues and
scolds his Corinthians for a while, as a preacher should do, both
teaching and punishing the unruly. To say then, Ye desperate red spirits
and heathen men, have ye such a heart that ye believe not that we shall
rise again, even as Christ rose again; what do ye then to be baptized
above the dead? What use is baptism to you, if you hope for no other
life? Just as he said above \[v. 14\]: If the dead do not rise, both our
preaching and your faith are in vain; for if there were no other life,
what would anyone preach or go to preaching? He would just as soon leave
God\'s word alone, as others do who believe nothing everywhere. In the
same way, if the resurrection were nothing, no one would be allowed to
go to baptism. For no one may be baptized for the sake of having enough
to eat and 2) drink, or to fill his coffers and floor. And it is true,
whoever seeks such things alone, may of course have none, and may well
live without God\'s word and baptism, as now both peasants, burghers and
nobles think they can, and may well boast that they may have no
preacher; and would much rather be rid of God\'s word altogether, not
giving a farthing for all the preaching. That is why they have their own
God, in whom they believe; that is their guilders and fat pennies, that
is their life and kingdom of heaven. Therefore it is not possible that
such should like to hear God\'s word, or ask for that life. For I also

2\) \"to\" is only in the Jena.

3\) \"Citizen\" is missing in the Erlanger and in the Latin.

1194 Erl. SI, ISS-190. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, IWI-ILM. 119\'5

Even if I believed (God forbid) that I should die like a cow, I would
never come to baptism, the sacrament, or some preaching. Therefore they
are not to be blamed, because they think nothing of that life, that they
respect neither baptism nor preaching, nor honor pastors and preachers.
For as they believe, so they live; they are and remain swine, believing
like swine, and dying like swine.

205 Therefore he says, \"You must be great fools yourselves to be
baptized when you hold nothing of this article. For where this article
is nothing, let only God with his baptism and Christianity remain where
he wills, and let him keep whoever he wills. For he who so believes does
not believe that he is God, who can help from death, and after this life
has something more for a moment; nor may any word nor preacher, but no
more, than Master Hansen, who is his preacher and God, and who forbids
that one sow should eat another, and when he is dead, should lead him
out, and should shut him up, like another sow on the shingle. After that
they will find what they have despised and mocked, when we again look at
each other with unequal eyes, and we have attained what we now believe
and hope for; but they will have nothing else to do but howl and cry
forever, which will not 1) help them. Just as the rich man Luc. 16, 19.
ff. also did not want to believe, when Lazarus lay at his door, until
faith came into his hand, when he lay in torment, and Lazarum saw in
eternal rest and joy, and would have liked to have had only a drop of
cold water for all his former riches, and could not.

So St. Paul wants to rebuke the rude teachers with these words, who
despise the article out of their sour mind, and yet also wanted to be
taken for Christians. For no Christian is so mad and foolish that he
could not do the very thing that those scoffers consider a peculiar art,
saying, \"Do you think that what the priests preach is true, that we
should all come to life again when we are buried and decayed? Or,

1\) Erlanger: them. The \"Constructiv\" in the text we have given is
common in Luther.

as our sows say: Do you think that there is still a guy in this one? For
this, praise God, does not require a sharp mind, but is a true sinful
art, which even the coarsest of them can do. It was a sin and a disgrace
for these Corinthians to say such things, and yet to be baptized and
called Christians, so that they would have been worthy of being scolded
otherwise; without writing not to the evil spirits and wicked, with whom
all admonition and punishment is lost, but to the small group of those
who were not hardened and could still be converted.

For this reason he wants to rebuke them out of their own doing, because
they let themselves be baptized, so that they do not have to deny the
article of the resurrection. For the two do not rhyme with each other,
that baptism should be something where one would not think anything of
that future life, otherwise those who are baptized would have to be
fools and would not know themselves what they were doing; yet there is
no sow (Christians be silent) so coarse that cannot understand that
baptism is nowhere to be used where the resurrection is nothing.

But this argument, though strong, is of no avail with a scoffer. For he
will soon say: Why do they do it? They are fools. But among Christians
and believers, since one should give another a good example of faith,
and testify of the same faith by baptism and sacrament, hearing God\'s
word and praying, this piece is considered a strong proof, because
Christians are baptized, that this article must be certain. For it is
not possible that so many finer, fomer Christians are fools and fools,
who are so learned and can do so much as the coarse swine, not to say
that they have much higher and more understanding. If you are moved by
what a sow says, 2) why not rather by what a Christian says to you, as
an angel of God?

Yes, that one is a lot. What is that to you? Even if there were many
more of them, they are nothing but swine. Therefore rather see how
pious, how faithful

2\) to scratch - to defy, to throb, to speak hopefully. Latin: xinnnit.

[1196 **He. SI, 190-192. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 29. 30. W. VIU, IMS-12M.**
1197]{.underline}

teaches and understands them, you will find a great difference between a
Christian and such sows who believe nothing. For a Christian knows how
to speak so apparently and powerfully of God and his words and works
that it is not possible that it is false and nothing; but those can
understand nothing more nor higher than any sow can understand;
nevertheless, they want to judge in high things according to their
sow\'s head, to teach and reprove Christians who have more understanding
in one finger than they all have in the whole body, and their sow\'s
art, if it should be called art, could as well as they themselves.
Therefore it is rightly concluded: All Christians are baptized;
therefore another life must follow after this. For baptism and
sacrament, as well as pastors and preachers, serve nothing everywhere
for this life; therefore, if it were to remain with this life, one would
leave just as much baptism and everything in place for Christians to
handle. For you do not get a sack full of florins, nor a floor full of
grain, but salvation from death, sin and all misfortune, and the gift of
eternal life. This is the jewel, the pearl and the precious stone, of
which Christ says, Matt. 13:45, that a merchant found and sold all, that
he might have them.

210 But he adds a little to the word \"baptize,\" that is, pro mortuis.
This has almost been interpreted (as it is in Latin) as if they had been
baptized for the dead, that is, for the unbelievers in the Gentiles, and
thus had been baptized twice, one for themselves, the other for their
own. But this is nothing. For so says Apost. 2:38, where Peter says,
\"Let every man be baptized in the name of our Lord Christ,\" 2c., and
it does not apply that one should be baptized for another, just as every
man must repent, believe, and confess the faith for himself, 2c.
Therefore I remain with the understanding, as the ancient Greek
teachers, and we have indicated by a scholion 1) next to this text,
namely: because this article was recently planted in the time of St.
Paul, as previously unknown and unheard of to the Gentiles, even among
the most learned in Greek-

1\) Scholion\-\--Randglosse.

(Although they nevertheless came so far as to think that the soul lived
after the death of the body, and yet could not conclude the same with
certainty; but that man should rise again, and both body and soul come
together again, of this they knew nothing at all), therefore it was
difficult for them at first to believe the apostles\' preaching, and
those who believed it had to suffer much mockery because of it. So, to
strengthen the faith of the people in this article, they were baptized
in the tombs of the dead, as a sign that they certainly believed that
the dead who were buried there, and over whom they were baptized, would
rise again, and they considered this so certain that they pointed to it
as with their fingers. Just as we also want to hold baptism publicly in
a common churchyard or burial ground. Hence we read that the church at
Aquileia taught and used to speak the article in faith thus: I believe
the resurrection of this flesh; no doubt also to teach and confess this
article clearly and properly against the seditionists.

The dear apostles and fathers kept this article in such a way, both with
words and signs, because it was still new; as one has to teach the
doctrine to the young rough people with ceremonies and outward manner,
so that they may grasp it, and doubt it the less; otherwise it is easily
forgotten, or soon taken out of the heart. So they baptized the people
here at the graves of the dead, as if to say: \"Here I am being
baptized, as a testimony that I certainly believe that these very dead
who lie here will all be resurrected; that one should not think that it
would only be a ghost, or that other and new bodies would be
resurrected, created anew by God, but the very Paul and Peter 2c., who
died and was buried, and, as our faith says, this very flesh, which now
stands and walks, or is buried under the earth. Just as the Christ who
was born of Mary and crucified was truly resurrected, and no other, as
he showed his disciples the scars of his hands and in his side.

[1198 Eri. 51, 19S-I94. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, I29\"-I2gg. 1199]{.underline}

So you see that everything must be done so that only this article is
certain to be with us, for if it falters or is no longer valid, then all
the others are of no use and are of no value, because everything has
happened for the sake of the resurrection and the life to come, that
Christ has come and established his kingdom in the world. Wherefore if
this (which is the ground, cause, and end of all articles of faith) be
overthrown or taken away, all the rest must fall and go with it, that it
is well needful to press and strengthen this article diligently; as they
did in this manner concerning baptism, and we also do with other like
signs; than that 1) we honestly lay the dead to rest, and go after the
corpse, singing or praying, as a confession and sign of faith, that
these same dead, and we with them, shall rise at the last day, and shall
be no other bodies, whether they be sent and transfigured otherwise.

For this reason St. Paul urges with all these words that we are sure of
the resurrection to come, so that he immediately shouts out with great
impatience, saying: \"If it were not for this article, we would leave
our preaching, baptism, and the whole Christian life in peace. What
would we want to hang on to it, because the devil together with the
world is so splendidly hostile to us, and work so vainly, and always
remain in the murderous 2) driving, in which we must now stand? There is
no man on earth so mad and foolish as to set himself on an unavoidable
journey without any cause, and to take upon himself nothing but
suffering and torment in vain. For there have been some among the
heathen who have taken great trouble and journey, risking life and limb,
but they have profited and been honored by it, and have been exalted and
praised in the sight of the world, and have always had something before
them that has moved them. Just as men of war and daredevils willingly
put themselves to the test, so that they may gain honor or money and
goods. In sum, whoever dares and suffers something great must certainly
know and wait for something brave for the sake of which he does it.

Now the Christians alone are such people,

1\) \"that\" is missing in the Wittenberg.

2\) Jenaer: murderous.

who must have all the hardship and misfortune in the world, and yet have
nothing on earth that should 3) move them to it. For they 4) have
neither money nor goods, neither honor nor favor, but only the
contradiction, poverty, misery, contempt, enmity, are condemned, cursed,
chased away and murdered, and would have to be nonsensical, if they
sought nothing else but harm and shame, as if they had a desire, that
one would be hostile to them, and anthäte all plague. For even the
heathen have said: Frustra niti, et nihil nisi odium quaerere, extremae
dementiae est, that is the greatest folly on earth, that one labors in
vain and gains nothing but enmity from it.

215\. Since we have nothing else to expect here, but must willingly
consider this life and everything that is in it, that our life and being
before the world is actually called frustra niti, struggling in vain for
misfortune, and in vain we lay ourselves against all the world, both
princes, scholars and saints, We must know something else to hold on to,
something that we consider higher and better than this world\'s goods,
honor, favor and grace, and all that it has. Otherwise, we would not be
so great and foolish, praise God, that we would not rather keep our
mouths shut, and have the world\'s friendship, good days and chamber,
and live as it lives. But because we can despise all this and let it go,
we give enough to understand that our consolation is not here on earth,
but has begun in another life, and ask nothing of the world\'s
ridiculing us and taking us for fools, or condemning us and trampling us
underfoot, but say to them again: We know well, if we want to be
Christians, that we cannot be one with the world, for we were baptized
for this very reason, and for this reason we preach that we enrage the
devil and bring all the world upon ourselves; this we have sought, and
have begun to do. If we had wanted to serve the world, we would have
started differently; but it

3\) Erlanger: us. 4) Erlanger: us.

[1200 **Eri. 194-1973 Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 29-31. W. vm, 1299-1301.**
1201]{.underline}

All this is so that our Lord may be praised, and that at last it may
come to pass that we and all the world may know what we have in him,
when the world, with all its favor and grace, honor and good, shall be
nothing any more, and we shall obtain such treasure as no lord nor king
shall come to, and no man shall know of it, unless he hold it with us,
and also have such courage that he may cheerfully despise the world with
its nature, and dare all things in it.

Behold, this is it that he saith, \"Why stand we all the hours in
journeying?\" Although he actually speaks this of the apostles (as he
soon after declares of his own person), and it does not happen to all
Christians that they endure and suffer so much suffering as St. Paul and
other apostles or preachers. But yet it is true that all Christians are
told that if we confess Christ and live rightly, the world will become
hostile to us and set it against us, just as it does to the preachers,
that we may wait for nothing better; this is the common outward journey
of all devout Christians, one as well as another.

But St. Paul speaks here (as I have said) of the special journey that
befell him and other apostles, over that 1) common journey, and is
always in the preaching ministry, as he says elsewhere, 1 Cor. 4:9:
\"God has set us apostles apart for the very least, as delivered to
death,\" or handed over to death. For they not only have to bear the
outward burden of the world, as persecution, imprisonment; but rather
that the devil clings to them, and hinders them everywhere, chasing them
day and night, so that they always have to be in mortal danger and fear,
and they cannot help but be afraid, as if they had to die in a moment.
For it is they who must always stand at the forefront for all the
others, and take up all the spears and arrows of the devil and beat them
away.

218 Thus he says: \"What would we seek by putting ourselves into such
high, unavoidable, constant journeys, since we are never sure of life
and have no joy? I do it not for the sake of honor and favor, or
friendship, but do nothing with it, except that I do not want to be a
friend.

1\) Wittenberger: his.

both the world and the devil become bitterly hostile to me, and set upon
me even unto death. Why then would I without cause place myself between
the spears, halberds and guns of the devil, since they all aim at me, as
they would like to catch me? As St. Paul undoubtedly often had to suffer
many a buffet and blow, which he well felt that he had no other sense
than those who have to run through spears, since one strikes and stabs
on all sides. But who would do this, that he should so stand and preach,
when he saw such loaded and lighted guns pointed at him? Do you think I
would take a hundred thousand guilders and preach a sermon? Now it has
been much harder and more horrible here, 2) since 3) the devil has
pointed his whole infernal quiver and cannon at the apostle, and has had
to suffer the same without ceasing, as he gives 2 Cor. 11:23 ff. to
understand; yet he has remained firm and steady in his ministry, and has
not considered any journey and 4) suffering so great that he would
therefore refrain from this sermon of his.

But who would wait for all this without ceasing, if he were not as sure
of this article as of his own life? Yes, I say for myself, if I knew
that it was worth nothing more than honor and good, and could earn the
good of the whole world three times over with it, if it should not be
possible for me to do a sermon, and would crawl nine cubits deep into
the earth before waiting for such a ride. But there is something else
for us, which we may seek and obtain here, which may well delight us in
suffering and sorrow, against which everything is to be regarded as
nothing; as St. Paul, Rom. 8, 18, says. We may eat and drink here, and
take what we get, although the world does not grant us the same; but for
this reason we do not want to be Christians, nor believe, but wait for
something higher and better, which is an unspeakable, eternal treasure.

**V. 31. By the glory that I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die
daily.**

220 Then he expresses what he means by steady driving, and takes it upon
himself, and confesses,

2\) \"been\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Erlanger: \"like\" instead of: there.

4\) Erlanger: still.

[1202 Eri. si, 197-199. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, isoi-isoi. 1203]{.underline}

how he is, writes in one word his true legend, of which the world
neither knows nor understands anything everywhere, for it no longer
knows either that it has heard how he and the other apostles raised the
dead, and performed miraculous signs, and what other works it can see
that seem great; but this piece no one has understood, except he who has
felt it, and no one understands it yet, except he who feels and
experiences it himself; therefore there is not much to be said about it
here.

But he swears to it, \"By our glory,\" and considers it a great and
noble oath. As if he wanted to say, \"As dear as the honor and glory
that I have in Christ JEsu is to me, so high and dear do I swear. Now
Christians know what this glory in Christ means and is; not that we
shall become rich to the hundred thousand florins, nor that we shall win
a kingdom or an empire; but that through Christ we are redeemed from
sin, death and the devil, and are set in hope, yes, in part already led
into the eternal kingdom, and boast that we have a gracious God and
Father, because we have been baptized, and believe in the man who can
give us eternal life, of which no Turk, no spirit, no papal bishop, nor
prince, nor scholar and false saint, and summa, the whole world knows
nothing. I have the glory on this article, and put it as a pledge, as I
should not lack nor can, for that I would not take the world, that I
should swear otherwise so high.

222\. But how is it that he says, \"I die daily\"? I do not see (say the
world) that you have ever been buried, but that you walk and stand, eat
and drink, wander about and preach, and do your trade: Is this to die or
to be dead? Well, he swears to it, and wants it to be certain; but that
is what I have said, that not everyone knows nor understands what he
means by it, or what such dying means, and how it happens, namely, that
he always carries death by the neck, and is so tormented without ceasing
that he feels death more than life. And yet he says that he has an honor
or glory next to it, namely life, although it is weak and often
probably 1) nothing.

1\) \"probably\" is missing in the Erlanger.

and is therefore always in battle, wrestling with death and life, sin
and piety, good and evil consciences, joy and sadness, hope and terror,
faith and unbelief, in short, God and the devil, hell and heaven. He
speaks here of such a struggle, which he alone has understood, as a high
apostle, who has dealt with it without interruption and is well
practiced; therefore he must also swear to be believed as the one who
speaks the truth, even if other people do not feel or understand it that
way.

Why then would I do this (he wants to say again), that I am not only
plagued, imprisoned, tormented by the world, and suffer what can happen
to me externally, which he tells after the length 2 Cor. 11, 25. ff.,
but also, over such danger, always have to stand in special battle with
the devil, and day and night wrestle with death, and feel the fear of
hell? What do I get out of it? Or what do they give me in return, that I
should put myself into it without any hardship, if I could well be above
it? Shouldn\'t I rather put an end to the matter and let myself be
buried? or advise the matter, as the world does, that I let Christ and
everything that is Christ have a good year, and live as the others live,
that the world would leave me satisfied, and the devil would be my
merciful master? Yes, I would certainly be able to do that if I wanted
to forgive myself for that life. But because I do not want to do this
and boast of another life, I must consider this and have to pay for the
fact that the world thus goes along with me and the devil impales and
tortures me so that I will never be happy with this life. But even if he
chokes me daily and would still do me so much harm, I still do not want
to let him take this glory from me, but finally put him down with it and
receive the victory. But he adds a piece of his fame or his ride, though
not the greatest, and says:

**V. 32: \"Have I fought with the wild beasts in Ephesus in the opinion
of men? What good is it to me if the dead do not rise?**

224\. that is also a glory; but not, as the world boasts, in power and
strength, or of great honor and good, but only of

1204 Erl. si, iW-2°i. Sermon On I Cor. 15, 32. w. vm, 1301-1306. 1205

Suffering and danger of death and of other victories than 1) the world
is capable of, namely, that he was in the jaws of death and yet was
saved. But he speaks of this in a special way, as it was customary in
the country, especially in Rome. For they had a way, when they wanted to
make special spectacles, so they took an evildoer or condemned man, made
barriers in the middle of the market, and put him in there, bare and
without any defense, and let lions and bears, or other cruel wild
animals, come to him, so he had to fight with them, and either fight
them off, or let himself be eaten; And they did this when the beasts
were hungriest, and often let the beasts run and run about, so that they
became the more ferocious. Thus they had their amusement in seeing
(especially the Christians) how the poor people were torn apart by the
animals. So they thought they could deter the Christians from such
horrible torment, or clean it up. For it was not possible for a man to
defend himself against the cruel beasts without God being present at
times with miraculous signs, and so sending that the cruelest beasts (if
they were rushing at the Christians) did them no harm, indeed, became so
gentle against them that they fell at their feet, behaved as kindly as
to young children, and dealt with them as with sheep, and thus some were
saved, strengthening their faith; but not all; otherwise it would have
been too mean and despised. But if this did not help, the executioner
had to come at last and execute them with the sword.

225 St. Paul boasts that he was thrown to the wild beasts, so that they
tore him apart, and yet he resisted them and was saved without all the
thanks of the world, just like Daniel when he was thrown into a pit by
lions \[Dan. 6, 16\], since the others who accused him were torn to
pieces by the same lions from the beginning with their wives and
children, and their bones were crushed. So he says elsewhere how he was
often miraculously delivered from the dungeon, item, from water and
other troubles he was in, 2 Cor. 11, 26,

1\) Wittenberger: den.

So that the heathen did not always have to devour the Christians as they
wished, but without their thanks they had to let them live, and not
destroy them before it was pleasing to God; so that the Christians would
see that God was with them, and would not be without comfort, but would
see a piece of life in the midst of death, and the others would also be
shocked by it, and would be converted or frightened 2) and would not
have to do what they wanted. Just as he has often shown himself with us
now; if he had not been with us, the pope and his angry tyrants would
have devoured us ten times over long ago.

226 Now, why would I put myself in such a death struggle (he says), to
wrestle with the wild beasts? Who would do it for the sake of temporal
good and honor? For what else was there but certain death before the
eyes, that a single man, without all help, should fight with ferocious
lions, bears and leopards? And yet faith had to fight against such a
gruesome sight. And even if I had done it for glory or for the love of
the world, I would have earned no other thanks or honor, except that
they would have despised it and said that I was a magician, or that I
needed the devil\'s art to do it, just as they did to Christ himself,
and would do to us now, even if we raised the dead before them. That is
why I have not done it in a human way or opinion, to seek something from
men with it. And because spiritually I must always bite and fight with
the devil, and always hover between death and life, so that everything
that the devil and the world can do evil clings to me, and there is
nothing with me but death, I must miss a greater comfort than no man
here on earth.

It is not strange that murderers and evildoers come to death, for they
have deserved it and struggled for it, and cannot fight or struggle with
it, but despair and perish. But we, because we willingly and in vain
take upon ourselves such a journey and battle of death, must live and
die another way.

2\) Thus the Wittenbergers. Jena and Erlangen: \"were\" and immediately
following: \"had to\".

[1206 Erl. 51, M-SOS. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, isos-isos. 1207]{.underline}

Otherwise we could just as well speak and do as others what the world
would like, or pretend to be princes and lords and strive to become
great lords and have good days. Yes, if we did not seek more than the
world can give! But now we seek and strive for something else than what
we find here, which no emperor, king, lord can give, and no scholar or
doctor knows or understands. Therefore, we speak and do differently than
they speak or do.

**V. 32. Let us eat and drink; tomorrow we will be dead.**

228\) He speaks this 1) in the person of the mockers, who mocked his
sermon with such words, and takes this saying from the prophet Isaiah,
Cap. 22, 13, to whom it also happened. When he preached very vehemently,
and chastised his disciples at Jerusalem, as though they had been
stingy, stingy wolves, despising the word of God, and believing as much
of the resurrection of the dead as cattle, they went to him, opened
their mouths, and mocked all that he preached, and lifted up their
tongues against him, and mocked him as a fool, and said one to another,
\"Hear, beloved, what the prophet saith, that we shall die tomorrow. If
this be true, O let us eat and drink first, and be of good cheer,
because we are here! These are the peevish mouths that have been able to
turn back his word and make a mockery of it, so that they should be
afraid that God would be angry and punish them with all kinds of
plagues, as he predicts: so they do the opposite, and use his prediction
for their joke and for more impenitence, and speak of death in such a
disgraceful way, as if death were nothing more than a hemp pot. 2) What
devil from hell would preach to such people who turn it all around so
poisonously? And as one frightens them of death, so they take it and
defy their prophet.

Without a doubt, St. Paul also often had to hear this from his scoffers.

1\) Erlanger: he as.

2\) Hemp potzen - popanz made of hemp. Cf. \"Strohpotzen\". Alte Ausg.
3, 1377, § 33.

For this is the rhyme that the world, and still both, 3) peasant and
burgher and squire Scharrhans lead, if one frightens them by God\'s word
with death and hell: O the priests tell us much about death, and make
the devil horrible, and hell hot; so let us first have a good drink with
each other, as long as it lasts; if we die, we are dead. For this reason
he also incites their words, as if to say: If it is true that one must
not believe in the resurrection, then I know nothing better than that we
also speak and mock like them, both God and his apostles. For whoever
does not want to believe God\'s word, nor is afraid of His wrath, then
it is lost what one says and preaches; can speak nothing else, but as
they believe (as also now our Junkers): Do you think that it is true, as
4) the priests say, that there is one man in another? Dear, if we are
dead, then we are dead; if the body dies, then one fellow dies with the
other.

\(230\) Well, Christians must hear such mockery and let it go until the
time comes when they will not despise death as they despise it now. For
this I have experienced and seen many times, praise God, among others,
that our prophecy and sermon have come true, and no peasant or nobleman
has ever been so insolent and proud, when death has come before his
eyes, he has nevertheless become frightened and angry, and his previous
mocking and defiance has not helped him. For he knows the art of making
the most proud and joyful despondent and cowardly, if he greets them
only a little with a pestilence, so that their hearts and courage fall
away when they think that they must leave their goods and splendor
behind them. If then death can frighten those who do not believe, there
will certainly be something more behind it, so that they will be
frightened in hell; there it will not be said, as now: If we are dead,
then we are dead, but will lie in eternal fires, and cry out wailing and
woe over themselves that they were ever born, and will have to curse and
condemn themselves, so that they will not be able to live.

3\) So the Wittenbergers and the Jenaers. Erlanger and the Latin:
\"old\" instead of: both.

4\) Erlanger: this.

[1208 **Erl. SI, M-sos. Sermon on I Cor. 15, 32. 33. w. VIII.
IS09-ISI2.** 1209]{.underline}

God\'s word, and so blasphemously despised and mocked.

Therefore, we should beware of such frivolous speech, lest one mock God
and His word. For he also likes to draw such people, before they are
able to warn others, as one has seen many such examples (which are not
to be told now), that 1) he nevertheless hurls atrocities at such
scoffers, who think it is a good thing, if they can only speak of the
Gospel in a scornful and mocking manner; these (examples) should not be
so easily forgotten and thrown to the wind. For he does not always
punish in this way, otherwise he would have to let few people remain on
earth; but he sometimes shows others, as an example and a fright, what
he likes to do, and what he will do when he sees the time, and once it
will come; but then it will also be too long. Today you mock, eat and
drink; tomorrow you are dead and will not return. And what happens to
one, that can happen to all, as Christ Luc. 13, 5. says of the tower of
Siloah, which had slain many people: \"I tell you, if you do not amend,
you will all perish.\"

Therefore, when he strikes and executes one, he means them all, and will
certainly strike them before they know it, if they do not stop in time.
How much misfortune one experiences daily from all kinds of terrible
plagues, fire, water, murder and sudden 2) death! And if many are
already going on like this, do you think that he cannot borrow a bill
and come after them with the punishment when they have long forgotten
the sin, and then consider themselves pious, complain and cry out as if
they had never deserved it? For he does not let the punishment go so
suddenly on the sin, but lets it go long enough, and keeps still,
whether they want to mend; but at last he comes too horribly, when one
least thinks of it. And after the body is great, after that also comes
the punishment: He punishes an individual or a small group soon; but he
waits a long time for a whole country or city, until it is well ripe;
but at last none remains unpunished.

1\) Erlanger: da.

2\) In the old editions: gehlings.

Therefore St. Paul warns from the prophet Isaiah, using the same words.
He wants to make an example of those mockers, as if to say: \"At that
time there were also wicked, evil men who could do nothing but mock the
prophets; but when they had long mocked, and were now safe and of good
cheer, and no longer remembered what the prophets had said, the hour
came when God sent the king of Babylon to devastate everything that was
there, to set fire to the city and temple, and to kill all they could,
and to carry away the rest with them. Then they also complained of
misery and distress, also thought they were innocent, but did not want
to think behind themselves, and look at the old register, as their
fathers deserved, and they had remained in the same sins, thought it was
all forgotten, as they had forgotten it.

But he hath a long memory, and forgetteth not, though we forget; neither
will he forget how all the world now wilfully and unhesitatingly sinneth
against the gospel, as if they had liberty and power to do what they
would, and mocked when it was told them, as if there were no God that
saw or knew. But he will come after them, when they think it is long
forgotten, both of them, with pestilence, thenrer time, war and murder,
that one will hack and spear like frogs, both young and old, that they
pay what they deserve now; so they will have to see what they have
mocked, and remember that we have told them now. But God will also let
them cry out in vain, as they let us admonish and warn in vain.

**V. 33. Do not be deceived. Evil gossip corrupts good morals.**

We cannot help it,\" he says, \"that the rough crowd of scoffers comes,
saying, If we are to die, let us eat and drink before we die; if we are
dead, we are dead; and if they are told much of the last day, they wish
they had money enough to count for so long. But let them go and mock,
because they can; it will be found in the end who mocks the other, and
then they shall have more to count than they would have if the register
were kept before them.

1210 Eri. si, L05-S07. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1312-1314. 1211

will have to hold their noses and give an account, so that they will
sweat over it. But do not turn away from what such reckless people say,
but beware and listen to what God\'s word preaches to you, for such talk
will surely deceive and mislead you.

236 And this saying is taken from a famous Greek poet, Menandro, from
worldly discipline. For where young people are to be brought up, it
takes effort and work to see to it that they do not see many evil,
annoying examples, and are thereby hurt and seduced. And there is also
reason, that it is very important that the parents take care, so that
their children are brought up in a disciplined way. If now father or
mother has spent much effort and food on their child, before it has been
brought up a little and brought to a fine 1) moral nature, so that it
knows how to behave sensibly and demurely toward everyone, then some
harmful animal should come, an evil mouth should speak something to the
ears, or an evil example should be seen, which poisons such a young
heart, and draws an evil blood, which 2) it can never get rid of. Thus,
even if a young boy has been well educated for a long time in teaching
and discipline, so that the parents see their pleasure in it, a wild,
wicked and careless boy will soon come and poison it with a loose,
impudent word or example, and thus spoil at once everything that has
been spent on it for care, diligence, time and food.

The pagans have experienced this in their nature, and we still
experience it daily and see it before our eyes, how easily and often
fine young people, both boys and girls, are seduced in such a way that
it is always a pity. So much harm can a wicked tongue do that in one
hour it can poison and spoil a whole bunch with one word what one has
brought up with great effort for ten or twenty years. That is why they
want to instill such sayings in the youth, and thereby admonish everyone
to beware of evil gossip or company, for it does murderous harm, and it
is not a good thing.

1\) Thus the Erlangen; Wittenberg and Jena; his. Latin: aä aliuva vitas
vaoäuiQ puulo Uonestiorem p6rv6Ü6rit.

2\) Jenaer: that.

which is well drawn, as a hailstorm or lightning destroys the crop in
the field. And they are shameful, devilish people, who want to poison
such innocent young people in this way.

Now, does a wicked gossip in worldly discipline and pagan wisdom and
piety, as nature and reason teach us, what should it not do in the high,
subtle matters of faith, which reason does not understand, and yet
everyone wants to talk about it, to puzzle and judge, as is now
happening everywhere, even among the rabble? As if there were some such
mouth drooling in a bunch of peasants or citizens: What do you want to
hear what the clergy preach? Do you think that there is still a guy in
this one? 2c. So also Junker Hans of the nobility and war-servants, when
they drive along: If I should think that I must die, and another life be
after this; who then would go to war? Let us have good courage and good
days here (they say), as long as it lasts; who knows how it will go
there. Yes, some who want to be very wise consider those to be fools who
preach or say so: They must be very idle people who worry about it. For
they have other things to do, which are more important, namely, how to
buy many villages and castles. Such words a whole crowd must grasp after
that, that they go, and no longer think nor consider how they live or
die, but only that they scrape and fill their belly. So with one word
the whole crowd is soon corrupted, so that no more preaching and
punishment will help them.

But when it first gets to the scholars and highly knowledgeable people,
then it does the right damage; they can first make it evil and 3)
unsavory, and yet polish it and decorate it with beautiful paint so that
it glistens, and paint it in the most mocking way. There have been good
foolish people (they say), Christ and Paul, who 4) say that there shall
still be a life after this. What lacks so many fine people on earth,
emperors, kings, princes and lords, scholars and wise men (as special-

3\) unsöt \-- rude, harsh.

4\) Wittenbergers: that one.

1212 Erl. si, L07-S0S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 33. w. vui, 1314-1317. 1213

The first one was the one who was in Greece), who would have known as
much about it as these poor beggars and unlearned people. A
simple-minded person soon takes this to heart and thinks, \"Who knows if
what they preach is true? Shall I believe him whom so many learned and
wise men do not believe? Who told him? We must suffer such things and be
accustomed to them; though we preach much, we cannot prevent such
useless 1) gossip and evil, poisonous mouths from running along, because
2) St. Paul himself could not prevent it.

\(240\) Now, there is gossip, and very wicked gossip; but you are hereby
warned by God that you should not turn away from it, if you have to hear
such things, but rather accept God\'s word more than the gossip of all
the world, even though the most learned and highest scholars, emperors,
and kings do so, as they do the more learned and wise they want to be.
For if you do not turn away your ears and follow such gossip, you will
certainly get such shocks and annoyances: who knows? there should be
nothing to it. And when the devil brings you there, he has already
caught you, as he did Adam and Eve. For this is his wickedness, that he
so lures man out of the word, and steals it from the heart, that thou
thinkest not of it, nor feelest it, and instead drives other thoughts
into it; so he has won the game. Therefore, you must be prepared to take
this remedy for and against such poison, and where you hear such talk
with one ear, soon hold to the word with all your heart.

For I myself have experienced how it shocks the head and hurts the heart
when one hears such people and wise-assed smarties talk about things so
certainly and surely, and scl even scornfully mock as if nothing had
ever been so certainly lied about, that one must nevertheless think: Who
knows then? There are so many great, learned and brave people, the best
core in the world and the biggest bunch, who talk differently.

1\) \"useless\" is missing in the Erlanger and in the Latin.

2\) ,/s\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Theriak (tUsriueuW) \-\-\-\-- Arznei Wider Gift, especially against
the snake bite.

and believe; if it should not be true, then no greater deception would
have come on earth. Therefore, I have also experienced and seen many who
have had heavy temptation about it, 5) whether there will be another
life after this life? Behold, all this comes from such loose, evil talk,
especially where hearts and consciences are still weak and untried. (For
I am, praise God, so equipped for this that, if God wills, I shall not
be harmed by what all the world gossips).

For this reason, one must diligently guard and always adhere to God\'s
word, by which this article was founded and has stood and remained for
fifteen hundred years, and has been contested by many talkers and
spouters, but has never been overturned or suppressed, since they have
all passed away with their talk and are dead, so that no one speaks of
them anymore, nor remembers them. But this article remains and still
stands, as it was preached by the dear apostles, and believed by Adam
and all the fathers and saints, and shall be preached because the world
stands, until the time comes when it will come into work and experience.
We want to stay with it and not turn away from it, even if some of us
talk about it so poisonously and mock, but comfort them that they are
not worthy of it, and let them go (as Christ says of the Pharisees
\[Matth. 15, 14.\]) as the blind and the blind leaders, and let them
talk until they have to stop. They have their part, and cannot be
punished more; for if they were worthy, they would also believe God\'s
word with us. Therefore we say to them, as Saint Paul said to his Jews
\[Apost. 13, 46\]: \"Because you will not listen, and do not consider
yourselves worthy of eternal life, we turn to the Gentiles.\" But you
thank God that God has given you grace, and called you to understanding,
and made you worthy to believe it, and let those go with their mocking,
eating and drinking, and living like swine lying on the graves, and
fattening themselves, so that they will soon be slaughtered. So you can
defend yourself and protect yourself against all kinds of evil.

4\) Erlanger: that.

5\) \"have\" is missing in the Erlanger.

1214 Erl. 5i, sro-sis. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, is-iziv. 1215

This is a poisonous thing, that thou shouldest say, I will hear the word
of God, and abide in it; for the same is better than such talk, as a
useful, wholesome word, and given of God, which abode in it from the
beginning of the world, and shall abide in it unto the end; and will do
as a pious daughter ought to do, when she heareth a lewd mouth, or is
provoked to fornication by a wicked whore, that she should say: This is
not what my dear mother taught me; I would rather follow her than
another, for she will certainly not teach me anything evil. Or like a
pious son, who shall not hear what any knave will tell him to do, but
shall say against it, This is not right; for so my dear father or
schoolmaster taught me 2c. Just as such children keep their parents\'
word against such poison, so that it does not harm the heart, so a
Christian should keep God\'s word, so that he rejects such pagan and
ungodly talk against the faith, and remains with that in which he was
baptized and called, and which is the faith and life of all Christendom.

**V. 34. Wake up properly and do not sin, for some know nothing of God,
I tell you to your shame.**

He adds these words to admonish and warn them the more strongly against
evil talk, and shows them how they should do it, so that they will not
be deceived. Thus he says: Take care that such talkers do not find you
slumbering or sleepy, or sullen and lazy. For this has already given
place and opened the door to all talkers and seducers; as I have often
said, and still say, that this is an excellent harmful vice, which is
called idleness, or (as it has been called until now, but has not been
properly understood or interpreted) slothfulness to worship, when one
gets tired of the sermon, and says, \"Oh, I know it well myself, and
have often heard it, and can read it at home, if it lusts me; what shall
I always hear of the same thing? And so they go, thinking that they have
the treasure in abundance, so that they cannot lack it. But St. Paul
says here the contradiction: \"Take heed, and beware lest you be too
sure, and think that you can do it too well, for it will surely deceive
you. For it has

The first thing you have to do is to make sure that 1) you don\'t get
any nasty gossip before you know it.

244 Therefore it is necessary that we always live bravely and carefully,
and in worry, so that we are not hurried, or 2) miss ourselves, so that
it does not happen to us as it does to those who suddenly and unawares
go to the devil. Take an example of a mad man whom I saw, who spoke
nothing else when he opened his mouth, but a thousand devils, even if he
stumbled or bumped into something; and was often warned by his neighbor
that he would give up the word, that he would make a dangerous fall at
some time, that it would go badly, and that the fellow whom he called
would soon be behind him; but he turned aside, and said: Oh, if it
should come to that, I myself know well that I should forget the words.
Not long after, however, he crossed a bridge, and as he did so, he
stumbled and fell into the water, and quickly, according to his custom,
he said, \"Farewell in the name of a thousand devils! So it can happen
to such secure spirits, who know themselves so learned and secure, as if
they should not hear and read it, or think of it, that just in the same
the devil creeps in secretly with evil talk or input, that they lose
Christ and the word, and the devil becomes powerful according to his
will.

For I have often experienced this myself, and have well tried how the
devil can cunningly lead one away from the word. For when he sees that I
am prepared and deal with God\'s word, he leaves me in peace; but if he
only gets so much air that I do not think about it and deal with other
things, he comes behind me and soon gives me a push that I feel heavy
before I take the word again. What would happen, then, if I were also so
sure, and let myself also be thought so learned, and let half or a
quarter of a year stand by to \"preach\" the word, or to hear and read,
because I am so learned?

1\) Jenaer and Erlanger: gleichwohl. Latin: üiti xsntsr.

2\) \"us\" is missing in the Erlanger.

1216 **Eri. si, 212-214. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 34. W. vin, 1319-1322.**
1217

What do I have to do that I can do with daily study and prayer?

Therefore, if you do not want to be deceived and lose what you have, you
must be steadfast and not snore, so that you may keep the word well, so
that you may be able to guard and defend yourselves from such evil
gossip, so that it does not break in among you. For it is not for you to
ward off evil talk, lest you hear it from the world, but it behooves you
to watch that you give it no place, but ward it off wherever it stirs.
For the devil will certainly not sleep nor snore, but will also attack
you on every side wherever you go. Therefore, you must also guard
against it, so that you are equipped with God\'s word wherever you go or
stand, at home or outside, in church, in your chamber, over the table,
and wherever you deal with people; just as God commanded His people that
they should paint and write God\'s commandment before their eyes at all
times, so that they could always look at it, and defend themselves with
it against all kinds of irritation and trouble \[Deut. 6:6 ff\].

Such diligence and care for God\'s word is what he means by the word
\"watch\" or to be watchful: and it does not mean to watch badly, but to
wake up rightly, or to watch so that it is called rightly and blessedly
watched, that is, according to God\'s word. For the world is also
watchful to its thing, but not to God\'s word. But this is the right
watch, to watch in God\'s word, so that one may beat back the devil and
his poisonous arrows and be victorious. Therefore it is not called
watching, as a watchman watches in the city, so that no one falls in or
does harm; or as a master or wife watches in the house, so that the
servants are up early in the morning, and direct what is to be done.
This is part of the rule of the city or of the house, that every man
watch his work, and that all things be done aright; but so it shall be
called watching, lest any man sin. The world is to watch against
poverty, strife, or enemies, that it may be well with both lands and
people; but our watching is that sin may cease, and righteousness arise
and be maintained, that faith and love may reign, and unbelief be
destroyed.

248 This means that God\'s word should always and everywhere be acted
upon and practiced with earnestness, and that we should greedily snatch
at it, gladly hear, sing, say and read, against the shameful idleness
and sloth of which I have spoken, so that we may have our castle and
fortress well guarded, and all holes closed up, so that the devil cannot
creep in. Otherwise, if I or others do not preach with diligence, and
you do not hear, nor practice, make yourself think that you can do it
too well, that is, neither watch nor resist, but slumber, and hang your
head, yes, snore in the midst of the devil\'s guns and spears, so that
he has good secure room to break in, and climbs the castle without any
effort.

For so it was also with the Corinthians. Since St. Paul was no longer
with them, and they became much more sure of themselves, thinking that
they were learned enough and could do everything, the devil came among
them with his weeds and evil gossip against this article, so that they
were clever in it according to their thoughts without God\'s word, and
pretended that the resurrection had already happened. For they did not
want to be taken for denying the article outright against St. Paul\'s
preaching (otherwise they would not have been easily believed), but made
a fine pretense of it, took St. Paul\'s words, and interpreted them to
mean that the resurrection had already happened. Paul\'s words and
interpreted them as they saw fit, saying that it was not to be
understood so crudely that the dead should all come forth bodily, but
should be understood in this way that we were all spiritually
resurrected in baptism, from being dead in sins and evil works, and now
entered into a new, pious, honorable life. This was a sweet poison out
of all measure, and it tore in with force, as it should still do, if one
were to spread this with words, and blew into the people, who were not
well guarded with a pure understanding of God\'s word, so that soon the
whole crowd would burst after it: Oh, this is truly right, we did not
understand it before, nor did we hear it interpreted; just as they do
now about the sacrament and baptism. For since they cannot deny the
clear words of Christ, that Christ\'s body and blood are there, they say
that he is only there spiritually. For how can he be acted upon and
eaten in the flesh, even by the ungodly? So they also have this article

[1218 Eri. si, 214-216. interpretations on the 1, epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, isee-132s. 1219]{.underline}

and painted its interpretation with a beautiful color, so that it
pleased the people, especially because it was preached by those who had
a great reputation, as the apostles\' disciples and companions.

But after that others came, and they pretended it so: The resurrection
was not to be understood according to the flesh, but only according to
the soul, and then they quoted St. Paul\'s saying from this chapter, v.
50: \"Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God\"; because we
are flesh and blood, the body could not be resurrected; but they had to
confess that Christ was not resurrected according to the soul alone, but
both body and soul, just as he was born and died. Therefore also our
article is clearly called: Resurrection of the flesh; that the body,
which now dies, should come forth again and live, as Christ rose bodily
from the grave. This is the right understanding of this article.
Although it is true that sometimes the Scriptures speak of spiritual
resurrection, when they say that we are to pass from sins into a new
spiritual life, which takes place through faith and baptism, while we
are still in this life. But in this article it is spoken and dealt with
how we will be resurrected after this life, when we are dead.

For this reason, it is not valid for them to draw from St. Paul\'s
saying that flesh and blood cannot inherit God\'s kingdom, contrary to
the clear opinion of St. Paul, which he puts forth through and through
in this chapter. For flesh and blood he calls (as we shall hear) nothing
else than the addiction and evil that we have in our flesh and blood
from Adam, namely, the sinful, mortal nature, evil desire and all kinds
of infirmities in flesh and blood. For in that life it shall all be
pure, without sin and infirmity. Therefore, everything that is evil in
our flesh and blood must now perish, so that on that day we will be
completely new and pure in body and soul. Now it does not follow that we
should not be resurrected bodily with flesh and blood; otherwise we
would also have to say that Christ did not have flesh and blood after
his resurrection.

252 Behold, this is the evil gossip ge

He says that the people who were among them were not introduced by
foreigners or common bad people, but by their own brothers, who wanted
to be the most distinguished and learned, and who had the office among
them, so that he had to admonish and warn them to be on their guard
against their own brothers. Therefore he also concludes with harsh
words, saying, \"For some know nothing of God, I tell you to your
shame.\" As if to say: \"Is it not a sin and a shame that it has already
come to this among you, all of you who have heard my preaching so
abundantly, that such things are taught among you and by yourselves, and
you have fallen into such blindness that you have almost nothing more of
God\'s word? What could be said of you that is more shameful than that
you, who 1) should be the most learned and best Christians, as my most
distinguished disciples, have let such unchristian gossip sink in so
far, until you regard God and his word as nothing at all. 2) Therefore,
I must admonish you to see where such things have fallen, and to take
offense, lest the same happen to you.

For this is what he means by \"knowing nothing of God,\" that one
neither knows nor respects God\'s word; for whoever wants to know God
must come to know Him through the word. Such people do not do this, but
leave it at that, and go with their reason and their own thoughts into
the articles of faith, presuming to judge God and all things for
themselves; there they never meet Him. For what is preached about Christ
and the life to come has not grown in their minds. Thus, when they hear
about the resurrection, they judge according to their own minds that it
is nothing other than resurrection from sins and becoming godly; God\'s
Word knows nothing about this when it speaks of this article. That is
why it is only called going astray, and getting further and further from
the Word and God\'s knowledge, as a blind man goes astray in broad
daylight, and can never get back on the path. And because they
themselves, who teach, lack God\'s word, they lead the poor bunch after
it, and one blind man leads the others, until they have nothing more of
God\'s word, and only with their own invented

1\) Erlanger: her so.

2\) In the issues: respects.

1220 Erl. si, sis-219. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 34. 35. w. vm, e-m. 1221

They are not able to avoid dreams, so that they may deceive themselves
and others. For they call this God\'s counsel and will, that not the
flesh or body, but only the spirit or soul should be resurrected, which
is neither his will nor opinion. Therefore they know nothing of him, and
become such people (as St. Paul says elsewhere \[1 Tim. 1, 7\]), \"who
want to be masters of the Scriptures, and do not themselves know what
they say or what they say. Therefore, beware of such, and do not look at
how great they are considered to be Christian brethren or preachers; but
see that you have God\'s word for certain, and hold to the same, and you
will not err or fail, but will rightly know and test God\'s will and
counsel.

**V. 35. But would anyone say, How will the dead rise, and with what
kind of body will they come?**

254 So far we have seen how the apostle took the article with great
seriousness, and let him work hard to make it certain, and warned his
Corinthians to be careful, lest they be deceived and seduced by other
evil talk. Now, he starts and makes a confutation to shut up their
objection, spun out of reason\'s cleverness, with which this article
does not rhyme at all, and many clumsy things must follow, if one should
judge about it according to their understanding and conceit, that they
must either consider this article to be lies, or cleverly manipulate it,
and deceive that it might be pure with them.

And there were indeed sharp fellows, whom St. Paul introduces here with
their words, who not only finely twist and turn this article, but could
also most masterfully (as they thought) mock and ridicule when one
teaches about the bodily resurrection. Dear, how will it be (they said)
when they all rise from the dead? What kind of bodies will they have;
or, what kind of being will it be? For, reckon thou, when we shall all
come to life again, bringing every man his body with him, as he hath
lived here, there shall be a great 1) and innumerable multitude
together.

1\) Erlanger: big world.

Where will they all get food and drink? Where can they get so much grain
and corn, or so many oxen and swine and sheep, that they may all eat?
how many men alone have died in the whole world in two or three hundred
years? I will be silent in a thousand and a thousand, that they might
eat all the flesh and bread that is on earth in one day: item, where do
they take all the clothes, shoes, blankets, and everything that belongs
to the body\'s food? We can hardly manage now to maintain ourselves on
what we have. What will happen when the world becomes so full, and every
man shall have his wife and child, house and farm, 2c., and shall
henceforth always multiply, that indeed the world will soon become too
narrow, even for every man\'s body, let alone that the earth should bear
all enough of all kinds of fruits and crops for men and cattle.

Yes, what will become of us when we come together again and live with
each other as we do now? For when I rise, then my wife also rises, my
children also, yes, my father and mother, and the same father and
grandfather, and so on. Item, my lord or sovereign, and the same father
and but-father: 2) where then will all emperors, kings, lords and
princes remain? Shall they all, at the same time from their first tribe,
have the same land and regiment? In one city as many lords, in one house
as many landlords, servants and maids as they were before one after
another? Item, if a man has had many wives, and is to take them all back
to himself at the same time, how will they divide among themselves, if
they are all to live with one another, and feed on the same inheritance
and goods, from father and father, to child and child\'s child; who will
give back to the other what is inherited from him? For such and
innumerable more inconsistent things must certainly follow according to
their understanding, if all men from the beginning of the world are to
rise again bodily, as we are now. And with such questions they wanted to
be very clever, and excellently pretend great art and wisdom, and this

2\) But-father - grandfather. Latin: xatris patsr.

[1222 Erl. 51, 2IS-22I. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, IWI-Izzg. 1223]{.underline}

The first article must have been violently overturned, so that it must
be nothing at all, or 1) Paul must not have meant it that way, and not
have understood it correctly, but must have covered something else under
it.

257\. Paul displaces their lack of understanding with clear words, and
rejects all such questions and arguments, what kind of bodies we shall
have, and how it will rhyme, so that the body shall eat and drink, spit
and cast out, grind and scratch, smell and make stink, be sick and
infirm, as now, and each again be a man, a woman, a servant, a maid, a
prince, as he was before, and what is more like that, and answers in the
shortest possible way: No, not one of them anywhere, neither this nor
that; but this is how it shall be: What is created a human being, that
shall remain a human being, both male and female. For thus God created
them (says the Scripture), male and female, and will not change his
creature. Therefore the same body of every man must remain as it was
created. But therefore he shall not eat, nor drink, nor any thing that
followeth after, nor beget children, nor keep house, nor govern 2c. For
he hath distinguished the creature, or nature, and the offices, or
stations, in the earth, ordered and instituted according to the
creation; that the body might remain in its nature, but not the same use
of the body. For this is not a created thing, that man is a servant,
handmaid, father, mother, lord, prince, king, but an order over the
creature. Therefore only that which is created in man in all kinds of
limbs shall remain, and yet shall no longer have such use for his need,
as he must now have, but shall become such that he shall have no need of
them, neither eating, drinking, threshing, sweeping, nor dwelling with
husband or wife, begetting children, building fields, ruling house or
city, and summa, everything shall cease, 2) which is of the nature of
these temporal goods, so belonging to the perishable life and works 3);
as also Christ teaches \[Matth. 22, 30\], when he says: \"They will
neither be free, nor will they be able to live.

1\) Erlanger: and.

2\) \"shall\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) \"and works\" is added in the Erlanger, also in Latin.

free themselves, but they are like the angels of God in heaven.\"

Those pagan and worldly-wise people 4) cannot understand this, for they
see and think no further than according to their sour head, how it is
with this life, and so they reason: If man is to become alive again, he
must also eat, drink, and keep house again, 2c. how else could he remain
alive. Should we then come together and live with one another, it would
become a strange, clumsy and disorderly being, that we should just as
much wish to remain dead; therefore there must certainly be nothing to
it. For as one looks at it, it does not want to rhyme. Yes, of course it
does not rhyme, if one asks reason how it should be in life, of which it
neither should nor can know anything. And it is true, if it should be no
other way than it understands, then I would not desire any other life.

But it is not to be judged by our reason, but by God\'s Word, which
teaches us that not this old, frail life, but a new, pure, eternal life
shall be, that the belly shall have no need of food, and the body of
nothing more for the preservation of life, and that there shall be no
distinction of estate, 5) no prince, lord, preacher, nor subject (as
also said above), but shall have all things in 6) God Himself, who shall
be all in all. Therefore, it must become a different, beautiful and pure
being, without all frailty and need. What else would God have done, if
it should not be otherwise, than that man should always carry himself
with his belly and his sackcloth, and eternally fill himself and throw
himself away, snot, fester, rot and be sick? And what should we preach,
believe and suffer for this, if we hoped for no better? But now all this
must be finished with this life, and yet the creature must remain, each
body, both male and female person, all in the same state and nature.

260\) But this is also true, as we will hear further on, that
nevertheless also in that life there will be a difference, after

4\) \"People\" is missing from Erlanger.

5\) \"will\" is missing in the Erlanger.

6\) Jenaer: from.

1224 **Erü SI, 22I-2SS. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 35-37. W. VIII, I\"-1W6.**
1225

they have worked and lived here. As that St. Paul was an apostle, Samuel
or Isaiah a prophet, and the like; that one will have greater clarity
than the other, than he who has done or suffered more in his office. So
the pious Sarah or Rachel will be something special above other women,
and yet will not be a different being or life. So every man shall have
distinction and honor according to his office, and yet in all shall be
One God and Lord, and one joy and blessedness. According to the person
no one shall be more nor have more than the other, St. Peter not more
than you and me. But nevertheless there must be a difference of works.
For God did not do through St. Paul what He did through Jesus, and
again. Therefore, each one will bring his works, by which he will shine
and praise God, so that it will be said: St. Peter has done more than I
or anyone else has done. This man or woman has lived and done so much.
Summa, all shall be equal before God in faith and grace and heavenly
being; but differing in works and their honor. Just as the same iron is
made into an axe here and a nail there, a key here and a lock there, all
of the same kind, but with different uses and works, just as dough or
clay is made into different kinds of vessels.

261 This is the sum of the answer that St. Paul gives here to this
question or objection, almost to the end of the chapter, both as to what
kind of bodies we will have after the resurrection, and what kind of
life it will be; namely, that the body will rise without all
infirmities, transfigured and pure, and needing nothing that belongs to
this perishable being, and yet will be distinguished from one another in
clarity. But he begins to describe it with some parables. For since
reason does not understand how things will be, nor does it believe the
word, and yet wants to know, it must be muzzled with crude similes,
taken from this life and being (which it must see and grasp), so that
things do not happen as it dreams. First, he takes a picture of all
kinds of seeds, how they grow out of the earth, and says:

**You fool, that which you sow does not come to life unless it dies. And
that which thou sowest is not the body that shall come to be, but a mere
grain, that is, wheat, or the other one.**

262\. he is immediately angry at this, and scowls at the useless
washers, so that they mock at him as out of great cleverness, and say,
\"You fool,\" as if to say, \"From your own words one hears that you are
a complete fool, and believe nothing at all, and yet you want to be
clever about it according to your foolish head. For this is called \"a
fool\" in Scripture, who judges in the things of God, not according to
God\'s word, but as he reckons by reason and sense, as one sees and
grasps, which even a cow or a sow may well do. So you also do in this
article. Because you see and understand that here man and woman must
come together, keep house, cultivate the land and cattle, and work, so
that they have food and drink, you conclude that it must be the same in
heaven; and you do not see the daily example of how it happens that the
grain grows in the field every year. For if you were to reckon according
to how you see the grain lying on the ground or in the sack, and were to
gape at it to see if anything would grow, what would become of it?
Certainly nothing everywhere, but would probably remain so forever. But
if something should grow, go and sow it in the field, and dig it into
the earth, you will soon see how it grows out again, even another being
or body, so that you cannot say: There stands my grain, as it was in the
sack. For it has rotted under the earth and become nothing; and yet in
the rotting and decaying, when it is no longer any good, it first gets a
root under it, and a stalk or stem above it, and a beautiful ear full of
new grains; then the previous grain is so completely lost that nothing
can be found of it again; and yet new grain has come out of it.

263\. you see such a thing daily before your eyes, and it is so mean
that it is probably shameful to give such a likeness, and you still want
to ask a lot, and dispute, how it will happen in the resurrection? you
do 1) not realize that there is a

1\) Jenaer: \"Merkestu\".

1226 Erl. 51, 2SS-2S\". Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1838-1339. 1227

mirror and image is placed before your nose, which you can grasp. For
since he makes such a thing out of a small dead grain, should he not
make us, to whom he created and gives heaven and earth, much better and
more glorious beings? Therefore you must be a mad fool, because this is
painted before your eyes and penetrates all five senses, how every grain
loses its shape and whole body, and yet does not lose it, but shoots out
again much more beautiful with leaves and stalks, and gets a beautiful,
new body, so that you would have to be surprised to death, if you had
not seen it before: and will not believe that God will do to us as he
has promised, that he will raise us up and transfigure us, much brighter
and more beautiful than any creature on earth is now; as he will say
later.

And behold, how St. Paul here becomes a delicious painter, painting and
carving the resurrection into everything that grows on earth, putting
everything into the word: \"What you sow,\" namely, all kinds of grain
and plants; he takes all of this as an example or painting, in which he
wants to picture this article and present it to everyone. And although
he has so far proved it mightily from Scripture and God\'s Word, that
would be enough; for he who will not believe, nor let himself be moved
by God\'s Word, and the example or experience of the resurrection begun
in Christ, to him one also preaches in vain by similitude and images.
Now it should be enough for a Christian, when he hears God\'s word, that
he should come forth again from the earth alive, with body and soul and
all his senses, and consider this to be true and certain, because God
has spoken it, and not ask further how it should happen, but let him be
commanded to do the same. For He who is able to raise all the dead from
the earth with a single word, will also know how to give it a form and
nature that serves it and belongs to heavenly eternal life. But for the
sake of abundance and confirmation of the matter, he also enters into
this disputation, how it will happen; he also knows it, and forms it in
these temporal creatures, namely in everything that grows in the field,
yes also (as we will hear in the following) in heavenly creatures.

For he who believes the word of God, that Christ is risen, and that we
also shall be risen through him, such images also serve him well, as a
silken cloth or harness, 1) in which he grasps this article and carries
it with him. For for this purpose one is accustomed to use parables and
images, so that one may grasp the doctrine all the more clearly and
always carry it in one\'s heart, as they are daily before one\'s eyes
and must remind us of it. Just as the Scriptures paint Christ and his
Christianity as a bridegroom with his bride, so they take such daily
examples and likenesses, and put our main article into them, so that it
is pleasant and fine to remember for those who believe it. For whosoever
believeth not first that Christ is our Saviour, by whom we are
justified, and made clean, and holy, and become one body with him; to
him also such a likeness of doctrine doth nothing everywhere.

266 So St. Paul makes a fine picture and likeness of the mere word and
sermon (which he has done so far about the resurrection), in which even
a simple person can easily grasp and retain this article, because it is
so common that everyone has it before his eyes every day.

Therefore, when you see a farmer or husbandman walking in the field,
reaching into his sack and throwing and scattering, you have a beautiful
picture and painting of how God will raise the dead. But you must first
believe this sermon, so that you can imagine and think that God is such
a husbandman, and that you are his grain, which he casts into the earth,
so that it may come forth again much more beautiful and glorious. He is
a much better and greater husbandman than a farmer in the field, and has
a sack on his neck full of seed, which we human beings are, as much as
we come on earth, from Adam until the last day; these he scatters around
him in the earth, as he takes them, woman, man, great, small, young and
old 2c. For one is to him as another, and the whole world nothing else,
but as the cloth that he wears on his neck. Therefore, when he lets the
people die, especially with

1\) Scharnützlein \-\-- a container for keeping valuable things. Latin:
seriniolum, a small shrine.

1228 **Erl. SI, M6-SS8. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 36. 37. W. VIII,
iszg-igti.** 1229

Heap by pestilence, war, or otherwise, that is, he 1) reached into the
sack, and strewed a handful around him.

Now, what does a pious farmer or husbandman do and think when he
scatters his grain in such a way that it seems as if it were all lost
labor and damage, and he must be a foolish man to lose his grain
wantonly? But ask him yourself, and he will soon say: \"My dear, I do
not throw it away because I want to lose it and let it perish, but
because I want it to grow again in the most beautiful way, and to bear
and give much more for this handful. Now it seems as if it is scattered
in vain in the wind for the birds and little worms; but let it come out,
so that it becomes summer, 2) then you shall see how it will grow, so
that from one handful ten, from one bushel six others will grow. These
are his thoughts; they do not look at how the grain falls into the earth
and must perish, so that it should remain there, but he looks and waits
for the future summer, which should bring it back to him completely and
abundantly, and is so sure and certain of the same grain, which should
grow, as if he saw it already standing there; yes, much more certain,
than that he has there; otherwise he would not be so mad that he wanted
to throw it away in vain and in vain.

Behold, we should also learn and become accustomed to thinking that it
is just so before God when he hurls one heap here and another heap there
into the churchyard, or seizes me today and another tomorrow, and thus
always throws one before and the other after into the earth as his
grains or seeds. This does not look different to us, as if it was now
completely over and should perish eternally. But he sees and thinks much
differently, and does it only for the reason that such his grains shall
come forth again in the most beautiful way in the beautiful future
summer, after this wretched being, and is just as certain with him as if
it had already happened and been arranged. But it is written for us, and
so sweetly pictured, that we should also have the same thoughts when we
are lying there on our deathbed, and we

1\) Erlanger: \"he into sack\".

2\) Wittenberger: in summer.

Do not turn away from it, whether we see nothing or feel nothing, except
that we should be scratched into the earth and hear nothing but weeping
and wailing, as if it were all over with us, but tear such human
thoughts out of the heart and graft these heavenly, divine thoughts into
it, so that it is not called buried or corrupted, but sown or planted by
God Himself as a grain or seed.

270 For it is not according to our seeing and feeling that we are to
judge, but according to the word of God. Just as we do not think of the
bodily grain that is sown as we see it thrown into the earth and
decaying, but according to what we know is to become of it in the
future, although nothing of it is yet to be felt. For such thoughts are
not our own poems, but, just as in the temporal being we draw our
thoughts and grasp them from God\'s work, which we see before our eyes
every year, so we also speak here of the future being from and according
to God\'s word, which is also true and certain, and must lack just as
little when the time comes, just as little as its present creature and
work on earth lacks.

For this reason, St. Paul is a master craftsman, that he can portray
this article so finely and sweetly. For no man could ever have made such
a painting, that out of him whom all the world considers dead, he made
an image of life, and thus 3) portrayed it in such common and small
things, namely, in all kinds of seeds or grains in the field, that when
a man dies, it must be regarded no differently than the grain that is
thrown into the ground; which, if it could see and feel for itself what
would happen to it, it would also have to think that it would be
eternally spoiled by it. But the husbandman would tell it much
differently, and imagine or paint it as if it were already there, and
therefore grew with a beautiful stalk and ears in the very finest way.

272 So we also have to let ourselves be painted here and formed in the
heart, when we are buried under the earth, that it must not be called
dead and corrupted, but saved.

3\) \"So\" is missing in the Wittenberg and the Jena.

[1230 Eri. 51, 2-s-sso. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1341-1344. 1231]{.underline}

We must henceforth learn a new speech and language to speak of death and
the grave when we die, that it is not called dead, but sown for the
summer to come, and the churchyard or burial ground is not a heap of
dead people, but a field full of grains, which are called God\'s grains,
which shall now sprout and grow again, more beautiful than any man can
understand. This is not a human, earthly language, but a divine,
heavenly language. For such things are not found in any books of all
scholars and sages on earth. Read all history, philosophers, and
lawyers\' books and writings, and you will not hear a word or letter of
the painting or such speech that out of death shall come another, new,
eternal life, and when people die that it shall be called sown; but all
at once they call it eternally corrupted and ruined, that nothing more
is to be hoped for nor waited for. According to the same, the other
rough crowd, called Master Epicurus, both among priests, nobles,
burghers and peasants, says: \"Do you think that there is one man in
another? 2c. And it is even a foreign, un-German language to them when
one speaks of the resurrection or eternal life.

But among Christians, this is to be a familiar, common and common
language. For since they are different people, who no longer live or
speak earthly, but heavenly, as God\'s children and the angels\'
companions, they must also speak a different language. Therefore, they
also have another Master, the Holy Spirit, who teaches them through
God\'s Word to understand and speak this language that is spoken in
heaven. Now when I see my father, mother, brother, sister, child or
friend buried and lying under the earth, I as a Christian do not have to
say: There lies a stinking, rotten carcass or dead man\'s leg; but,
there lies my dear father, mother, child, friend, prince and lord 2c.,
and I today or tomorrow also with them. What are they? Vain grains,
which shall soon grow immortal and incorruptible, much more beautiful
than the green seed in the field when summer comes. That is spoken of it
in quite heavenly German.

how God and His angels speak. Therefore, even though the world does not
know or understand such language, we must learn to scrape our tongues
and purify our eyes so that we can look at and speak according to God\'s
word.

Behold, this is the painting or picture that St. Paul sets before the
eyes of us Christians who believe God\'s word of this article
beforehand, and he takes almost the whole creature with him, overwhelms
and drowns us in it, so that wherever we look, we find examples and
parables enough, and every farmer, even if he cannot read, nevertheless
has this article daily before his eyes and in his hands, so that he can
grasp it. And summa, so many living testimonies of the resurrection do
we have, so many seeds and grains one sees sowing or rising in the field
or in the garden, that one has to say: Life comes out of death
everywhere.

For, go now this hour into a garden, and see how it stands in it, how
all kinds of herbs and trees grow, you see that it is all purely
dead; 1) but if you come into the summer, it is quite another thing,
green and blooming, and is pure joy and life against this harsh, dead
winter. But don\'t you think that it would be such a great work and
miracle, if we had never seen it before, to make such a beautiful apple
tree or cherry tree from a small grain, which bears a thousand apples or
cherries for one seed.

But the 2) one must not see nor pay attention, but pass by, and only eat
and drink from everything that grows there, as otherwise a sow runs over
the field, or burrows in the garden, and eats what it finds. But he who
is a sow, let him be so. For such an image is not painted nor written
for sows, but for those who are Christians, that they may delight and
rejoice when they see such beautiful blossoms and fruit.

1\) This passage shows that this sermon was held in the winter time.
Therefore, the assumption of Köstlin, Martin Luther (3rd ed.), vol. II,
p. 292, that Luther gave these sermons in June 1533, while the Elector
was present in Wittenberg, is at least not to be extended to all sermons
on I Cor. 15. Cruciger also says in his dedication that Luther \"did
several of them at the castle before S. C. F. G.\".

2\) Wittenberger: da.

1232 He\". 51, -S0\--S2. Sermon on I Cor. 15, 36. 37. w. vm, IS44-I346.
1233

say: \"Oh, how lovely it is that it is greening, blossoming and growing
so beautifully; how shameful and miserable it was half a year ago,
when 1) everything was frozen and dead in the earth. Surely this must be
a fine God, who can make such a beautiful living thing out of the dead
winter? Dear, what does he mean by this, or what does it mean? For of
course it was made for our sake, so that we can get to know Him by it,
and it presents His work to us as a prelude to what He wants to do with
us, for the sake of which He created all this. For since he makes such
beautiful new growth from a dead kernel and seed every year, he will
certainly do much more with us in this way, even if we are buried under
the earth, and now the time is coming that an eternal summer will begin,
when we will emerge much more beautiful and glorious.

Thus Christians speak to trees and everything that grows from the earth,
and they to them again. For they do not see in it how they want to eat,
as swine, but God\'s work in it, which He wants to do for us, and so
they take this article as a precious jewel wrapped in a cloth, to
strengthen and confirm our faith, which we have previously established
in the Scriptures. For those who do not have the Word, even though they
2) see such a work of God in the creatures, how everything grows out of
death (as the philosophers among the Gentiles have well seen and
described it), yet they cannot see such a thing in it, nor draw the
conclusion that this article is painted in it. Therefore we are to let
such paintings of St. Paul be commanded to us, that we may well imagine
the resurrection, and well learn this new heavenly language.

This is the first thing that St. Paul has begun to answer to the foolish
question and useless theiding, what will be the nature of the dead when
they all rise from the dead, and what kind of bodies will they have? And
punishes their lack of understanding from their coarse, carnal and pagan
thoughts, so that they do not look at it differently, nor

1\) Wittenberger: that.

2\) \"equal\" is missing in the Erlanger.

think about it, because how it happens here in this life, and want to
find out how it is possible that the body comes back, when no one can
say how the grain that the farmer sows in the field comes back; and yet
must confess that none of them can grow, nor gain a new body, unless it
is first thrown into the earth and decays. Therefore, do not ask much
about how God will make it, or what form the body will take, but be
content with hearing what he will make; then let him command you what
will become of it. For (as I said before) if he can make the being, he
will also know how to give it a form. But he will show you a picture, so
that you can see it, when you see a farmer walking in the field and
throwing the seed into the ground, he does not do it so that it should
remain in the ground, otherwise he would rather keep it out of the
ground at home, but that is his main thought, for the sake of which he
does it all, that he certainly hopes to get it again in the summer; and
nevertheless he scatters it in the ground, so that it should and must
rot and decay. For he knows that nothing else can come of it; as Christ
also says John 12:24: \"Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and
die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth forth much fruit.\"
For after it has died and lost its form, it only begins again as if it
wanted to live, and sprouts under itself and above itself, until it
becomes new grain.

God does the same with us. For he does not throw us into the earth so
that we should remain in it forever and perish, and yet he must attack
it as if it were lost and nothing should ever come of it. 3) For if the
body does not decompose in the earth, no new body will ever come of it.
For if the body did not decay in the earth, no new body would ever come
out of it; but if it is to take on a new form, we must decay and perish
just like the grain under the earth. Therefore you must be a great fool
(he says) if you think that man must therefore remain in the earth and
cannot come again, because

3\) \"it\" is missing in the Erlanger.

1234 Erl. 51, SSS-S34. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, I346-IS4S. 1235

It must rot and decay there, or if it is resurrected in a moment, it
must retain its present imperfect form and become just such a thing as
it is now. When you sow your grain in the ground, you do not do it
yourself so that it will remain as it is and not take on a different
form; instead, you throw it there so that it will lose its present form.
And if this did not happen, nothing would come of it, and your sowing
and all the grain would be lost. Shouldn\'t God also think much more
with us to make another being (whether he lets us be entombed in the
earth now), and bring forth his grain again with a more beautiful and
better form than now, so that it loses this mortal being and gets an
immortal being in its place, as St. Paul will conclude later. For this
dead, corruptible grain (that is, the body as it now lives) does not
belong to heaven, for it 1) has previously lost its form and put on a
new one, since it should no longer eat, drink, smell, fester and stink,
deal with wife, child, house and yard, nor have any other necessities,
but sweep all this out and perish or decompose in the grave, so that it
may be completely pure and transfigured. And you fool, with your carnal
thoughts, want to make such a heaven for God, when the body should cover
and fill itself daily, and sweep it out again, as it is doing now. Reach
into your own bosom, and see your own work, what you yourself do with
the grain that you sow, that will show you that it should not nor can
happen this way. Since you must now grasp this in the grain, so that its
decay serves to give it a different, more beautiful form (for if it
remained as it is now, it would never get a root, and would much less
become a stem or stalk or ear), should God not create much more with His
grain, who is a different cultivator than you, who creates all things,
and us humans as well. And because he made us once before from nothing,
he can also make us alive again from the grave, and give the body a new
form. For it is a greater art to make something out of nothing, because,

1\) Wittenberger: he.

that is something before, make it new again and more beautiful 2c.

See, so he wants to beat away the gross carnal mind, which they carry in
the article, to weaken it with it. And this is the opinion and
resolution, that the body of man must be changed, and not retain the
form it now has, without what belongs to its essence, so that nothing
remains that is of this perishable life; and yet the same body and soul
be and remain, as each one has had, with all the limbs. But he must
leave everything here that he had in this world, husband, wife, child,
house, farm, master, servant, maid, food, drink, clothing, etc., until
we have all come to the end, one after the other, that this life may
cease and pass away, and another, more beautiful life may begin, which
shall remain forever. Therefore it is not a question of whether in the
resurrection they will all have the same nature or status as they have
now, and where they will all eat, drink, and wear clothes, 2c., because
he wants to make such a new life for this very purpose, so that this
perishable life will all be gone and nothing more. For this purpose
death must serve, so that it comes and says: Stop eating, drinking, and
drinking 2c., and lie down and decompose, so that you get a new, more
beautiful form, like the grain from the earth grows again.

**Not all flesh is the same flesh, but there is one flesh of men,
another of cattle, another of fish, another of birds. And there are
heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies. But another glory have the
heavenly, and another the earthly. Another clarity has the sun, another
clarity has the moon, another clarity has the stars. For one star
surpasses the other in clarity. So also the resurrection of the dead.**

281 St. Paul sets three equivalences over this article. The first, as we
have heard, is of the grain or seed. The second is of all the bodies of
all living creatures, birds and fish. The third is of all the heavenly
bodies, the sun, moon and stars, so that all of them serve us in
painting and imagining this article. Now he has shown sufficiently by
the first similitude that the human body

1236 **Erl. SI, 2S4-236. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 39-42. W. VIII,
IS4S-I3SL.** 1237

In the resurrection, a different form shall arise, much more beautiful
and glorious than now, just as the grain, after it decays, grows again
much more beautiful. And it shall become such a new being that it shall
be stripped of all this temporal need, and shall have all fullness and
sufficiency in God alone. But in this other and third likeness he will
interpret the other piece, of which I have also said above 260s, as that
also in that life there shall be various differences, that every one in
his body shall have his clarity, item, also every member its special
honor.

This is now recently the opinion of St. Paul. See how God has made and
given various kinds of flesh to living creatures, such as men, cattle,
birds, and fish, 2c., all of which are of one kind and nature, in that
they are and are called flesh. Although we Germans, and the pope in his
own language, do not call fish flesh; but with the Romans and Greeks,
and all the true natural masters who have spoken or 2) written of it,
everything that is a living body is called flesh. Just as there are many
kinds of flesh, and yet they are not of the same form: the cattle and
other animals of the earth are different from the birds of the air; the
birds are different from the fish of the water; and in each of these
there are many differences, so that the flesh of one animal is known
before the flesh of another: so also there will be many kinds of men,
and yet they will have many differences, each according to what he has
lived 3) and done. This is the other likeness.

Thirdly, after he has spoken of all kinds of living bodies, he also
speaks in general of other bodies, and goes recently through all bodily
or moral creatures, gold, silver, fire, water, stone, wood, iron, and
what may be called more, which are earthly things. After that also
everything that is in the sky, sun, moon, planets and other stars, which
he calls \"heavenly bodies\". There are now so many earthly or heavenly
creatures, and yet each one is different in its kind from the others,
and always one

1\) \"all\" is missing in the Jena.

2\) Jenaer: and.

3\) Wittenberg: believes. Latin: vixit.

more glorious and noble than the other: Gold better than lead; silver
better than straw; precious stone better than wood; and among the
heavenly creatures the sun more glorious and beautiful than the moon,
and one star more beautiful and brighter than another; yet all the stars
have one nature or body, and on earth also all are at the same time
God\'s creatures, the least as well as the greatest and most precious.
In the same way, in that life there will also be various differences of
clarity or glory, and yet all in one heavenly being, as one body and
members of Christ. Just as in a natural body there are many and various
members, each of which has its own name and custom or office, and yet
all have the same essence and nature of the one body.

Thus, according to St. Paul, many more of these similes could be made
and spread out, as far as nature goes, as God makes one body out of many
bodies, so that each has its own body, with a difference, so that it can
be known before others, even in one kind or essence. As, among the
precious stones there are many names, colors and powers; in one body
many members: so that one sees everywhere that the carnal thoughts are
nothing, as if it had to happen in that life just as in this one. For if
one should not eat, drink, and drink in this way (says reason), then one
would not be able to do anything with the members of the body. But if
one should have and need all the members of the body, as now, it would
become an unrighteous being and a shameful kingdom of heaven, as above.

\[§257 ff.\] enough has been said.

Now St. Paul rhymes this simile with his article, and says: \"So also
the resurrection of the dead. This means: We will all rise with body and
soul, but in a new being or form of the body and its members. Therefore,
let no one be mistaken by any pagan talk or thought as to how it will
rhyme and come about. For if the body is to be transfigured, then also
the members with their custom will be in a new essence, and it will be
found for what purpose they will serve or be useful, whether one will
not need them in the same way as now, according to the perishable
custom; and nevertheless they should not be used.

1238 Erl. SI, 2SS-SS9. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, isss-isst. 1239

so that we shall have various distinctions or clarities among ourselves;
as, Peter and Paul of an apostle; the one of a martyr, the other of a
pious bishop or preacher will have clarity; each according to his work
which he has done. Just as in a body each member has its own glory, the
eyes have a different glory than the hands or feet, 2c., item, in the
sky the sun has a different clarity than the stars, and one star is
brighter and brighter than the other, so that all will be different, and
yet according to the person the same and one nature, and all will have
the same joy and blessedness in God. Just as the stars all shine in the
sky and are bright, although one gives more, the other less clarity or
light. This is briefly said of the images or parables that he uses to
impress the simple, so that they do not let the coarse, sour thoughts,
drawn from this life, err. Now he concludes, and transfigures such
similes with dry, clear words:

**V. 42-44. It is sown corruptible, and will rise incorruptible. It is
sown in dishonor, and will rise in glory. It is sown in weakness, and
will rise in power. It is sown a natural body, and will rise a spiritual
body.**

There he touches again the first simile of sowing, and lays it out
himself, and herewith throws out of sight another piece of a great
aversion, which also moves the Gentiles very much. For these are their
arguments or objections, as mentioned above (255 ff.): first, that
Christians themselves must confess that even the bodies of the greatest
saints, as patriarchs, prophets, apostles, have long since decayed to
such an extent that not a stalk of them can be felt. When a man dies and
lies in a coffin for more than a day, he smells and stinks, and if it
lasts longer, maggots and worms grow in it, and it becomes such a
disgraceful being that no one can see it or suffer it. Therefore, it
must be quickly buried under the earth or consumed in fire or water, so
that one can

1\) \"a\" is missing in the Erlanger.

For in short, he is not to be suffered on earth. Now, such a sight
causes great distress, that one must think: How should something become
of such a body, which stinks and rots so badly? and, as those say who
have experienced it, the most wicked worms, vipers, toads, snakes become
of it? item, on the gallows by ravens, in the water by fish, toads and
also snakes, or pulverized in the fire, and the ashes scattered
everywhere? How does this rhyme with this article, resurrection of the
dead?

Yes, I know this too (says St. Paul) and have seen it myself many times;
but only stay with the word \"seed\", or sowing, as I have painted and
interpreted it, namely, that it means sown and God\'s grain. Therefore
you must not look at it, nor let yourself be deceived, that the body
becomes so stinking and rotten, and finally nothing remains of it.
Otherwise, you must also say to the sower, \"Well, what will become of
the grain? It lies there in the earth and is completely rotten. Then he
would say to you again, \"You are a fool and don\'t understand; that\'s
just how I want it, and I would be sorry if it were otherwise. Because
it is so decayed, that is a good sign that something will come of it, as
I had hoped. For therefore he hath cast it down, that it should lose its
form, and new corn should grow out of it: and he rejoiceth that it
faileth and corrupteth.

Therefore, it is not necessary to say of a man or a dead man\'s leg,
\"Nothing can ever come of it; it has no eyes, ears, flesh, lungs or
liver, 2c. and everything has been destroyed. But so the Christians say:
You fool, so it should and must be, that the whole body loses its form,
and decays with skin and hair, and everything that it has in itself, so
that one must say that it is nothing anymore. This is called sown here,
and sown corruptible; but afterwards it shall be called risen
incorruptible, when we shall have a new body with all the members, so
that it shall 3) no more decay, nor die, nor decrease, but remain
eternally healthy and fresh, beautiful and fragrant, and

2\) \"it\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3j Wittenberger: es.

1240 Erl. si, M-s4i. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 42-44. w. vm, 1354-1357. 1241

have everything as he would wish. That is the first.

On the other hand, St. Paul says: \"It is sown in dishonor, and will
rise in glory,\" that is, it is all worthless and even rejected, as one
can see before one\'s eyes that no animal\'s body after death is kept so
shamefully as man\'s. Sows and other cattle are slaughtered and
strangled for the benefit of the people; or when they die of themselves,
they are led before the gate to the slaughterer, so that the skin and
the lard can still be used; But the dishonor of a man\'s body is that
everyone scares and flies before it, and holds his nose, and hurries to
the grave with it, as much as he can, be it emperor, king or prince, and
robs him of all his honor and jewelry, so that he lies naked and bare,
while the dead raven is left his feathers, the sow her bristles; But he
is not left with a gold chain, not even a thread, but everything is
stripped clean, and nothing but a linen cloth is wrapped around him, so
that he is not seen lying so shamefully, and only quickly covered up, so
that he does not remain on earth. Man becomes such a shameful thing as
soon as he is dead. Even if a mother would like to keep her son, or a
king his heir, and adorn him splendidly, he still cannot stand it, and
must be glad to bring him to earth the sooner the better, and would even
have to be a bold man who could remain alone with a dead corpse.

But a Christian does not have to let himself be deceived by all this.
For even now you do not have to let yourself be challenged, nor do you
have to be mistaken, that you yourself have a nose under your eyes,
which is disgraceful enough with snotting and snorting, 2) without what
the belly does and the whole body, with sweating, barking and all kinds
of filth; nor are you hostile to him because of this, and 3) you do not
despise him because of this, but, regardless of the fact that he is such
a disgraceful sack of stink, you adorn him most diligently with velvet,
gold and pearls 2c. So learn here also to think that therefore this
article does not have to be

1\) Jenaer: one; Wittenberger: one; Erlanger: dem.

2\) schnodeln \-\-- to throw out schnöde Aussonderung (schnöde!, snot).

3\) \"and\" is missing in the Erlanger.

But as dishonest and worthless as it is now, it will return so honestly
and deliciously that the future honor and glory will surpass this shame
and dishonor a thousand times over, so that all creatures will marvel at
it, all angels will praise it and laugh at it, and God Himself will see
His pleasure in it. For to this end it is called sown, like the grain,
which also must so shamefully throw itself down, be humbled, and have
its feet run over it, where it shall grow again afterwards. This is how
it must be, because it is actually God\'s work, which He Himself wants
to make anew, so that it will no longer, as now, become frail and
unruly, but most pure and delicious.

291 Thirdly, it is said, \"Sown in weakness, and shall rise in
strength.\" For it is so weak now, that it must suffer all kinds of
things, where only a plague, yes, a gland or fever comes; and when it
lies there, it cannot fight off (with leave) a louse or a flea, must let
itself be eaten by worms and all kinds of vermin, and is not so much
strength there, that one would like to say: He can do that, but only: He
must suffer that. How then (says reason) should the body rise again from
the grave, when it has been consumed and turned to powder, which even
now, because it lives, is so powerless and weak that a small pestilence
or ulcer throws it down.

292 If thou wilt not believe, go thy way, and remain a sow. But we know
that as weak as he is now, without all strength and ability, when he
lies in the grave, so strong will he become hereafter, when the time
comes, that he will be able to carry this church with one finger, to
move a tower with one toe, and to play with a great mountain as children
play with a ball, 4) and to leap to the clouds in a moment, or to travel
over a hundred miles. For then it shall be called vain strength (as now
it is called vain weakness and lack of strength), that no thing shall be
impossible for him, if he only takes it into his mind, that he alone may
beat the whole world, and become so light and nimble that in a moment he
can both here and there.

4\) In the old editions: Pallen.

1242 Erl. SI, 24l-2ts. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, ISS7-IW9. 1243

The world will never be the same on earth and above in heaven.

293 We now wait for this in faith until that day; but in the meantime we
lie there under the earth, and cannot move a hair\'s breadth from our
place, but must remain as we are laid, and suffer all men\'s feet to run
over us, and all the evil worms to gnaw and devour us away. Nor must we
allow such things to go astray, but think like the farmer who sows the
grain in the ground and buries it deep, and leaves it lying there until
it decays. There it has become so utterly impotent and ruined that it is
of no use anywhere. But nevertheless, when the time comes for it to
become summer, it breaks forth again and shoots up with a beautiful
stalk and full ears, which bear twenty or thirty new grains for one
spoiled grain, so that it stands there against wind, rain, storms and
all kinds of vermin; without God imposing a particular plague. Behold,
such a small grain or seed, which has no power at all, and before could
not move when it was sown, nor come across the earth with the width of a
straw, but now sprouts so strongly that I have often wondered how it is
possible that such a small thing, as a mustard or poppy seed, can pierce
through the earth in such a way that a strong farmer should have enough
trouble to pierce it with a stake, and yet he has no help for it, but it
pierces through in such a way that it cannot be resisted, even if it
hits sand and pebbles, and the earth is hard and dry. 1) Should God not
be able to do this with us, according to his word, when he raises us up,
so that we come forth with a new strength? so that we tear through the
earth, even though great heaps lie over us, and bring such strength and
power with us over all creatures that everything will have to give way
and lie under our feet.

294\. At the last he concludes: \"A natural body is sown, and a
spiritual body is raised. This is an unusual speech for us, which we do
not want to include in this article.

1\) A germinating pea is said to be able to overcome a resistance of
sixty pounds.

But it is not particularly true for us Germans, but we must also become
accustomed to the language of the Holy Scriptures. For, luiuialo oorpus,
a natural body, it means such a body as is born on earth, which needs
its natural abstinence or nourishment, that is, food and drink,
clothing, fire, water, air, wood, iron, as also Ecclesiasticus, chapter
39, tells (Sir. 39, 31. ff.). For the word animale corpus, which we have
interpreted: a natural body, comes from the Hebrew nephesh, anima, which
is common everywhere in Scripture, and means not only a part of man, as
we Germans call the soul, but means the whole man, as he lives in the
five senses, and must maintain himself with food, drink, house and yard,
wife and child. Summa, natural body is nothing else than such a bodily
life, as any livestock lives, that one might well call it, in plain
German/ a livestock body. For in the part of the bodily life we are
nothing or even little different from the cattle, which have just such
bodies, and do the same natural works that our body does, and live
according to their five senses, except that they have no understanding
of it.

295 Such a natural or animal body, which nourishes itself in this way,
feeds on its food, and sweeps out the rest, and in addition is
corruptible, miserable and weak, the same is now sown (says St. Paul)
when it dies and is buried, so that a new, spiritual body may be formed
from it, which does not want to live this natural life, and needs
neither food nor child, neither wife nor child. Paul), when it dies and
is buried, so that a new spiritual body may be formed from it, which
will not live this natural life, nor need food or covering, nor have a
wife or child, nor need other bodily necessities, and yet will be the
same true body. For he is not called a spiritual body because he should
not have bodily life, nor flesh and blood; otherwise he could not be
called a true body. But now it is called a spiritual body, so that it
will have its life, and yet it will no longer be a body that eats,
sleeps, or sleeps, but will be spiritually fed and sustained by God, and
will have life in it.

1244 **Erl. SI, 24S-S4S. Sermon on I Cor. 15, 42-45. W. VIII,
1360-1362.** 1245

296\. But after that, when he thus lives spiritually in God, he will
also go out into heaven and earth, play with the sun and moon and all
other creatures, and also have his joy and pleasure in it, and be so
full and blissful from it that he will never think of eating or
drinking, and thus be a spiritual being or life and be called the whole
man, according to body and soul, 1) which springs from the spirit, and
will go from or through God without means, so that we will not only be
enlightened by Him according to the soul and recognize Him, but will
also go through the whole body, so that it will be as clear and light as
the air, so sharp to see and hear, as far as the world is, that we will
not be in need of another, so that we will preserve ourselves and live,
and still have a true body. Just as the stars in the sky are now made in
such a way that they do not need any necessity for their being, and yet
they are also bodily creatures, even though they do not have such an
earthly body, but a heavenly one.

Behold, St. Paul has herewith taken away all pagan thoughts, and the
evil form which gives rise to such thoughts, when the contemptible,
feeble nature of man is set before our eyes, and a Christian is regarded
no differently than by such outward appearance, that he dies like a cow
or a sow, that no one has yet been so wise and learned as to make a
distinction in the same between a man and any cattle. And it is true (he
says), I myself see and know such art also well, which you can pretend
from your heathen mind; yes, there is no cow, which does not see it; and
if one therefore becomes wise and learned, that one scoffs at this
article, then I am 2) a doctor, or will ever soon become one.

But a Christian must know another art, than such sowing art, that he may
judge and believe, not as it is before his eyes and any cow understands,
but what God\'s Word teaches about it from that which he does not now
see.

1\) The words \"after body and soul\" are missing in the Wittenberg and
the Jena. They are in the Erlangen and Latin versions.

2\) Erlanger: already.

still feels. There it is no longer said 3) that man passes away and
dies, that he must perish, and is nothing but a frail, corruptible,
shameful being, but 4) according to right, divine understanding and in
heavenly language it is said: The corruptible, dishonorable and
powerless is sown, so that it shall rise incorruptible, and in clarity
and power, and from the animal body from earth become a spiritual,
heavenly body.

299\. Therefore, we should learn to be sure of our faith and not doubt
that we have been called by God to Christ through baptism and the
gospel, and that we have the promise of eternal life, because we believe
in the Savior, that he rose from the dead, and that he will also raise
us up on the last day and present us again as beautiful and glorious as
he himself is, so that we can comfort, nourish and strengthen our
hearts, and play with such thoughts, and have our joy in the beautiful,
glorious being that we are to receive there. For this will serve to warm
us up, so that we forget our temporal being and do not cling to this
life as if we wanted to remain here forever (as the world does), but
rather set our defiance and hope somewhat higher than on this life and
transient good, which is nevertheless uncertain without it every hour,
but rather accustom us to comfort ourselves and to make us joyful over
the high unspeakable treasure that we are to receive.

**V. 44, 45: If one has a natural body, he also has a spiritual body. As
it is written: The first man Adam was made into the natural life, and
the last Adam into the spiritual life.**

Then he brings a saying from the Scriptures to confirm what he has just
said about the natural and spiritual body. For thus it is written in
Genesis 2:7 of the creation of man: \"The Lord made man out of the
earth, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. Thus was

3\) Erlanger: \"alone\" instead of: more.

4\) Erlanger: but.

5\) Wittenberger: and.

[1246 Eri. 51, S45-S17. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1362-1385. 1247]{.underline}

man is a living soul. The same word, \"living soul,\" as it reads in
Hebrew, is here interpreted by St. Paul himself with the Greek word
psychicos, natural body. But, as I have said 294), \"soul\" does not
sound like that at all to us Germans; yet we must do honor to the Hebrew
language that we sometimes use its way, because we cannot give it
better. So it is a thing that Moses says \"a living soul\", and here St.
Paul calls \"a natural life\", or a natural man, as I have shown enough
above, that in Hebrew the little word \"soul\" actually means, which we
call body life, or a living body, that is, a man or animal that snorts
and has breath.

301 Thus it is written very often in Moses, \"every soul,\" that is,
every animal that has a living body. Item, of Jacob he says \[Gen. 46,
25-27\] that he went into Egypt with all the souls that were in his
house; that is nothing else than as many living bodies were with him.
Accordingly one reads also in the New Testament, as Revelation 18,
11-13, where he prophesies about Babylon, that one will no longer buy
nor sell corpses, nor souls of men, that is, living men, or captive
people. Moses does not want to say anything else than that God has
infused his five senses into man and made him eat, drink, smell and what
is necessary for the body. All this is called by St. Paul from the
Hebrew psychicos, animalis homo.

302 St. Paul now proceeds from the text, and draws from it an antithesis
or comparative: because Moses says that man was first made to have a
natural body, or to live a natural life, he understands this to mean
another body or life, which is not natural, but spiritual. He sets these
against each other, and thus concludes per antithesis: If one has a
natural body, then one must also have a spiritual body; and 1) thus
distinguishes two kinds of life: one for which Adam was first created,
that is, natural; the other spiritual, which is to come afterward. For
Adam

1\) \"and\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

is first made in the natural life. But because this life ends, and
another is to follow, so that he will live anew, it must not be natural
again, but a spiritual life.

In the same way Christ separates John 3:6 when he says: \"That which is
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit 2) is
spirit\" 2c. For he is called flesh, the whole man born of flesh, as he
lives with body and soul, reason and senses. The same, where he remains
alone, he does not belong to heaven. If he is to go to heaven, then he
must be born of the spirit and become completely spiritual, also with
body and soul, so that there is another life than this natural one; and
yet the same body or man remains. Therefore he now sets two kinds of
Adam or two kinds of man, and makes the first Adam an example or image
of the other. The first Adam is made (he says) into the natural life;
this we have from him, more cannot father and mother give, or God
through them, but the other Adam shall have and give another life. Since
you now carry the first Adam, as he feels and grasps, through which you
live the natural life, know that you will also have the other spiritual
one, when the first one has ceased.

304\. So learn here the words, both \"natural\" and \"spiritual\",
rightly and differently understood according to the Scriptural way: not
that the body is to be distinguished from the soul (as we do in our own
way when we hear the word spirit or spiritual), but that the body must
also become spirit, or live spiritually, as we have already begun to do
through baptism, so that we live spiritually after the soul, and God
also considers and counts the body as spiritual, without it even having
to take its leave of this temporal life, so that it becomes completely
new and spiritual, and lives solely from and through the Spirit. Thus
our Lord Christ, the other Adam, was made into spiritual life through
the resurrection, so that he no longer lives in bodily need as he did
when he walked on earth, and yet has a true body, with flesh and blood,
as he showed himself to his disciples, and has

2\) Erlanger: God.

3\) Erlanger: gar.

[1248 **Erü 51, 247-2SV. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 44-47. W. VIII,
I3KS-I3K7.** 1249]{.underline}

He has set up for himself the heavenly spiritual life, so that he may
also begin it in us and even bring it to pass on that day, as St. Paul
will further show.

**V. 46. 47. But the spiritual body is not the first, but the natural,
then the spiritual. The first man is of the earth and earthly, the other
man is the Lord from heaven.**

305\. There you see how he always puts the two words together:
\"natural\" and \"spiritual body\", that he does not want to understand
it, as some heretics have pretended from the following text: \"Flesh and
blood cannot inherit God\'s kingdom,\" that on the last day only the
spirit or the soul shall come forth and be saved, but the body shall
remain in the earth, as they already began at that time, making only a
spiritual resurrection out of it, that if man were baptized, he would
already be resurrected, and would not concern the body. No, not so, he
will say, for I speak plainly, that it shall be a spiritual body, and
the very same that before was and led a natural or animal being.

Otherwise, if it were true that the soul alone should be saved, a fine
being would come to pass, that we could blame baptism for our being
sinners, and the body would remain condemned, that it would have to bear
its repentance, saying that it is not the soul but the body alone that
sins, and yet the spirit could not be saved, because the body is still
there. But this is nothing. For we are not baptized according to the
soul only, but the body is also baptized: so also the gospel is preached
to us, and we are blessed thereby, not according to the soul only, but
for the sake of the whole man, according to the body also. Item, not
only the soul, but also the body receives the sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, so that it goes through baptism and sacrament with the
soul, and is to remain where the soul remains on the last day.

307 Therefore we stick to the clear words of St. Paul, that it should
become a spiritual body, but before that it should have been a natural
body. For we would gladly (as he says elsewhere, 2 Cor. 5:4), when we
have been baptized, heard the gospel, and received the food of the Lord,
be baptized.

But this cannot be done before that day when there shall be a new being,
not only in us men, but with all creatures. However, we must bear the
body of the beast, and not become so spiritual that we can feel and
grasp it, but must grasp it in faith alone. For God, who has promised us
these things, is sure enough for us, and will not let us believe and
hope in vain.

308\] \"The first man (he says) is of the earth and earthy; but the
other man is the Lord from heaven\"; that is, after the first man, Adam,
was born, we are nothing else but flesh and blood, and earthly in all
things, for he was made from an earthen lump, as the Scripture says
\[Gen. 2:7\], which he here includes. 1) If you have read this in the
Scriptures, and can believe such a miracle that God made that Adam from
earth, you can also believe that He will make a heavenly body out of the
other, heavenly Adam. For, if you put a piece of earth and a living man
against each other, how does the earth dumpling rhyme with the beautiful
living image that Adam is? Now he is nothing else than the same earthen
lump, which has become blood, flesh, veins, 2) legs, eyes, ears, head
2c. Now, can God make a living man out of such a thing, which is only
earth, with all its members and powers: should he not also be able to
make a spiritual, heavenly body out of the present natural body, since
he has the nature or essence of the body beforehand?

309\. Item, where is our first mother, Eve, origin, since he made her
from a leg of Adam? What is such a beautiful image, as she was before
the fall, against the mere leg or rib? Yes, if one should reckon, as all
people come from father and mother, who would believe it, that such a
person should come from there, if us not the

1\) Erlanger: hiemit zeiget.

2\) In the Wittenberg: \"obern\". In the Jenaer: \"or your\". The
Erlanger bietei correctly: \"veins\" after its original: \"oddern\". In
Latin this word is not expressed.

1250 Erl. 5i, 250-W. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, iZ \"7-is7v. 1251

How can he convince us of his work through experience? Should he not
just as well be able to bring the same body out of the grave again, and
make it more beautiful than before, because he has applied his word,
spirit and work to it? Therefore I may now say to man, as he himself
said to Adam: \"You are earth, and will become earth\"; and all men are
of earth, and must again go under the earth. But it shall not remain
earth; but, because he has made a beautiful man out of it before with
body and soul, he will make him much more glorious and beautiful the
next time. For this reason he now lets him decompose in the earth, so
that the earthly being perishes, as it is perishable and corruptible by
nature, weak and corruptible, and becomes a new man from heaven, who is
no longer called earthly, but completely heavenly.

So he teaches again from God\'s word and work, against the sneers of the
wise men, who say, How shall anything come of the dead, feeble, and
corrupt body? For I will tell thee more (saith he) than thou. What was
Adam at first, without an earthly body? Much further from a man than we
shall be when we lie in the grave and rise again. Item: How far is a rib
or a leg, and a beautiful living woman from each other? And how far is a
drop of blood from a living man, who will be a great glorious king on
earth, or a great holy apostle, prophet, and martyr in heaven; and yet
is called in Scripture no other than Abraham\'s seed and David\'s seed,
as also Christ himself, without being begotten of a man.

I could also make much less and 1) even masterfully mock, if it were
art, in addition with unreasonableness, like some coarse philosophers:
Dear, let them preach what they want; do not believe that a drop of
flesh and blood comes to heaven; see for yourself where you come from
2c. Still I must confess here that this is much further from each other,
which I must not believe, but see and feel God\'s work before my eyes,
which He does in man when He brings him to this life.

1\) The words: \"wohl - und\" are missing in the Wittenberg and in the
Jena, but are in the Erlanger and in the Latin.

Otherwise, the sun would have to shine for a long time. Otherwise, the
sun would have to shine for a long time, and all the forests would have
to be gathered together and set on fire, and all creatures would have to
melt with heat, before one made a human being out of an earthly body.
Therefore, this article should not be so difficult, because it is much
less and lesser to make a heavenly body out of what was previously an
earthly body.

**V. 48, 49: As the earthly is, so are the earthly. And as the heavenly
is, so are the heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthly,
so shall we bear the image of the heavenly.**

312 See how the apostle so richly and with so many words emphasizes this
article, that he precedes the shameful preachers who already began at
that time. He holds the two men, Adam and Christ, against each other, as
he has done elsewhere and above \[v. 45\]. For he calls Adam the first
earthly man, but Christ the first heavenly man: sets them both as
examples for us, and concludes from this that we must all become like
the heavenly man, Christ, just as we are now like the first earthly man
2c.

313 But these words, \"Which is earthly,\" and \"which is heavenly,\"
are not to be understood of the sin of the first man, Adam, which we
inherited from him (as some have interpreted), nor of the righteousness
which Christ has, and we receive through him, but we remain in the sense
of which Paul began to speak. For he is not speaking here of the way we
are against God in sins or godliness, but only of the natural and
spiritual life of the body. Therefore, the recent opinion is: As Adam
lived the natural life in the five senses and all kinds of natural works
of the body, so all his children live from the beginning to the end of
the world, one as the other. For this is called \"the image of the
earthly man,\" that is, that we all walk along in the same form and
nature, and live and do all things as Adam and Eve lived and did. For
they have exactly the same nature

1252 **Erl. Sl, SW-S54. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 48-50. W. VIII,
1370-1373.** 1253

Thus they ate, drank, stewed, cast out, froze, wore clothes, 2c. that
there was no difference at all between them and us. 1) But hereafter we
shall put off such an image and nature, and take on another, namely the
heavenly one, Christ, and also touch the same form and nature, which he
now has after his resurrection, so that we are no longer allowed to eat,
drink, sleep, walk, stand 2c., but live without all need of creatures,
and the whole body will become as pure and bright as the sun, and as
light as the air, and finally, so healthy, blessed and full of heavenly,
eternal joy in God, that he will never hunger, thirst, nor grow weary or
decrease.

314 This will now be a different and exceedingly glorious image compared
to this image, and a different carrying, because we now have to carry.
For there will be no unpleasantness, no weariness, no burden, as in this
lazy, lame image, where we have to be carried and dragged, lifted and
led with this heavy, lazy belly, but will 2) travel as nimbly and
lightly as lightning through the whole heavens, and float above the
clouds among the dear angels. And such thoughts St. Paul would like us
to imagine, that we are already accustomed to lift ourselves up by faith
into that life, and remember what we have to hope or desire and ask for
when we speak the article: I believe the resurrection, not of the spirit
alone (as the heretics said), but of the very flesh or body which we
bear on our necks, that it may also become a heavenly, spiritual body.
For what St. Paul says here in many words in the whole chapter is only
an explanation of this article, and teaches nothing else than these two
words: having and giving the resurrection of the flesh.

**V. 50. But of this I say, brethren, that flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God; neither shall that which is corruptible
inherit that which is incorruptible.**

1\) to look at - according to outward appearance. Latin: sxtbruis
opsribus.

2\) \"will\" is missing in the Erlanger.

St. Paul has now almost finished his sermon and has said enough about
this article. But he still adds a little bit to it, as an encore, and
wants to tell them something secret, how it will be on the last day,
when we are to rise from the dead. But he prefaces it with a short
warning, as if to say: \"You have heard how the wise men and the
riffraff preach and mock against this article, how it will be, what kind
of bodies we will have. Therefore I counsel and warn you faithfully,
beware of flesh and blood and what is human wisdom and thoughts, and
only do not think that you will gain this article or keep it. For it is
not known otherwise than from heaven through faith, which must be given
by the Holy Spirit. And summa, judge and direct yourselves, that ye
think and live not as flesh and blood do, which believeth not any thing,
and liveth as though we should abide here for ever, but seek ye how ye
may attain unto the resurrection. For such carnal, worldly being and
thoughts do not belong to heaven, but must all cease and perish.

For (as I have said above \[§ 305 ff.\] and many other times) \"flesh
and blood\" in Scripture means man with all his being, as he comes from
Adam and grows according to reason, where he is not changed by Christ
and faith. Such a man, who thus lives and remains in the old Adam, knows
and understands nothing of God, but dreams and paints God according to
his thoughts and lacks his own (just as the monks paint their God, who
sits above and looks at their caps and orders), therefore he cannot
grasp this article either; and the wiser he is according to reason, the
less he thinks of it. Therefore beware of such, for they are nothing but
flesh and blood, where they are the cleverest, which does not belong to
heaven, nor can come to God\'s kingdom, but must perish and decay until
a new man is made of it.

317\. this is recently the right opinion of this text, and does not
apply that someone wanted to say, because he speaks: \"flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of god\", that not

3\) Erlanger: and.

1254 Erl. 51, 254-256. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, I373-I37S. 1255

the body, but only the soul or spirit should be resurrected, as some
heretics have concluded from this, straight against St. Paul\'s teaching
throughout this chapter. For he does not say, \"The body will not rise
again,\" but, \"Flesh and blood cannot inherit God\'s kingdom. And
behold, what muzzlers and careless fools these are who make such
interpretations of it. The text stands clearly thus: \"It cannot inherit
God\'s kingdom.\" They flutter about and see only the word \"flesh and
blood\" and nothing else; then they add from their thoughts that flesh
and blood will not be resurrected; which St. Paul never wanted to say,
nor could he, because in the next text he said beforehand so clearly and
scantily that a true spiritual body should be resurrected; but so he
says: \"that flesh and blood do not belong to God\'s kingdom,\" as
Christ Himself also says John 3:5 ff.

318\. Now there is a very different thing, to rise bodily or with blood
and flesh, and another thing, to enter God\'s kingdom or heaven. For
Judas, Caiphas and all the damned will also be resurrected bodily, but
they will not enter God\'s kingdom. And what could be more clearly
spoken than that he says that flesh and blood, which is now sinful,
cannot go to heaven? Just as Christ also speaks \[Joh. 3, 5.\]:.
\"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. For that
which is born of flesh (saith he) is flesh.\" But the flesh and blood
that is baptized into Christ is never called flesh and blood (for it is
born again of the Spirit), even though it was flesh and blood. Of course
it is flesh and blood, but spiritually not, because it has been cleansed
by Christ in baptism and taken to God\'s kingdom. Therefore it must no
longer be called flesh and blood, without being outwardly like your
body. For flesh and blood actually means: the old man according to his
reason, as he comes from flesh and blood, and neither knows nor
understands anything anymore, without faith and God\'s word and without
Christ, as he says to Peter Matth. 16, 17: \"Flesh and blood has not
revealed these things to you\" 2c.; therefore it does not belong to
God\'s kingdom. But it still does not follow that blood and flesh do not
belong to the kingdom of God.

should rise again on the last day, but rather the contradiction follows.
For this very reason, because flesh and blood cannot come to God\'s
kingdom, it must cease to die and decay, and be resurrected in a new,
spiritual being, so that it may go to heaven. Therefore he admonishes
them as Christians to be new men, so that they will not be found as
flesh and blood on that day.

I say this so that one may see how such spirits (who want to be masters
of the Scriptures everywhere) get so fine, and sail with half a wind,
and when they see a word, quickly open their mouths and eyes to it, so
that they can no longer see or hear anything before it. Just as now the
Anabaptist mob sees with mouth, eyes and ears nothing in baptism but
water, and swarm after it: Water is water, what good is water to the
soul? They can see water (as a part of baptism), which the cow also
sees; 1) they think it is great wisdom that they can say: water is
water; but the other and most important part, namely the word: \"Whoever
believes and is baptized will be saved\" \[Marc. 16, 16.\], they cannot
see with open eyes. They have so filled their mouths and eyes with water
that they cannot see both the word and the water. And it serves them
right that they disgrace themselves and are struck over the head with
their own sword.

**V.51. 52. Behold, I tell you a mystery. We shall not all fall asleep;
but we shall all be changed, and that suddenly in a moment, at the time
of the last trumpet. For the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
rise, and we shall be changed.**

This is the last bit in which he wants to tell them something secret.
For he is a pious apostle, and means it faithfully, as he would like
them to grasp the article well and keep it, and not be misled by any
other gossip. Therefore says

1\) Erlanger: \"can see\" instead of: \"well sees\".

2\) Wittenberg and Jena: \"still word\".

[1256 Eru si, sös-259. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 51. 52. w. vm, is7s-is78.
1257]{.underline}

He told them a special thing in one ear, which is not written anywhere
else, how it will happen on the last day. For because he said that no
one would go to heaven with this corruptible body of animals, but that
out of this natural body a new spiritual body must be formed, someone
might be troubled and ask, \"How will it be with those who are still
found alive when Judgment Day comes?

321 To this he gives this secret answer, namely: \"Thus it shall come to
pass (he says): \"We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed\"
2c. That is, as if we should not all die, as some have also speculated
about it; but St. Paul\'s opinion is this, that the last day will come
as suddenly as a snare (as he says elsewhere), before anyone knows it,
when the world will be completely safe, and in a moment all will be
changed. By this he does not mean to deny that we must not all die, but
in this way he says: that we shall not all fall asleep; that is, those
who are taken at the same last hour will not pass away in this way, as
otherwise a man on his deathbed, nor be taken to the grave or under the
earth. For these are called in the Scriptures \"fallen asleep\", so they
go into the coffin and into the grave. But these will come out of this
life into that, so that they will not go under the earth, but will be
badly changed or transformed.

For the Greek word, which is written here, means primarily to change,
that one moves from one place to another, as, from the water to the dry
land, from the earth into the air. So we shall also be found there in a
moment elsewhere and in a different way, who the same hour before will
be here on earth in the house or 1) in the field, and suddenly be moved
away from the table or bed, or from the work, as we walk, stand, sit or
lie, so that in a moment we are dead and again alive, and

1\) \"or\" is missing in the Erlanger.

will be changed, however, and hover above in the clouds. He means such
changes here. Although he also includes the other qualitative changes of
form, of which he has already said \[v. 42 ff.\] that the body will put
on another garment, that is, it will be transfigured and made bright,
much more glorious and beautiful than the sun; but not in such a way
that this will happen while he is still in this inn and in this garment,
but everything will be stripped naked and burned to powder beforehand,
and in that same moment he will be drawn away. He himself explains this
in 1 Thess. 4, 15. 16. 17. when he says: \"We who are alive and will
remain in the future of the Lord will not appear to those who sleep. For
the Lord Himself will come down from heaven with a shout and the voice
of the archangel, and with the trumpet of God. And the dead in Christ
will rise first. Then we who are alive and remain shall be caught up
together with them in the clouds to meet your Lord in the air\" 2c.

With this he shows that everything is to happen at once, that the dead
are to be brought forth from the graves, and we are to be carried away
with them, as and where we are found, and torn away from mortal life and
being, to be transfigured at the same time as one another. This is what
it says here: \"We shall not all fall asleep.\" For it cannot and must
not happen so slowly that always one buries the other, until we all die
2) one after the other, but must once all be gathered together in heaps,
and thus be moved through with one another, but so that \[it\] shall not
happen without death. But God will show His almighty power and majesty,
so that everything on earth will be consumed in a moment, and the whole
world will lie in one heap and become different, and we will be
eternally beside and with Christ; but the others, who have not believed,
will be cast into eternal torment. And this he will do (he says) by the
last trumpet. For he will first descend with a great shout (1 Thess.
4:16), and will send the archangel to blow the trumpet of God, which
will sound through heaven and earth.

2\) Erlanger: all, all.

1258 Erl. Sl, SSS-S6I. Interpretations On the 1st Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1378-1381. 1259

that everything will fall into one heap and all the dead will have to be
raised.

This is the secretly concealed little piece, which he alone tells his
Christians. For the wise of the world cannot and should not understand
it, but rather make fun of it and mock it. But the Christians alone
shall know and understand it. For of course he will not do it at the
last day, so that you may understand it now, because otherwise there is
no article of faith that can be grasped or understood by reason. If we
cannot comprehend our own nature in body and soul, when we see and feel
before our eyes, how it is that we see, hear, speak, think, grow, 2c.,
what then should we understand of such high things, which we neither see
nor feel, but must grasp with faith alone? Further he speaks:

**For this corruptible must put on the incorruptible, and this mortal
must put on immortality.**

He always spins this in, 1) that he comes to the beautiful text, so that
he will conclude. We will not only (he wants to say) be raptured and
carried away to heaven, and leave everything here that we must have for
the necessities of this life, house, yard, clothes, shoes, 2c., and let
everything that is on earth perish and burn, but also strip off
everything that is innate to us of our perishable nature, eat, drink,
sleep, so that we no longer need work or effort. All these things must
be taken away in a moment, and completely changed to eternal clarity and
glory, and must be changed, not only in the place, but also in our
bodies, so that they remain unchangeable and imperishable.

**When this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall
put on immortality, then shall be fulfilled the word that is written:
Death is swallowed up in victory. Death, where is your sting? Hell,
where is your victory.**

1\) i.e. he talks about it continuously (Dietz). Wittenberger:
\"hinein\" instead of: einhin.

When the heart is full, the mouth overflows. That is why St. Paul can
speak so abundantly of this article, for he is full of it and so sure of
it that he considers everything against it to be nothing; otherwise such
words would not come to him if he were not full of such thoughts in his
heart. That is why in other ears, which do not deal with such thoughts,
they sound very unclear and strange, as incomprehensible words. But he
who is concerned about these things and thinks about another life will
grasp and understand them, for he speaks of them as if they were already
there before his eyes.

327 And it must come to this, because the Lord Christ is risen, and his
resurrection gives us opposition to our sin, death, and hell, that we
also learn to say, \"Death, where is thy sting?\" 2c., and yet now see
only the contradiction, that we wear a vile corruptible thing on our
necks, and even a miserable, vile being, 2) subject to all kinds of
distress and peril, and finally vain death. But the faith that holds on
to Christ can draw many other thoughts, and see a new being, and grasp
such an image and view that such a corruptible, wretched form is gone
altogether, and a pure, heavenly being is there. For since he is certain
of this article, that Christ\'s resurrection is ours, it must follow
that this same resurrection must be just as powerful in us as it is in
him (without him being another person, namely, true God) and bring about
this, that this frail and mortal being in our body is stripped and taken
away, and another, immortal being is put on with such a body, which no
more harm, sickness, accident, sorrow nor death can hit, but is
completely pure, healthy, strong and beautiful, so that not a needle
point can hurt him in his body. This is to be the power and effect, or,
as St. Paul says here, the victory acquired through Christ, who will
purify and sweep away our sin and death, with all kinds of infirmities,
driving and suffering of the body.

328 And behold how St. Paul speaks of this life and being; behold it
thus, that

2\) Erlanger: and.

3\) \"he\" is missing in the Wittenberger.

1260 Erl. SI, Sermon on I Cor. 15, 54. 55. w. VIII, IS8I-ISW. 1261

it is not man himself, but a garment which he must now wear, but
afterwards must take off, and put on another. Make death and the grave
nothing else than that it is called an old torn garment taken off and
thrown away; and the resurrection is called putting on a beautiful, new
garment (which is called immortalitas, incorruptibility or immortality),
spun and wrought by the victory of Christ. For to this end the victory
was through Christ, who in Himself overcame all things, that He might
clothe thee therewith, and cleanse thee from thy sin and death, that
nothing might remain in thy corruptible body, and from all that the
devil hath blown into it, or that cometh from him, all manner of
unhappiness and infirmity, error and ignorance, without which is nature
and true body, as it was created by God. For God did not make man to sin
and die, but to live. But the devil has put shameful filth and stains on
nature, so that he must bear so much pestilence, stench and misfortune
on his neck 1) because he has sinned. Now that sin has been taken away
through Christ, we must also get rid of it, so that everything is pure,
and nothing evil or annoying is felt on earth any more, but not in any
other way than that we first have this old, evil garment taken off
through death, until it 2) becomes powder.

329 When this happens (he says), it will be fulfilled and called: Factum
est, which is now called: Scriptum est. It will happen once and be
aligned, which one preaches now always and says. What is now the same?
It is that which is written, \"Death is swallowed up in victory.\" Where
St. Paul got this word, which he says is written in the Scriptures, I
cannot really know. It seems well that it is from the prophet Hosea on
the 13th, v. 14th, where he speaks, \"I will deliver them out of hell,
yea, from death will I deliver them. Death, I will be a poison unto
thee; hell, I will be a plague (or pestilence) unto thee,\" that is, I
will kill and cleanse thee myself. For poison

1\) \"so much - neck\" is missing in the Erlanger and in the Latin.

2\) Jenaer: he.

and plague is called in the Scriptures a deadly evil, which soon
consumes you and takes you away, as one is stung by the most poisonous
vipers, or gets a hot, damp fever 3) or pestilence; just as the stinging
of snakes naturally brings fever. This is what St. Paul may have meant,
and in short words, he may have committed the crime.

330 But I think that St. Paul has looked further, and besides the saying
of Hosea, he wants to include all such things in Scripture, especially
the main saying, from which many others are spun, Genesis 3:15, where
God says to the serpent, \"I will put enmity between you and the woman,
and between your seed and her seed; he shall bruise your head, and you
shall bruise his heel. There are in the Hebrew words of the same kind,
to tread or to sting, and actually means to sting, as the serpent stings
and the poison shoots, and wants to say that the serpent will sting him
in the heel, but Christ will sting him again in the head, and be a
deadly poison and pestilence to her (as Hosea interprets from this
text). Now this saying brings with it this sermon of St. Paul: \"Death
is swallowed up in victory.\" For this is what our Lord Christ has
accomplished, that the poison and stings of the devil have been killed
and even devoured by Him, when He has crushed his head, that is, taken
away all power and strength. So you can draw all such sayings from time
to time in the prophets in this saying, as they all flow out and in,
that out of all One text is made fei. For he does this according to his
rich spirit, that he melts many sayings into one heap, and pours such a
text out of it, which the whole Scripture gives, and is the opinion of
the whole Scripture. Thus he will say 4) When Christ, by his
resurrection, shall have accomplished that for which it was done, then
shall all things be fulfilled which are written of the victory, that
thereby both death and hell shall be swallowed up, and be no more; that
it shall be said, \"Death,

3\) \"schwind fever\" - an acute fever. Latin: acnita st kervens lsNris.
Walch and the Erlanger: schwind fever. ,

4\) Erlanger: well.

[1262 Erl. oil, SS\--S6S. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1383-1386. 1263]{.underline}

where is your spike now? Hell, where is your spear?\" 1) This will then
no longer be preached nor heard nor believed, but will be felt and
experienced by oneself, and will no longer be called: Fiat, but: Factum
est, and stand there before the eyes, which is now presented in the
Word. However, we must hold to this saying, and know that what it says
must certainly come to pass.

Behold now the words, how mightily he speaketh of death out of the
scriptures, and maketh it to seem as if it were utterly devoured and
purely drunken, that nothing should remain of it, who hath devoured and
is devouring all men upon the earth; item, that he himself will be a
poison to death, and a pestilence to hell, which shall consume all his
poison, wherewith he hath choked and destroyed men. For this poison is
nothing else but the curse that has gone over all the world, blown and
smitten into us by the devil, so that we must all die of it. This is the
poison which he gave to Adam, and which we all drank when we were born,
and which has passed through the body and all the members, and also
shows itself by heart with all kinds of plagues and calamities. On the
other hand, the Scriptures show us a healing remedy and a delicious
medicine, given by God in the Word, by which He certainly promises that
He will kill death again, and also give the devil a little drink, so
that he may drink himself to death forever, and devour his poison,
curse, sin, hell and death, which he has attached to nature, himself,
but we shall be eternally delivered from it by believing and clinging to
the Seed.

I will do that myself (he says), I will be your death and pestilence
myself. Calls himself with such ugly words a death and pestilence; and
yet are out of measure comforting. For behold what and whom he means. He
is not hostile to nature, but shows that he wants to help her to curb
her enemy, death and the devil, and laments him of our accident, because
he sees that we are now drowned by the devil\'s poison and death, and
are stuck in it, that we cannot get out. He wants to take revenge on
him, as on his own.

1\) In the German editions: \"Spieß\", but in Latin: victoria.

enemy who has poisoned and corrupted his work. Therefore, this is a
truly divine 2) theriac; not from the apothecaries, but prepared and
given from heaven by the resurrection of Christ, which is to be harmless
to us, but only to kill and destroy the one who gave us the poison and
caused it.

If we now begin to believe the article of Christ, the drink is already
mixed and drunk, which takes away the poison that he has put into my
heart and conscience, and into the body, so that we are helped out of
the curse, and the same poison that we have in us is poured into the
devil, so that he must devour death upon us. So we have drunk a healing
medicine in baptism and sacrament, which expels and takes away our
poison, and does not kill me, but the very enemy who wanted to strangle
me with it. Behold, this is why he speaks in such fancy words, that God
calls himself a poison: not for us poor people, who have death and
pestilence on our necks before, but against the poison of death and
shells, so that we may comfort ourselves when we feel such poison and
plague, and know that God takes care of us so highly that he will take
them out of our bodies and souls through Christ, and drink them all into
the devil and death, so that his stomach will be torn apart by it.

Now the pestilence and poison is such a death, which does not choke
suddenly and suddenly, but it does so all the same, lifts up and
gradually blows 3) through the whole body, until it comes to the heart.
God does the same with us, not wanting to give the victory over death
and the devil suddenly, but lets it be preached for a while for the sake
of the elect who are yet to be born, and thus begins to mix and prepare
the potion, so that it is a purgation or remedy that will heal and
strengthen us, but a poison and death to the devil. Just as a physician
gives a potion that is a poison to the sick for the health of the body,
but a poison to the fever; so that he may also call his medicine or
theriac a poison or pestilence, and is also called here a poison.

2\) Thus the Erlangen and the Latin. Jenaer swohi a misprint:
\"töttlich\"; Wittenberger: deadly.

3\) In the old editions: meilich.

1264 **Erl. SI, SSS-2S7. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 54-57. W. VIII,
1386-1388.** 1265

one pestilence kills another. This is how it is in Christianity, when
the word, baptism and sacrament are distributed, and nothing else is
preached, except that Jesus Christ died and rose again. This is the only
remedy or purgation against our sin and death, which we must daily use
and let go, so that the poison may be driven out of our hearts, and we
may be brought from death and hell to eternal life. He promised this,
and commands us to preach and believe it, thereby working in us daily
that it may pass through as leaven (as Christ says Matth. 13, 33.), that
the heart may always increase in faith, and learn to despise and
overcome this life and all its plagues.

335 This is the victory by which death is to be swallowed up, so that
one should no longer fear death, nor remain in it. For the heart has
already been infused with the gospel, which is to be a poison and plague
to death, weakening death from day to day and taking away its power,
until it perishes altogether and becomes nothing. For even though it has
not yet been finally swallowed up in us, the victory has been won
through Christ, and has become ours through the gospel, baptism and
faith, so that we will finally destroy it on the last day, when we have
taken off the old, earthly, corruptible robe and have put on a new,
heavenly one 1) so that we will remain in life forever, that we remain
eternally in life, and life in us, so visibly and sensitively, as we now
see and feel the contradiction, that death is in us, and we are in it,
that it seems as if the victory is his alone, and he as a lord of the
world always devours and eats away one after the other, until \[the\]
last day. Nevertheless, we know from the Scriptures that the victory is
taken away from him through Christ, who began to devour him in himself,
and through him we also now have spiritual victory, and afterward also
bodily death will be buried and cleansed, so that no more will be seen
or known of him, and instead we will have vain life and blessedness.

336 Then the joyful boasting and defiance will begin, so that we will
say

1\) Wittenberger: Rock.

and sing, \"Death, where is your sting now? Hell, where is your
victory?\" That is, death and hell hit a cliff, and spoken: Dear death,
do not bite me, be now evil and strangle me: Despite devil and hell,
bend 2) me a hair! Where are you now, you evil people eaters? So that
then it will not be called anything else, but a loud mockery from death,
hell and devil driven. And as they now boast and mock against all the
world: \"Defiance, that you have escaped from me;\" so it will then turn
around, that we will cool our troubles on them again, and forever defy
and say: \"Let me see, what can you strangle now? Yes, it is forbidden
to you, and now you must lie there yourself with all the disgrace and
have the mockery of it.

337 And this has already begun through Christ in his own body, who sings
such a song of defiance to death and hell without ceasing: Dear death,
you also crucified and buried me once, and walked over me with your
feet, thinking that you had now won and eaten me; but where are you now?
Defy, and cling to me more. For he is already drunken and swallowed up
in his body, so that there is not a speck of death left in him, so that
we who believe in him may also have this when the hour comes for us to
see and feel how death and hell will be swallowed up and destroyed, but
now we are waiting for it and know that it will certainly happen, and
can already defy sin, death and hell by believing in Christ.

**V. 56. 57. But the sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the
law. But thanks be to God, who has given us the victory through our
Lord, Jesus Christ.**

He uses these words as a conclusion, as an accidental way to explain
what he means by a sting, and what the victory is, by which death is
devoured. And concludes this chapter, as he began it, with a short
sermon on the power of Christ\'s resurrection, painting death as if it
had a spike to execute people; he calls this same spike or spit sin, and

2\) Jenaer: krümme.

1266 Erl. Sl, 297-299. interpretations on I Epistle to the Corinthians.
W. VIII, IWS-IW,. 1267

The sharpness or power of this is called the law. These are dark and
strange words to us, but they are also for those who seek and hope for a
different life. For the rest of the multitude, as they neither feel nor
regard anything that is sin or death, go on and have good courage until
they suddenly go to hell before they think of it; so they also do not
understand this language. But Christians must learn it from themselves,
as they daily feel what sin and death are and have power.

So St. Paul calls the sin of death a spear or weapon. As if to say, If
it were not for sin, death should not strangle us, but sin has strangled
us. Therefore something more is necessary for him who is to strangle
death, namely, that he first strangles that which works death, which is
sin. So it follows that sin is the weapon and spear, or sword, of death.
For because a man goes and neither feels nor respects sin, he neither
feels nor fears death; but when the hour comes for him to wriggle and
die, the sin is soon before his eyes, saying: O woe! what have you done,
how have you angered God? When this hits the heart, the person cannot
stay and must despair, and if it lasts long, die in despair. For it is
not possible to bear an evil conscience when it rightly seizes a man
that he begins to feel God\'s wrath, as one sees some people suddenly
fall away, or kill themselves out of such fear and trembling. 1) For it
is a sting or spike that goes through the heart, that the soul and the
body must separate over it.

This is what St. Paul means when he speaks of sin, namely, the right sin
is not only the work that is done or spent, but the one that is alive,
stirs in the heart and conscience. For because it lies there asleep, and
neither bites nor presses, it is not a real sin; but if it stirs and
stirs the heart, it 2)cuts and

1\) Erlanger: Verzagen. Latin: trspiäntions st ässpsrations.

2\) Miltenberger: scheinet. Latin: soinäit. Jenaer: schneit.

It is clear that no man can endure the sting (even if it is from a minor
transgression) unless he is comforted and healed by the gospel. If then
you ask where death comes from, or how it so easily frightens and
executes people, you will hear here that nothing else does it, but sin;
which is nothing, but a spear and stones, yes, thunder and lightning of
death, through which death does its work.

Where does sin come from, or how is it that it is so powerful to
strangle and kill? I will tell thee (saith he): \"The power of sin is
the law.\" Who has ever heard God\'s commandment and law spoken of in
this way, which is holy and well given and ordered by God? Nor can he
say that sin is weak and dead, and could not do anything if the law did
not work; it must make sin strong and vigorous and drive it to cut and
sting. Otherwise, sin would remain dormant and asleep forever, if it
stood with us; but God can awaken it finely through the law; where the
hour is to come when sin is to cut and thrust, it becomes so strong in
an instant that no one can bear it. For the law resounds in the heart
and holds the register before your nose: Do you hear? You have done this
and that against God\'s commandment, and spent your whole life in sin,
and your own conscience must bear witness and say yes to it. So sin
already has its power, makes you so afraid that the world becomes too
narrow for you, drives you and beats you until you have to despair. And
here is no evasion nor defense. For the law is 4) too strong, and has
your own heart to help, which denies yourself and condemns you to hell.
Therefore, sin cannot do anything else but God\'s law; where this comes
into the heart, it is already alive, and can kill a man if it wants to;
if, on the other hand, he does not seize this victory, which is Christ,
our Lord.

342\. If the law does such evil things, why did God give it? Wouldn\'t
it be much better if there were no law?

3\) Erlanger: that.

4\) Wittenberger: is him.

1268 **Erl. 51, S6S-S7S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 56. 57. W. VIII,
I3SI-I3S3.** 1269

Yes, of course, it would be better for us, but we cannot do without it.
For it is not possible that God should be pleased with him and always
let us go along in such a way that we do what we want; although he bears
with us all for a long time before he shows his wrath, and always lets
many people go along in this way who never feel the law and sin, nor
even think of God\'s wrath, but despise it and mock at it, as they are
threatened with death and hell; but in the end he must show them what
both law and sin are capable of, so that they do not make a joke of it.
For he can see through the fingers for a while, but when the hour comes
when the law knocks, and seeks you at home, and demands an account, it
will not let itself be taken in the wind, but will vainly begin such
lamentations and cries: O woe, what have I done? Where shall I stay now?
There you can see what it means: \"The law is the power of sins.
Therefore he calls it elsewhere a law of death, and an office of death,
which preaches death, and is the cause of death; and if there were no
other preaching nor government, by this alone could all the world be
preached to death.

343 For thus it goes one after another: When the law shines into the
heart, and shows sin, then immediately sin becomes alive and strong; but
sin brings death with it. Therefore it is rightly said, \"Sin is the
sting of death,\" that it 2) alone kills, and no one else. But sin comes
from nowhere except through the law; not that the law first brings and
makes sin, for it is there before the law comes, and remains forever,
because it is born with us and we are conceived in it, but that it is
not rightly recognized nor felt unless this light is kindled in the
heart; nor can it come to its power, for it is awakened by the law. But
when it comes, it shows us that we are drowned in sins, and lie in
God\'s wrath, that we must say (as St. Bernard says of himself): I
thought I was sitting in the rose garden, and do not know that I am
sitting in the midst of murderers.

1\) \"recht\" is missing in the Wittenberg. Latin: rsots -ezuutit.

2\) Erlanger: as the.

344 But when the heart feels such things, it cannot bear them; for it
sees and feels nothing, but the spears of the world pointed at it, and
shot at it, that it must die. Then it is very clear that nothing can be
done by works to atone for sin or to satisfy the law. For man has been
tricked into not being able to get rid of it; he can neither defend
himself nor do enough; he runs and does what he wants; and the more he
tortures himself with works, the worse it gets. But that is what St.
Paul says:

**Thanks be to God, who gives us victory through Jesus Christ our
Lord.**

This is a different sermon from that of Moses, for it shows the comfort
of Christians against the sting of death and the power of sin. For this
is true, and must be so: the law is right in that it reveals sin to
thee, and accuses thee; so also sin is right against thee to kill thee,
and death to devour thee; against this there is neither dispute nor
defense. For both your own testimony and God\'s word stand against you.
But this must help us, that the man, Jesus Christ, has come, and has
taken upon himself and borne our sin and death, which we have justly
deserved, and now stands up for us against the law, sin and death, and
says, \"I am of blood and flesh, and these are my brothers and sisters;
what they have done, that have I done, and paid for it. Law, if thou
wilt condemn them, condemn me. Sin, if thou wilt stab and kill, stab me.
Death, if thou wilt devour and devour, devour me. As it happened when he
stood before the judge Pilato. There he was accused as a sinner and
condemned to death; as he also calls himself a sinner in the Scriptures,
Ps. 41:5: \"Be merciful to me and keep me, for I am a sinner before
you\"; item Ps. 69:10: \"The reproach of those who reproached you has
fallen on me,\" that is, what they did against you, for which they
deserved death, that is what I did. Therefore also the law clings to
him, and condemns him, and sin smites him to the cross, and stabs him to
death 3), and

3\) Erlanger: too todt.

1270 EU. öi, s7s\--74. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1393-1396. 1271

Death brings him under the earth, and they do everything 1) they can to
him. For God has not spared His only Son (says St. Paul \[Rom. 8:32\]),
but has even given Him for us, so that they have tried all their power
on Him.

But by this they have not yet accomplished what they wanted. For just
when they think they have destroyed him and now won, he comes out again
and says to the law, sin and death: \"Do you not know that I was your
Lord and God? What right have you to me, that you should accuse and
strangle your Lord? Therefore henceforth ye shall do it no more: but I
will accuse and condemn you, and will cleanse you, that ye shall have no
more right in any that believe on me. For what I have done, I have done
for their sakes. Otherwise he would not have needed it for his own
person, for they would have had to leave him unchallenged. But now he
has taken our place, and for our sake has let the law, sin and death
fall on him, and has not only taken them from us, but has also
completely overcome them and put them at his feet, so that they may
overcome us and have no more right or power over us, and so have
complete victory in Christ, now spiritually through faith, but
afterwards also bodily and visibly.

347 A Christian should learn to grasp and use this when the law comes to
attack him, and wants to accuse him, strangle him with sin, and push him
into the jaws of hell, and his own conscience says to him: This and that
you have done, you are a sinner, and guilty of death 2) 2c, that he may
confidently answer, \"Yes, alas, it is true, I am a sinner, and have
well deserved death, so far as you are right; but that you will condemn
and kill me for it, you shall not yet do that; another shall defend you
against it, who is called my Lord Christ, whom you have innocently
accused and murdered. But knowest thou also how thou hast run against
him, and hast burned thyself, and thus all thy right against me, and
against all the Christians?

1\) Erlanger: everything, everything.

2\) Erlanger: worthy.

3\) \"and thus\" is missing in the Erlanger.

lost? For it was not to him, but to me, that he bore and overcame sin
and death, both of them. Therefore I confess to thee neither complaint
nor right against me, but will rather have right against thee, that thou
mayest attack me without guilt, when thou wast before condemned and
overcome by him, that thou mayest leave me unchallenged and unaccused.
And though thou mayest now attack and devour me according to the flesh,
yet thou shalt neither gain nor profit thereby, but shalt eat up thine
own sting, and be slain thereby. For I am no longer the man you seek as
a child of man, but the child of God; for I am in his blood, baptized in
his victory, and clothed with all his goods.

348 Behold, Christians must therefore arm themselves with this victory
of Christ, and so strike back at the devil, that he may be confessed to
no disputation, and say, How art thou that thou wilt accuse and afflict
a Christian? Knowest thou not who my Lord is, and what he is able? And
no better (who can do it) than defiantly and gladly despise, saying, If
thou wilt be wicked, get thee off the wall, and leave me unsworn, and
have no thanks. If thou canst stab and cut much, go up to him that
sitteth above, and bite thee with the same, and accuse me, if thou hast
/anything to 4) me, before thy judge and mine, and see what thou canst
do. But he will not go there; for he knows well that he has lost there,
and is already judged and strangled by him; therefore he flinches, as
before the cross. So he does not go to the insolent, wild and crude
people, who do not ask anything about sin and death, for he has them
beforehand, but only wants to attack us, who seek Christ and would like
to be free of sin and death; that he may tear Christ out of our hearts,
and frighten and press us with sin and death, so that we may despair
under it and surrender to him altogether. Therefore we must turn him
away from us to the victory we have in Christ, and so close ourselves in
Christ and keep ourselves, so that he cannot come to us; for he knows
well that he cannot come to us.

4\) Erlanger: an.

1272 Erl. 51, 271Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 57. W. VIII, 13W-W8. 1273

he can create nothing if we only stand firm with faith and hold fast to
it.

This is the beautiful sermon for Christians, how to get rid of the sting
of sin that kills us, and the power of the law that drives such a sting
into us, 1) through the victory of Christ, until it is completely
destroyed in us. To this now belongs the end of the song that St. Paul
sings: To God be praise and thanksgiving, who has given us such victory.

350 We may also sing this, and thus always keep Easter, that we praise
and glorify God for such a victory, which is called, not won by us, nor
conquered in battle (for it is too high and great), but given and
bestowed by grace from God, who had mercy on our affliction, from which
no one could help us, and sent His Son.

1\) Get rid of in the issues.

and let us go into battle; he has put down these enemies, sin, death and
hell, and has kept the victory, and given it to us, so that we can say
it is our victory, and just as much as if it had happened through
ourselves. Only that we accept it with earnestness, and do not give the
lie to God, like those who presume to overcome their sin and death by
themselves; nor are we found ungrateful for it, like the crude, false
Christians, but keep it in our hearts with firm faith, and strengthen
ourselves in it, and always preach such thanksgiving, and sing of this
2) victory in Christ, and thereupon go on happily until we also see it
in our own bodies. May God help us to do this through the same dear Son,
to whom be glory and praise forever and ever, amen.

2\) Erlanger: solchem.

**C. D. Martin Luther\'s Four Sermons on the Fifteenth Chapter of
Paul\'s First Epistle to the Corinthians, vv. 35-57.**

Of the Resurrection of the Dead and the Last Trumpet of God.\*)

Anno 1544. 1545.

**Letter from M. Andreä Poach, pastor of the Augustinians in Erfurt.**

> To the honorable and wise Mr. Erasmo Schmid, mayor of the imperial
> city of Nordhausen, my favorable lord and patron. Grace and peace in
> Christ, our Lord and Savior!

Honorable, wise, favorable lord and patron! What one promises, one is
obliged to keep. Because I promised these sermons of the dear man of God
to E. E. W. long ago, I should also have promised them in good time.

manufacture, and E. E. W. send. But now there has been a lack of this,
now of that, now also of myself; for I do not want to apologize for
everything. But one also says: He who comes slowly also comes. Therefore
I ask E. E. W. to be patient, if I am already a little slow with these
sermons.

They would come in time enough, if the world had more to advise and
help. For under other wholesome teaching these sermons punish the world.

\*These four sermons, which Luther held in the years 1541 and 1545 in
the time after Easter, were transcribed by M. Georg Rörer and published
by Vl. Andreas Poach, from Rörer\'s \"written books brought together\",
in 1563 by the pressure. Poach\'s attribution is dated \"am Tage Martmt
sll. Nvv. 1, Xu na Domini 1563\", and Walch in his preface to the eighth
volume, p. 12 k, reports that he \"consulted this first edition\", also
says lNote x) that \"this edition was published in Just. Christ.
Motschmanns Lrkoräiu littsrada p. 429 is cited\". In contrast, the
Erlangen edition \<2. Auflage), vol. 205, p. 50, lists as the first
printing an edition printed at Erfurt by \"Georgium Bawman, zu dem
bunten Lawen, bey Sanct Paul\", which is marked with the year \"64\".
Unseparated, these sermons can be found in the \"Altenburg\" edition,
Vol,

[1274 Erl. M-ob, so s. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, ILSS-Iioi. 1275]{.underline}

The two sins that are now prevalent throughout the world are untimely
prudence and carnal security. Untimely prudence is what I call it, since
one presumes to master God in his words and works. As it has happened at
all times, and especially at this last time, that there is no greater
disciple in the world than our Lord God, in whom no one can be master,
and know, speak and do everything better than God knows, has spoken and
done it; as Christ complains about it, Matth. 11, 19: \"Wisdom must be
justified by her children.

Man with his best reason is blind, a fool and a fool in all things of
God. Nevertheless, he refuses to master God in his regiment. And in this
it is the most fearful thing that such untimely prudence does not want
to be wrong, but right. In other regimes it has reason against it, and
is also punished and rejected by reason as wrong, as the proverbs of the
Greeks and Romans testify: 8us docet Minervam; and of the Germans: The
calf teaches the cow to calve; and: The egg teaches the chicken. But if
the untimely prudence gets into the church and into God\'s regiment, it
has all reason on its side, and wants to be unpunished and undamned.

The Holy Spirit has faithfully warned against this, as the sayings in
the Holy Scriptures testify from time to time, Eccl. 7:17: \"Do not be
too wise.\" Rom. 12, 17. \"Do not consider yourselves wise.\" 1 Cor.
3:18, 19: \"Let no man deceive himself. Whosoever among you shall think
himself wise, let him be a fool in this world, that he may be wise: for
the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God.\" But what is the use?
Everyone wants to be God\'s master; especially in these last days,
everyone wants to teach Christ how he should govern his church, order
and establish the sacraments; St. Paul how he should preach. I will
remain silent about Luther, because he now has nothing at all to teach.

is still valid with such highly competent masters and overmasters.

That is why things are so good in Christianity, because people do not
remain in humility, in the simple truth, and there is neither measure
nor end to the clashing, so that there is almost no article of Christian
doctrine that has not been changed after D. Luther\'s death. Luther\'s
death, and there is almost no town or village that is not full of
quarrels, discord and disunity among preachers and listeners. This is
the beautiful fruit of the untimely prudence, which leads Paul, Luther,
yes, God Himself to the school, and teaches them how they should preach,
teach and write; there it should never be different nor better.

^1^ ) Here I must relate the poem by Hans Pfriemen, which the other
sermon will report on later, for the sake of those who do not know it,
so that they may understand it when they read it. God wants to lead His
reign in such a way that no one should persuade Him; but the world
cannot let it go, it must speak against what God speaks and does. That
is why this poem was written by Hans Pfriemen: He was a poor wagoner, to
whom it was granted by God that he might be in paradise, and enjoy all
the joy and pleasure that is in paradise (as it is also said: wagoners
lead from mouth to heaven, if they did not curse so gladly and cruelly),
but with the condition that he should make no objection in any matter,
but keep quiet, and let him like what he would hear and see in paradise.

When he was in paradise and looked around, he found some people drawing
water from a barrel that had no bottom. When he saw this, he became
indignant and thought to himself: How strange and foolish things are
here?

1\) The following section, \"the poem by Hans Pfriem,\" is also in the
second edition of the Erlanger Ausgabe, vol. 2Oj\>, pp. 50 ff. Cf.
Linässil, solloguia, Dom. I, p. 429. similarly Xnalsota luitüsruuu. si
Llslnntlioiiiaiig., sä. I-osselis ((lotlm 1892), p. 216 f.

p\. 379; in the Leipzig edition, vol. X, p. 416 and in the first edition
of the Erlangen edition, vol. 19, p. 104. In the second edition of the
same, they are placed in chronological order under other sermons and are
found in vol. 20b, p. 52, p. 86, p. 313 and p. 334. Three of these
sermons, the first, third and fourth, are in other redaction handwritten
in the library at Wolfenbüttel in the so-called Gocl. Lluelpb. 97. These
have a much shorter version, which, however, is not to their advantage.
The rendering of Luther\'s thoughts is extremely deficient; several
times, meaningless things occur in it. Nevertheless, the Erlangen
edition has also printed this handwritten text, because the editor
assumes: \"Should we have the notes of Rörer before us? Although we know
that Rörer \"did not have the gift to rewrite and compose especially
with a hurried hand\" (Walch, St. Lonis Edition, vol. XIII, Preface, IX
\>, it does not seem credible to us, on the one hand, that he is the
person who has reproduced Luther\'s sermons in such an inadequate manner
as they are available to us in the manuscript, and on the other hand,
that Poach should have been able to produce his quite excellent
redaction on the basis of these notes. We consider it sufficient here
(as with Luther\'s eight sermons against Carlstadt\'s innovations,
Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XX, 4) to reproduce only one version, and
the best one at that, of a writing that did not flow from Luther\'s pen,
but only from his mouth. We bring the text after the old edition of
Walch under comparison of the Erlanger.

1276 **Erl. (s.)sod, Li f. Letter from M. Andreä Poach. W. VIII,
IE-1404.** 1277

Why do these make themselves tired with vain work. He wanted to measure
the regiment in paradise according to the regiment on earth, as carters,
servants and maids have to stand and stand by the stable and the cowshed
to draw water, and would have liked to speak against it; but thought of
what condition he would have come to paradise, passed by, and was
silent.

He came down and noticed that two carpenters were carrying a large, long
beam, which they had grasped over their shoulders, 1) and were bumping
into it on all sides, and could not get away. Watching them, he thought
in his heart: What clumsy dolts are these? They should take the beam in
length, so they could get away with it; and he could hardly refrain from
persuading them; but he refrained, went away, and was silent.

As he was walking along, he found a carter who had four horses in front
of a wagon and was stuck in the mud. Since he could not get out of the
muck, he took two horses that were in front of the wagon and harnessed
them to the back of the wagon, driving the rearmost horses as much as
the front ones. When Hans Pfriem saw that this was his handiwork, he
could no longer refrain from scolding the wagoner and said, \"You big
fool! What are you doing? Do you want to tear the wagon in pieces and
ruin the horses wantonly without any need? Harness the horses all fours
in front of the wagon and drive them by force, and you will bring the
wagon out of the mud.

And the Thor thought that he had done well and had done right, and had
helped his team out of the mire with his wisdom; but he had acted as a
fool, because he wanted to be the cleverest, and had done wrong, and
deserved to be cast out of paradise. Therefore Peter was sent to him
first of all by God to bring him the command. He came and said:
\"Listen, Hans Pfriem, the Lord tells you that because you have not kept
the commandment, but have transgressed God\'s commandment, you must
leave paradise. Hans Pfriem answered: \"How can I be asked to leave
paradise, and yet I did not owe it to God as much as you? How can that
be right? You have denied our Lord God, and yet you remain in paradise;
and I am to be expelled for the sake of a word? No, not so. Peter was
ashamed and departed. Then God sent Paul, who came and said, \"Hans
Pfriem, you are to leave paradise. But Hans Pfriem also rejected Paulum
grossly, saying, \"You have persecuted the church of God, and

1\) Erlanger: ubergwericht.

blasphemed and reviled the Son of God, and yet remain in Paradise; and I
have spoken a word or two, and shall go forth?

Paul was also ashamed and left him. Then Mary Magdalene was sent; Hans
Pfriem answered her in the same way and said: \"You have been a public
sinner and you want me to leave paradise? The holy man Moses was sent,
as he should fear him, because the enemies had to fear him. But Hans
Pfriem remained on his opinion and said to Mosi: \"Do you want to drive
me out of paradise? Do you not know that by unbelief and doubt you have
unholy our Lord God before the children of Israel, when you should
strike the rock with the rod to make it give water?

When Hans Pfriem did not want to listen to \"any\" messengers and knew
how to rebuke them all, God sent the innocent little children to him.
Hans Pfriem thought: \"Alas, this is going to be bad, how am I supposed
to endure to stay in paradise? I cannot blame the innocent children. If
only I were rid of this one, I would henceforth keep quiet and not raise
any objections against the regiment in paradise. He thought to himself:
I know what I want to do, I want to play with the children\", and try to
bring them away from me with good grace. And before the innocent
children came close to him, he climbed a tree and shook down many
apples, called to the children and said: Come here, dear children, come
here, read up confidently; if you have picked up the apples from under
this tree, then I will climb up another, and shake down more. This
pleased the children well, and so they got hold of the apples, and
forgot the command for which they had been sent out, and each child read
his geren 2) full, went away, and left Hans Pfriemen. So Hans Pfriem
stayed in paradise, and afterwards kept quiet, and let him like
everything that happened in paradise by God\'s government.

This is a childish, but nevertheless fine poem, and teaches that God\'s
government in the kingdom of heaven and in the church of Christ is far
different from man\'s government in \"worldly regiments\" on earth;
therefore, whoever wants to be and remain in God\'s kingdom and church
must keep quiet about God\'s government, word and works, and let him
like what God speaks and does, even if it seems foolish to reason. But
if he wants to persuade God in his government, he will be expelled from
paradise and the kingdom of heaven. It also teaches that there is no
greater sin than to persuade God.

2\) Geren - Rockschooß. Hes. H6, 8.

[1278. erl. (s.,sot\>, \[s f. Interpretations On the 1st Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1404-1108. 1279]{.underline}

in His word and works. God can tolerate other sins before and wants to
forgive them, as Peter, Paul, Mary Magdalene, Moses were preserved under
divine patience and remained in paradise. But this sin, if one wants to
master him and persuade him in his regiment, God will not tolerate nor
suffer. As church history testifies, and we learn today, that many,
through their untimely prudence, have become heretics, idiots and
enthusiasts, and have fallen out of Christendom, and are still becoming
heretics and idiots and falling out of Christendom. On the other hand,
many poor sinners who allowed themselves to be taught and governed by
God became great saints and remained in Christendom through divine
patience and forgiveness of sin; they still become saints of God today
and remain in Christendom.

The other sin that these sermons, especially the third sermon, punish is
carnal certainty; as all the world, learned and unlearned, rich and
poor, have now fallen into the common seed faith, and no longer fear
either God or the devil; indeed, they no longer believe in any of them.
It is true that Christ, just as he found such swine among his own people
in his first future, who said that there was no resurrection, nor
angels, nor spirit, Apost. 23:8, and yet boasted of great and excellent
holiness before other people, and called themselves Sadducees, that is,
the saints, so also in his other future such saints.

who believe that there is no God, nor the last day, nor eternal life,
nor the devil, nor hell, that is, who believe nothing, but mock God and
His word, and walk according to their own lusts, 2 Petr. 3:3. But
nevertheless, such certainty and mockery must be punished, and those who
want to be warned must be warned against it. This is why the holy man of
God preached the sermon about the last day and the last trumpet of God
with such seriousness that everyone who heard it was amazed and
horrified.

I have brought together such sermons and let them go out under E. E.
W.\'s name to show my willingness and gratitude to E. E. W. with them.
For I have always recognized and still recognize E. E. W. as my
favorable Lord, friend and patron. I would have liked to put these
sermons, especially the one about the last trumpet of God, on paper with
my pen as the man of God put them with a living voice before the ears of
those who heard him. But because such a thing is impossible, I have done
as much as I could. Please, E. E. W. let my work please you, and be and
remain my favorable lord and patron. Date Erfurt on the day Martini,
Anno Domini 1563,

E. E. W.

willing

Andreas Poach, to Augustinians.

**The first sermon, Who 1 Cor. 15, 35-38.**

Held in the parish church, on Sunday Cantate \[May 11, afternoon\]
1544.\*)

**V. 35-38. But would anyone say, \"How will the dead rise? and with
what kind of body will they come? Thou fool, that which thou sowest
shall not live, except it die. And that which thou sowest is not the
body that shall come forth, but a mere grain, that is, wheat, or the
other one. But God gives it a body, as he wills, and to each of the
seeds his own body.**

1\. at this time in our church we use to preach and consider the article
of our Christian faith, of the resurrection of the dead.

1\) Just as it is right and proper that the same article be preached and
practiced at this time. For since we preached and heard the article of
the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ at Easter, it is right that we
preach and hear the article of the resurrection of the flesh, that is,
of our resurrection, after Easter.

1\) In the church at Wittenberg, after Easter, and especially on the
Sundays Jubilate, Cantate and Rogate, texts from the fifteenth chapter
of Paul\'s first epistle to the Corinthians were preached. Cf. Luther\'s
Church Postilion, Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XII, 578 ff, 592.

\*) That this sermon was preached five years \"1544\" and \"in the
afternoon\" is reported in the Tischreden, Cap. 49, § I, Walch, St.
Louis edition, vol. XXII, 1320.

[1280 **Erl. l-.-sod, 5S-55. sermon on I Cor. 15, 35-38. W. VIII,
1408-1411.** 1281]{.underline}

For our Lord Jesus Christ began the resurrection in his own body, but
the resurrection is not completed, so we are also resurrected. Just as
his suffering and death will not be perfect, we also will come
afterwards and suffer and die with him; as St. Paul says, \"he makes up
in his flesh what is lacking in Christ,\" Col. 1:24. So also his
resurrection will not be perfect, nor complete, we also will come
afterwards and rise from the dead. He is our head; we are members of his
body, Eph. 5, 23. 30. Therefore, after the resurrection of Christ, we
must also preach about our resurrection, since both belong together, so
that it may be a perfect resurrection.

2 St. Paul pushes the same article very violently in this chapter. The
reason was this: There came into the church at Corinthos certain wise
men, not only of the Greeks, who asked for wisdom, and thought the
gospel vain foolishness, but also of the Jews, as the Sadducees and
their disciples, who received the gospel, and were baptized, and were in
part preachers and teachers in Christendom, and yet believed not that
there was a resurrection of the dead. They pretended that a man, if he
died, would fall as a tree falls, and die as a cow and the unreasonable
animals die, which alone are created for this life; when this life
ceases, they have nothing more to wait for. They were good fellows who
did not think anything of the resurrection of the dead and of the life
to come, and they despised and mocked the Christians who believed such
things. Just as in our time the pope, together with his cardinals and
bishops, and the worldly wise men, together with their highly
intelligent and keenly sensible sages, think nothing of the article that
there is a resurrection of the flesh and an eternal life, and know how
to laugh at us and mock us for believing such things.

3 Against such clever ones, who are called good Christians, even
excellent teachers, who wanted to be respected as the first preachers
after the apostles, and who boasted of their high spirit, St. Paul
stands up with all his strength and establishes the article of the
resurrection.

in the strongest possible way, shut the mouths of such smart alecks
violently, so that he may keep the righteous Christians in the right
pure faith of this article constantly, so that they will not also be
misled and seduced by such poison and loose talk of reason and human
cleverness, which subverts itself to mastering the articles of faith.

4 Shortly before he proves this article, about the resurrection of the
dead, with the main part of Christian doctrine, which no one can deny,
who otherwise wants to be a Christian, let alone a preacher of the
gospel of Christ. And he shows our resurrection in Christ\'s
resurrection, thus proving one article with another, and says v. 12, 13:
\"If Christ be preached that he is risen from the dead, how say some of
you that the resurrection of the dead is nothing? But if the
resurrection of the dead is nothing, then neither is Christ risen\" 2c.
So Christ is the head of us all, and we are his body and members of his
body. Now a head cannot be without its body and without its body limbs,
if it is to be otherwise a truly living head. Now if we should not be
raised from the dead, it would follow that Christ would not be raised
from the dead either. But if Christ rose from the dead, as we preach and
believe, it follows that we also must rise from the dead.

5 Therefore, whoever believes and confesses Christ\'s resurrection must
also believe and confess our resurrection. And again, he that denieth
our resurrection hath also denied Christ\'s resurrection, yea, at the
same time the whole gospel, and all that is preached of Christ. What is
the use then of accepting the gospel, boasting of being a Christian, and
being baptized, if one says that the resurrection of the dead is
nothing? Just as much deny everything and say that there is no gospel,
no baptism, no Christ, no God. It is we for whose sake Christ rose from
the dead; for himself and for his person he did not rise from the dead.
Just as for his own sake he did not suffer, was not crucified, and did
not die, but for our sake; so for his own sake he was not raised from
the dead.

[1282 Erl. \<2.) 20b, SS-57. interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, IIIl-1414. 1283]{.underline}

but for our sakes. If therefore the resurrection of Christ was for our
sakes, we must also afterwards rise from the dead, as Christ rose from
the dead, that it may be a full and complete resurrection. For a body,
when it rises from the dead, must rise with all its limbs, leaving none
of them behind.

\(6\) Having now proved and established this article of the resurrection
of the dead by the main body of Christian doctrine, that is, by the
resurrection of Christ, he refutes some of the objections and questions
of those who denied this article, and further proves this article from
the creatures and from the creation of the creatures. For the highly
intelligent men who denied this article argued sharply from reason: How
is it possible that the dead should rise again? They measured the
resurrection of the dead and the future life according to their sour
head; just as if it had to happen with the resurrection of the dead and
with the eternal life in the same way as it happens with this life here
on earth: What kind of being would it be, if the dead should rise again
and become alive?

\(7\) Just as the pagan Pliny mocks and ridicules this article. There
are some boys, he says (that\'s what he calls Christians), who say that
people, when they have died, will come back to life. But how does this
rhyme? For where will so many people dwell, if they are all to come to
life again? Therefore it is a vain childish thing, and only fool\'s
work, that one pretends such.

\(8\) So they also laughed at this article in Corinth, and said: How is
it possible that the dead should rise again? What kind of bodies will we
have after the resurrection from the dead? Where will we all have room?
Where will we all take food, drink, house, yard, wives? As the Sadducees
also reproached Christ \[Matth. 22, 25. ff. Luc. 20, 29. ff.\]: a woman
would have had seven husbands here; would she also have the same seven
husbands there? Measure also the future life according to her reason,
and according to this life. Should each, say

If they, who have died, are resurrected, where would we all have room
enough? Or, will a man become like a flea? The Corinthians had a lot of
such foolish thoughts out of clever reason, with which they blued the
ears of the people, and misled the Christians, so that they should not
believe that there was anything in the resurrection of the dead.

\(9\) He rejects such pleas and questions, and repels them with parables
which he takes from nature. You fool,\" he says, \"ask how it is
possible that the dead should rise from the dead. For what is done daily
to many creatures before your eyes is as impossible to reason as this
resurrection of the dead. \"That which thou sowest shall not live,
except it die.\" Takes the likeness of the seed, and points it to the
resurrection of the dead, as Christ also does with the grain of wheat,
John 12:24. And thus wants to say: Life is not found before, the seed
dies and decays in the earth. So this mortal, decaying body, as it now
lives, does not come to life either, it dies before and decays in the
earth. Now you are not such a fool as to say of the seed that it is
impossible for it to grow again and come to life, even though it is
already thrown into the earth and dies. Why then do you say that it is
impossible for dead bodies buried in the earth to rise again and come to
life?

010 Item: Thou askest how the dead shall rise, and with what kind of
body shall they come? Thou fool, look at the grain: \"which thou sowest
is not the body that shall be, but a mere grain, that is, a wheat, or
some other. It is the same with the human body. According to its
essence, it is the same body that is to be resurrected; but as far as
its form is concerned, it is not the body that is to become, but is a
wrinkled, decayed, dead body, just as that is a mere, dry, wrinkled
grain. But God will give it a fresh, beautiful, living, incorruptible
body, which may no longer eat, drink, die, decay 2c., just as He gives
the bare dry grain a beautiful green body, which is not dry and dead on
the ground.

[1284 **Erl. (\"2.\" 20b, 57-59. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 35-38. W. VIII,
I4I4-I4I7.** 1285]{.underline}

and is a mere grain, but which has its form, color, sap and life, grows,
blossoms and greens like a forest. And as God gives to every seed its
own body, so that the grain of wheat does not become a stalk of barley,
nor the grain of barley a stalk of rye, although it is already mixed
with other seeds in the field: So he will give to every man his own
body, so that in the resurrection the body of a man will not become the
body of a woman, nor the body of a woman the body of a man, but that
which is made man will remain man, both man and woman, each in his
nature and kind, although the form and custom of the body will be
different.

So the apostle puts this article of the resurrection into the article of
the creation, and proves one article with the other. As if to say: He
who has the word of God that there is a resurrection of the dead, and
believes and confesses that God, who has spoken such a word, is Almighty
Father, Creator of heaven and earth, as the children pray in faith, and
the grain in the field together with all creatures are a strong example
and witness of it, 1) believes and confesses also that there is a
resurrection of the dead. But he who denies that there is a resurrection
of the dead denies at the same time that God is the Almighty Creator of
heaven and earth and has spoken this word about the resurrection of the
dead. He who confesses this article, that God is almighty, does not
dispute and question whether it is possible or not that the dead will
rise, since God\'s word is there that says so. But he who disputes and
asks how it is possible that the dead should rise, shows by such
disputing and questioning that he has no faith, that he does not believe
that it is God\'s word and that God is almighty.

12 And this is also the truth. If this principium, that is, reason and
principal, stands that God is Almighty Creator of all creatures, then
the consequence brings irrefutably and undeniably that God creates all
things.

1\) In the old edition: \"sein\", which here, as often, stands for
\"sind\". Erlanger: be.

are possible. If the same almighty creator now speaks a word, then it
must happen and cannot go back. If all reason asks the same question
here, it must confess it and say: If it is true that God is almighty,
then nothing can be set that should not be possible for him. That is why
all the objections of prudent reason are here stopped, and the article
of the resurrection is strongly and powerfully concluded from the
article of the creation. God says in His word that the dead shall rise:
GOD, who says such things, is an almighty GOD, and Creator of heaven and
earth, and of all creatures; therefore the resurrection must happen, and
cannot go back, because GOD has said so. Otherwise, he would not be an
almighty God and Creator.

\(13\) We should take note of this, so that we may learn to establish
our faith in the article of the resurrection and strengthen it with the
article of God\'s creation and omnipotence, against all reasoning and
against all temptation. For from this principio, that is, reason and
principal, the dear fathers founded and strengthened their faith in the
article of the resurrection of the dead, and that nothing was impossible
to God that he had spoken.

14 Abraham had the promise Gen 21:12: The seed in which all the nations
of the earth were to be blessed was to be called Isaac. Now God tempted
Abraham, commanded him, and said Gen. 22:2: He should offer his son
Isaac, on whom the promise was written, for a burnt offering, that is,
he should slaughter him and burn him with fire to powder; for this was a
burnt offering, if it was burned pure with fire, Deut. 1:8, 9, 13. These
are two disgusting sayings: \"In Isaac shall the seed be named\"; and:
Isaac shall be burned to powder, and become ashes. And no reason can
compare and tolerate such unequal, repugnant sayings. But Abraham keeps
the word, and believes the promise, even though Isaac is burned to
powder, yet the promise must be fulfilled, and Isaac must come to life
again from the ashes; for God has spoken it, and nothing is impossible
to Him, for He is almighty. Thus Abraham bases his faith in the
resurrection on God\'s word and omnipotence; as the Scriptures say

1286 Erl. cs.) sod, 59-SI. Interpretations on the I Epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1417-14S0. 1287

Hebr. 11, 17. 18. 19.: \"By faith Abraham sacrificed Isaac when he was
tempted, and gave the only begotten, since he had already received the
promise, of which it was said: \"In Isaac shall thy seed be called unto
thee. And he thought, God is able to raise even the dead, therefore he
took him again as an example.

15\. before reason, it is a ridiculous thing that is proposed to
Abrahani. Abraham shall sacrifice Isaac, and yet believe that from Isaac
shall be born the seed that brings the blessing. Here the reason speaks:
Abraham, you are mad and insane that you believe such things. How does
this rhyme? In Isaac shall the seed be called, and Isaac shall become
ashes. How can ashes be your son from whom the seed comes? But Abraham
does not let such thoughts of reason err, but says, \"Well, let me be
mad and insane; though I offer my son Isaac for a burnt offering, as God
commanded me, yet God has said, \"In Isaac shall the seed 1) be
called.\" Because He has said this, it must be done, and cannot be
turned back: for God is almighty \[Gen. 17:1\]. Has he given me the son
from the old, barren Sarah, which is so difficult and impossible before
reason, as this, that the dead ashes should live. If God was able to
give me a son from the dead body of the barren Sarah, He can also make
Isaac as fresh and alive from the ashes as he is now. Thus Abraham
believed that God was almighty and could and would do it, because He had
spoken it. And such faith pleased God so much that he made him the
father of many nations \[Gen. 17:4\].

16 Adam also believed in this way. He had the promise from Christ that
Christ would overcome sin, death and hell, and redeem men from the power
of the devil and make them blessed; as the promise reads Gen. 3:15:
\"The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent\'s head. Adam and all
his descendants keep this promise, believing and hoping that death will
be taken away from him.

1\) Gen. 21, 12. In the original: Name (Erlanger).

and he will live. But when he hears the word \[Gen. 3, 19\]: \"You are
earth and shall become earth\", he must think: Today I am alive,
tomorrow I will be dead, and when I am dead, the worms will eat me and I
will become earth. As we see in experience, this word is fulfilled
tremendously in all the world every day; for everything that is Adam,
that is man, dies away, becomes powder, earth and dung. These sayings
are also opposed to each other: Adam shall be redeemed from death
through the seed of the woman, and shall live. And: Adam shall die, and
become dust. And no reason can unite and harmonize these unequal
sayings. But Adam compares them in such a way that he grasps the word of
the promise of Christ with firm faith in his heart and believes that he
will live, even if he dies. In such faith he lives and dies, retaining
the hope even in death that he will live. He could also have thought
according to reason: What will become of it? Shall I live and yet become
earth? How is that possible? Who wants to bring them to life, to be
eaten by worms? But he does not think so, but he keeps the word of the
promise: \"The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent\'s head,\" and
thus says: \"Because God, who spoke this word, is almighty, and made all
things from nothing, as I have learned and experienced from the creation
of all creatures, I believe that He can also make man alive again, even
though he has already died. If God created me from the earth, he can
also raise me from the earth and bring me out of death.

Therefore, in this article, about the resurrection of the dead, the only
thing that matters is that we learn to pray with the young children: I
believe in God the Father, Almighty Creator of heaven and earth, and
say: God has said that I shall rise from the dead, for His word is
written \[John 6:40\]: \"This is the will of Him who sent Me, that
whoever sees the Son and believes in Him shall have eternal life, and I
will raise him up on the last day. Because God has spoken these things,
and is Almighty God, Creator of heaven and earth, I have no doubt that
it will happen; for nothing is impossible to Him, so He cannot lie. When
we say the

1288 **Erl. (S.) M.d, SI-S4. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 35-38. W. VIII,
I4S0-I4SS.** 1289

we have no doubt about the article of resurrection. For whoever believes
that God is the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth also believes that
He can raise the dead. But if we doubt, it is a sure sign that we still
lack childlike faith. For he who disputes and doubts the article of the
resurrection does not believe that God is the almighty Creator of all
creatures; indeed, he believes nothing at all. For since he does not
believe God\'s work, that God can and will raise the dead according to
His word, he also believes nothing of God\'s power, might, majesty and
glory, and thus denies God completely in truth, because he denies His
works.

\(18\) What is lacking today in our enthusiasts and the spirits of the
pagans, the Anabaptists and the sacramental abusers, because they do not
know, nor do they want to know the infantile faith: I believe in God the
Father, the Almighty Creator of heaven and earth. Ah, what is water? say
the Anabaptists; water is water: how is it possible that water should
wash away man\'s sins and save him from death? These do not believe that
there is a God, for they deny His work. They hear with their ears and
speak with their mouths: I believe in God, the Almighty Creator; but in
their hearts they do not believe. For since He Himself says, \"He who
believes and is baptized shall be saved\" \[Marc. 16, 16.\], and all
things are possible to Him, as to the one, almighty Creator of all
things, how should it not be possible that the water in the Word should
cleanse man from sins and make him blessed? No thing is impossible with
God; as the angel Gabriel says to Mary \[Luc. 1, 37\].

\(19\) In the same way, one might say of the other article of our
Christian faith: How is it possible that God should become man and be
born of a woman, and that without man\'s seed, only of the Holy Spirit,
from a pure virgin? Item: How is it possible that a virgin should be
pregnant and bear a son? A virgin cannot be a mother, and a mother
cannot be a virgin. It does not rhyme, says reason, virginity and
motherhood, virgin chastity and motherhood.

The work of giving birth to a child, suckling a child 2c. And it is
true, no reason can rhyme such things together. But faith rhymes it
together, and says: You fool, God is almighty; therefore all things are
possible for him.

20 Carlstadt also lacked this piece. I will never let myself be
persuaded, he said, that I believe that God will open the heavens and
let down his Son and include him in the bread that is distributed in the
sacrament.

\(21\) This is what the grievous unbelief does. But what is the cause of
such unbelief? This is the cause that one does not believe God to be
omnipotent; for even reason can recognize this: if one allows that God
is omnipotent, then one must also allow that everything God says can and
must happen. Since God is omnipotent and created heaven and earth, it
should be impossible for Him that the bread is Christ\'s body and the
wine Christ\'s blood, because His word is written there, which He says
\[Matth. 26, 26. ff.\]: \"Take, eat, this is My body; drink from it, all
of you, this is My blood of the New Testament, which is poured out for
many for the forgiveness of sins.\"

\(22\) Yea, if the baker said unto me, Take, eat; the bread is my body;
and if the vintner said unto me, Take, drink; the wine is my blood, I
would say also, Thou deniest; how is this possible? Yes, even if the
priest were to say such things from his own head and speak his own word,
I would also say to him, \"Hold still, you deny. But here is neither
baker nor wine tavern, neither priest nor bishop, but God, almighty
creator of heaven and earth, is here founder and steward of the
sacrament, who says: \"Take and eat, this is my body, which is given for
you; this is the cup, the new testament in my blood, which is poured out
for you.\" Who spoke such things? Not a man, but GOD, who created heaven
and earth from nothing. Let it be seen who has spoken the word, not how
it is possible, but who has spoken these words, namely, not a baker, not
a wine taster, not a priest, but God\'s eternal Son, our Lord Jesus
Christ.

\(23\) Therefore, I say, the only thing that is lacking in the spirits
of the wicked and the enthusiasts is that they should

[1290 Eri. (2., 20I\>, St-S6. Interpretations on the I epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, mz-ms. 1291]{.underline}

do not believe that God is omnipotent. If they believed that, they would
not argue and ask how it is possible. They forget about God and His
omnipotence, and therefore chatter: water is water, bread is bread, wine
is wine; how is it possible that water should redeem from sin and death?
How is it possible that bread should be Christ\'s body, and wine
Christ\'s blood? We know this well, and must not first learn it from the
enthusiasts, that water is water, bread is bread, wine is wine. But here
you must not look at the water, the bread, the wine, but at the almighty
speaker who says: \"Unless one is born of water and the Spirit, he
cannot enter the kingdom of God. Item \[Marc. 14, 22. ff.\] \"Receive,
eat, this is my body; drink, this is my blood.\" You must not lose sight
of this speaker if you are to keep the right faith and understanding of
baptism and the Lord\'s Supper.

24\. see the creation of all creatures \[Gen. 1, 1.\] \"In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth.\" By what? By His word, as Moses
writes v. 3. \"GOD said, Let there be light; and there was light.\" V.
6.: \"GOD said, Let there be a firmament between the waters 2c., and it
came to pass.\" V. 9: \"God said, Let the waters under the heaven be
gathered together unto separate places, that dry things may be seen: and
it came to pass so.\" Speaking does it; if this speaker speaks something
that he wants to have, it must happen. If God has created heaven and
earth and all creatures from nothing, only through his speaking, how
should he not be able to accomplish what he wants through his word and
sacrament, especially because his word stands there and testifies to it?

\(25\) Then comes a spirit of the mob, an Anabaptist, a desecrator of
the sacraments, and a fanatic, chattering out of reason, and says: The
priest takes the child on his hand and pours water on it, takes bread
and wine for the sacrament, says the words, and offers it to the people
with his hand, lays his hand on the people, and absolves them: how
should this give blessedness? I see water, I see bread and wine, I see a
man\'s hand. How can water make blessed? How can a sinful hand absolve
sin?

give? So be prepared, and say: Dear man, you must not look at the
priest\'s hand here, but at the speaker, whose word you hear in baptism,
absolution and sacrament. The same speaker says Matth. 28, 19: \"Go and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Item Joh. 20, 23: \"Receive the Holy
Spirit. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them.\" Item
Marc. 14, 22: \"Eat, this is my body; drink, this is my blood. Do this
in remembrance of me.\" And what this speaker says must be done. Even
though he uses water, bread, wine and the hand of man as an instrument
and sign, he still says that it should be called his work; what men do
here, according to his word and command, that he wants to have done.

This speaker is almighty, and created all creatures from nothing; so he
is also true. Since we have his word in baptism, absolution and
sacrament, we should not doubt, but believe that what the word tells us
will happen, \"for nothing is impossible to him\" \[Luc 1:37\] \"so he
cannot lie\" \[Heb 6:18\]. Although we see the poor, sinful hand of the
priest, we should not let ourselves be deceived. This speaker wants to
tread down the devil with his kingdom, so that even a man\'s hand,
through baptism, through absolution, through Word and Sacrament, should
snatch men out of his jaws. Since this is not man\'s word and work, but
God\'s word and work, who is almighty and cannot lie, we can be sure
that \"whoever believes and is baptized shall be saved\" \[Marc. 16,
16\]. For what the priest does here, according to God\'s command, God
Himself does.

\(27\) Therefore, I say, the pagans and the enthusiasts who do not want
to believe that baptism is the remission of sins, that the bread and
wine in the sacrament are the body and blood of Christ, that absolution
excludes heaven, have not yet begun to write the article in the infant
faith: I believe in God, Almighty Creator. For this reason, they cannot
keep any article of Christian doctrine pure. For whoever does not
believe that God

[1292 **Eri. (s.) sov, 6S-W. Sermon on I Cor. 15, 35-38. W. VIII,
1125-1128.** 1293]{.underline}

is omnipotent, he cannot believe that baptism is a blessed bath for the
forgiveness of sins; that the bread and wine in the sacrament are
Christ\'s body and blood; indeed, he cannot believe that God became man
and that a virgin is God\'s mother. The article that God is almighty
preserves all the other articles; if the article falls, so do the other
articles.

028 Was it not an impossible thing that God should have promised Abraham
that a son should be born to him of Sarah his wife? For they were both
old and well advanced in years. Abraham was almost a hundred years old,
Sarah ninety; in addition, Sarah had passed away, which belongs to the
conception, as the women know well \[Gen. 18, 11\]; that it was so
possible that a child should be born from a block or stone, as from
Abraham from Sarah. Nevertheless, Abraham does not waver over such an
impossible thing, because he has God\'s word and promise, but firmly
believes that the promised son will be born from such an old, rotten log
and stone. As St. Paul exemplifies such faith Rom. 4, 19. 20. 21:
\"Abraham was not weak in faith, nor did he look at his own body, which
had already died because he was almost a hundred years old, nor at the
dead body of Sarah; for he did not doubt the promise of God through
unbelief, but was strong in faith, and gave glory to God, and knew with
the utmost certainty that what God promises, He is able to do.\"

\(29\) But we cannot persuade our Sadducees, the devotees of the
Sacraments, to learn to base their faith in the Lord\'s Supper on the
Word and on the omnipotence of God. The glorious thoughts of faith
(since they should think that God has spoken it, and God is omnipotent,
therefore He can and will do it) they put out of their hearts, and
instead follow the shameful thoughts of human reason: How can bread be
Christ\'s body? how can wine be His blood? and sharply dispute de loco,
de locato, de creatura, etc., and abandon God\'s word and omnipotence.
We must let such Sadducees be wise, because they do not want anything
else, and in the meantime hold fast to the word, that

Christ says: Eat, this is my body; drink, this is my blood, give him the
glory, and believe that he can and will do it, since he has promised it
and is almighty.

\(30\) St. Paul also penetrates here above the article of the
resurrection of the dead, against all the disputing and arguing of
reason. For reason also disputes how it is possible that the dead body
should come forth again and come to life. It sees the great power of
death, how all people on earth die and are eaten by worms. Because she
is blind to God\'s omnipotence and cannot believe that on the last day
our bodies will be resurrected and come back to life, she disputes and
asks how the dead will be resurrected and with what kind of body they
will come. To this St. Paul answers, saying, \"You may dispute as you
wish, but this article is certain to me. For I have for myself God\'s
omnipotence, His word and promise, item, the example of all creatures,
that God created all things from nothing. Since God has said that the
dead will rise, and God is omnipotent, how can it be impossible?

\(31\) What does God still do every day? We see before our eyes that a
human being is born from a small drop of blood, which is as great a
miraculous sign of God as when God raises children from stones. Yes, God
has made, as St. Paul Apost. 17, 26, \"that of one blood of all men
there should be generations on the face of the whole earth. This is the
truth: Man is born from a small drop of human blood and seed. It is just
as if a man jumped out of a stone and stood in front of us and said:
Here stands a man. This is a much greater sign and miracle than that
Adam was created from a lump of earth and Eve from a rib and bone. Since
God still creates such great and even greater things today, and thereby
proves His omnipotence that no thing is impossible for Him, how should
it be impossible for Him to awaken the dead?

32 Therefore, we should pray the children\'s faith rightly and pray to
God, our Almighty.

[1294 **Erl. (2.) 20b, \[s-70.** interpretations on the 1st epistle to
the Corinthians. **W. VIII, I428-I43I.** 1295]{.underline}

Creator of heaven and earth, so that we may believe what he says, that
he can and will do it. For he still proves it daily in our own bodies
and souls. All the angels in heaven would not be able to create a single
human being. They could not create the body of a man, let alone the
soul; but God creates both, body and soul, without our thoughts, yes,
against our thoughts and reason. We see this happening before our eyes
every day, and we experience it ourselves. Nevertheless, we want to
dispute a lot and ask, if God, our almighty Creator, promises something,
whether it is also possible. Well, now dispute in the name of the devil;
is it not sin and shame that a man should presume to judge the articles
of faith, which belong only to God\'s omnipotence and to His word and
promise, according to blind nature?

It is impossible for the angels in heaven to comprehend God\'s works,
even though they are always looking at them with pleasure. They may
wonder about it, but they are not able to investigate it and measure it
with their thoughts. It remains true what Job says in Cap. 9, 10: \"God
does great things that cannot be investigated, and wonders that cannot
be numbered. And we poor, miserable people want to fathom and understand
God\'s works and the mysteries of faith with our miserable reason and
blind thoughts.

34 Anabaptists and sacramentalists dispute about the Lord\'s Supper:
\"The baker cannot make bread to be the body, and the winebibber cannot
make wine to be the blood: how is it possible that the bread in the
Lord\'s Supper should be Christ\'s body, and the wine His blood? Well,
disputire, not in God\'s name, you wretched man. Such enthusiasts should
not be given bread to eat, who want to measure and divide God\'s word
and work according to their foolish sense. Is this not a fine
consequence? The baker cannot make bread to be body, and the vintner
cannot make wine to be blood; therefore Christ cannot make bread and
wine in the Lord\'s Supper to be his body and blood. What do you think
about this Master?

\(35\) Therefore, let him who is able to learn learn to base his faith
on God\'s word, promise and omnipotence, and to set it against all
arguments and questions of reason. If the clever ones come, argue and
question out of reason about the article of the resurrection of the
dead, set God\'s word and omnipotence against it, and say: \"Even if I
die, God will raise me from the earth \[Job 19:25\] and bring me up out
of the dust, so that I will shine like the sun \[Matt. 13:43\]. Of this
I have no doubt; he is almighty, and can do it; he has also promised
such things in his word, and will do them; therefore I believe that it
will surely come to pass. He will certainly bring me up from the grave
on the last day, I believe this without a doubt, and in such faith I go
along happily on his word and omnipotence.

\(36\) If the sacramentalists come and argue out of their dizzy brains:
How can it be that the bread in the Lord\'s Supper should be Christ\'s
body and the wine his blood? Set God\'s word and omnipotence against it,
and say: Do you, sacramentalist, shut your mouth and do not ask how this
can be. For we are not talking about the baker and the wine-giver, but
about God\'s Word and Sacrament. God, who instituted, ordained,
instituted and commanded this sacrament, is almighty and true; therefore
it may well be that the bread in the Lord\'s Supper is Christ\'s body,
and the wine His blood. It is said here, as St. Paul says Titus 1:2:
\"Which he promised who did not lie, GOD.\"

\(37\) Yes, says reason, how can I believe that I will come out of the
earth? When I die, I decompose and become nothing. Now how can something
come out of that which decays and is nothing? In addition, my body, when
it is dead, stinks so horribly that everyone is horrified by it, and the
maggots and worms come and devour it according to all their will. What
can become of that which is nothing but stink and filth? Answer: Yes, as
far as human strength is concerned, all is lost, and nothing comes of
such a dead, decayed, stinking body.

1296 Erl.(ü.\>2vd, 7°-7s. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 35-38. w. vni, iisi-iisi.
1297

in death, stinking and under the worms eternally, because of human
strength, and even if all human strength would be melted in one heap.
But listen, you do not have to look at man\'s power here, what it can
do; much less do you have to look at the power of the dead body, how it
lies in stink and under the worms, but you have to look at God\'s word
and power, which alone can do it and wants to do it. When it comes to a
man that he lies in the coffin and is buried under the earth, then all
men, yes, all creatures, must confess and say: We are not able to raise
this dead body again and make it alive. But God says: What no creature
is able to do, I am able to do, Almighty Creator; this dead body shall
rise again and come to life, even though it has already decayed and
rotted in the earth. I Almighty God and Creator will and can do it,
there stands my word John 5:25: \"Verily, verily, I say unto you, The
hour is coming, and is now, that the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they which hear shall live.\" And soon after, v. 28, 29:
\"The hour cometh, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear
his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of judgment.\"

\(38\) Therefore, in this article of the resurrection, we should leave
aside all thoughts of reason, since not only the Scriptures testify, but
also the creatures prove to us that with God no thing is impossible. Let
us not argue or ask how the dead will rise and with what kind of body
they will come, but let us pay attention to who is the one who can and
will do it. The same is not called an angel, nor a man, but God\'s only
Son, who created all things from nothing. \"He is the firstborn before
all creatures; through Him all things were created that are in heaven
and on earth,\" Col. 1, 15. 16. He carries all things with His powerful
word,\" Hebr. 1, 3. He can do it and wants to do it, as He Himself says
John 5, 21: \"As the Father raises the dead and makes them alive, so
also the Son makes alive those whom He wills.

39\. six thousand years ago the whole world was nothing; now who made
the world? Read the Scriptures, thefelbe will tell you who made the
world, Gen. 1, 1.: \"In the beginning God created the heavens and the
earth.\" Joh. 1,\' 1. 3.: \"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word
was with GOD, and GOD was the Word. All things were made through the
same, and without the same nothing was made that was made.\" Heb. 1:2:
\"GOD hath spoken in the last by the Son, whom he hath made heir over
all things; by whom also he made the world.\" What were you a thousand,
yes, a hundred years ago? Nothing. Who made you? Hear the first article
in the children\'s faith; how do you pray? I believe that God created
me, together with all creatures 2c. The same God and Creator can also
raise you from the dead; he wants to do it and can do it. He is almighty
and has promised it to you; therefore dare to trust in him, he will not
lie to you. If he has done the greatest thing before, he will do the
least thing after.

\(40\) And as we must and ought to do in this article of the
resurrection, so we ought also to do in other articles of Christian
doctrine, whether of baptism, absolution, the Lord\'s Supper, 2c., that
we put all reason aside, and say, If God has spoken it, it shall surely
come to pass, I have no doubt of it. For there stands his word, which
cannot lie; so he is almighty; therefore, what he says cannot go back,
it must come to pass.

\(41\) But, as I said, the only thing that is lacking is that one does
not believe that God is almighty, that he can do it, and that God has
said that he will do it. A Turk believes nothing and denies all our
articles and reasons of faith. But if a Turk could be persuaded to
admit, believe, and confess that God is almighty and that God has spoken
such things, he would certainly also admit the other thing that follows
from the principio and reason, he would say: If God can do it, and if He
will do it, it will certainly be done; if the first is true, that it is
God\'s word and promise, and that God, who has spoken such things, is
omnipotent, then the other must also be true, which follows from it.

[1298 EU. (2.) 20b, 7S-7S. Interpretations on the I epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, 1434-1137. 1299]{.underline}

If a Turk and an unbeliever does this, why do those who are called
Christians and believers not want to believe that what God has said in
His word must happen? The first, as the principium, reason and main
part, is allowed, and the other, which follows from the principio and
reason, is not allowed. One confesses that God is almighty and that it
is God\'s word \[Is. 26, 19\]: \"The dead shall rise\"; item \[Marc. 16,
16\]: \"Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved.\" Item \[Matth.
18, 18.\]: \"What you forgive on earth, that shall be forgiven in
heaven.\" Item \[Matth. 26, 26. 27.\]: \"Eat, this is my body, which is
given for you; this is my blood, which is shed for you for the remission
of sins.\" This is confessed, and must be confessed, and no thanks is
given. But how is it possible that the dead should rise from the dead?
how is it possible that water should wash away the soul from sins? how
is it possible that I should be absolved from sins by the hand of man?
how is it possible that in the Lord\'s Supper the bread should be
Christ\'s body, and the wine Christ\'s blood? Well, now disputire, thou
poor, wretched man! Are you not mad and foolish? Do you yield to the
principium and principal, and deny that which follows from the principio
and principal? Thus you testify of yourself that you are either a mocker
who believes nothing, or a desperate villain who says yes and no in the
same article.

This is why St. Paul here, in this article about the resurrection of the
dead, rejects and rejects all objections of human reason. For reason
wants to be wise here, and raises various questions: how the dead will
rise? whether they will eat, drink, sleep, wake, be free and let
themselves be free? St. Paul puts down all such thoughts and questions
with the example of God\'s omnipotence and power, which he demonstrates
in the creatures, in the grain of the field. As if the apostle wanted to
say: God has spoken it, and can do it, therefore it will certainly
happen; he will say at the last day: Arise, you dead. This will be the
way in which the dead will rise. By his word the dead will

resurrect, that God will say: Surgite, qui jacetis in pulvere terrae,
arise, you who lie under the earth sDan. 12, 2.\]. Therefore you must
not dispute and ask how the dead will rise. By the Almighty\'s speaking
it will happen.

44\. For just as God accomplishes what He wills in other things through
His word, so it is also with the resurrection of the dead. In baptism,
God accomplishes His work through the Word, when He, or the priest in
His place, says: I baptize you in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit \[Matth. 28, 19\]. \"He that believeth and
is baptized shall be saved\" \[Marc. 16, 16.\]. By such saying the
baptized becomes a child of eternal life and blessedness. This is also
the case with the Lord\'s Supper. How is it that the blessed bread is
Christ\'s body, and the blessed wine Christ\'s blood? By the word it is
done, Christ says: \"Eat, this is my body; drink, this is my blood.\"
Behold, this is the way it happens, that he who eats the bread eats
Christ\'s body, and he who drinks the wine drinks Christ\'s blood.
Likewise with absolution; how is it that by the key of absolution heaven
is opened and hell is shut? How can a man forgive sin? It is by the word
that the priest, or Christ through the priest, says: \"I absolve,
absolve and absolve you from all your sins, through the merit, suffering
and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by his command, in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. This word does it,
because it is Christ\'s word and command, as he saith \[Matt. 18:18\],
\"Whatsoever ye shall forgive on earth shall be forgiven in heaven.\"

45 And this is the sum of it, that we learn to pray and understand our
infant faith, to which we pledge in baptism to confess it and to remain
firm in it, when we say: I believe in God the Father, Almighty Creator
of heaven and earth, namely, that we know that this is the main part and
the basis of all articles of Christian doctrine. He who sets the
principal article must understand the other articles, of the
resurrection of the dead, of baptism, of absolution,

[1300 **Erl. (2., sob, 76. 86 f. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 39-44. w. VIII,
1437-1110.** 1301]{.underline}

of the Lord\'s Supper 2c. also put. Whoever denies the other articles,
or disputes how it is possible, has also denied the main part, namely
God\'s omnipotence, yes, His majesty and divinity. For everything hangs
on each other like a chain, and they join together.

the articles together, and one follows from the other. May our dear God
keep us in the right mind of faith and graciously guard us from sharp
disputes and clever fables, as St. Peter calls them \[2 Ep. 1, 16\], of
human reason, amen.

**The other sermon, on 1 Cor. 15, 39-44.**

Held in the parish church on Sunday Rogate \[May 18\] 1544. \*)

**1 Cor. 15, 39-44. All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one
flesh of men, another of cattle, another of fish, another of birds. And
there are heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies; but another glory have
the heavenly, and another the earthly. The sun has a different clarity,
the moon a different clarity, the stars a different clarity; for one
star surpasses the other in clarity. So also the resurrection of the
dead. It is sown corruptible, and will rise incorruptible. It is sown in
dishonor, and will rise in glory. It is sown in weakness, and shall rise
in power. It is sown a natural body, and will rise a spiritual body.**

1 St. Paul, as your beloved has heard for eight days today, instructs us
with his sermon, which he preaches in this epistle to the Corinthians,
about the article of the resurrection in the field and in the garden, so
that we may see how it is with the seed, and learn to strengthen our
faith in the resurrection of the dead with the work that God, through
His omnipotence, performs daily on the creatures. With this he also
meets those who sharply ask about this article out of reason: how will
it be in the resurrection? with what kind of body will the dead come?
How should it happen? he says. Look at the field and the garden, how it
happens there, and learn there.

God\'s omnipotence and power, which he demonstrates in the creatures,
which he also brings forth from death and makes alive.

A farmer walks in the field with his cloth around his neck, carrying
wheat, rye, barley, etc., and confidently reaches into the seed with his
hand, throws it around, and sows the field. Behind him follows a boy,
who leads the harrow, and digs the seed, which is sown, so that it is
well covered with the earth. To such seed we want to oppose a coarse
dolt and incomprehensible fool, who wants to be excellently clever, and
may well reform and master God in heaven, as it is said of the carter
Hans Pfriemen 1) that he wanted to outsmart and master everything in
paradise. The same Hans Pfriem sees the farmer with the cloth and the
boy with the harrow, looks at him and says: \"Dear man, what are you
doing? Are you also clever? You throw the good grain into the ground;
don\'t you have children, servants and cattle at home who can eat it?
Why do you spoil the good grain so shamefully and throw it into the
ground? And are you not satisfied with this, but another follows you,
who tramples and crushes everything with the horses, and furrows
everything with the harrow; what is it to you that you kill the fine
grain so miserably that it is of no use to anyone?

1\) Compare Poach\'s letter Col. 1275 ff.

\*We give this time determination after Luther\'s words at the beginning
of this sermon: \"as your love has heard today eight days\". The time
when the previous sermon was preached is fixed by the inscription in the
print, which is confirmed by the Table Talks, Cap. 49, L 1, namely on
Sunday Cantate 1544; accordingly, our sermon must have been preached on
Sunday Rogate, and the time given in the single print: \"Held in tswplo
paroolüas, vo niiniou blxuuNi\" is erroneous.

[1302 Erl. p.) 20b, 87-8p. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, I44V-I44S. 1303]{.underline}

If the farmer were impatient and short-tempered (as one finds many who
are hot-tempered and can\'t stand anything), he should probably get up
and rudely reject my Hans Pfriemen, and say: What do you fool have to do
with me, you go your way, leave me alone; he should also take an earthen
dumpling, and greet such Master Klügel with it, so that he lies on his
back and turns his eyes, like an ox that one now wants to beat. But a
sensible farmer does not do this, but says: \"Dear, be quiet, you do not
understand what I am doing now; but come back after half a year or a
quarter of a year, and then I will show you what I have done now. For in
that time every grain that I now cast into the ground and sow will bring
forth a stalk with a thick, full ear; then I will take back tenfold,
yes, twenty, thirtyfold for the seed that is now cast into the ground
and tilled. And the sun and the rain will serve me through God\'s work,
so that the grain in the field will sprout, green and grow.

4th Against this Hans Pfriem sitteth down, and saith, Well, this is
nothing that thou pretendest; I see neither stalk nor ear, but I see
that thou castest the goodly corn into the mire, and plowest it up; how
shall anything come of it? Be thou content, saith the farmer, and I will
have the corn cast into the ground, and be it plowed up; not that it
perish and perish in the ground, but that it grow up, and bring forth
fruit. Therefore, when the grain is sown, I also pray to God to give it
rain, sun and weather, so that it first becomes soft and decays in the
earth, and then, when it has taken root, breaks forth again from the
earth, grows and bears fruit.

\(5\) Such a foolish man, says St. Paul, are you also, when you ask how
the dead will rise? For as it is with the seed, so it is with our body,
which also is sown in the ground. For although men perish in many ways,
some drown in the water and are eaten by fishes, some go to the gallows
and are eaten by ravens, some are burned with fire, 2c., St. Paul sums
it all up as follows

and all this is called throwing the grain into the ground and plowing it
up so that it loses its shape. Can you then,\" he says, \"have such
faith in the field that if the grain is sown before winter and plowed up
with the harrow, for half a year afterward there will be beautiful,
young, delicious grain? You learn this from experience and read it in
your book and in your Bible, namely, if God blesses your work and gives
sun, rain and weather, that the seed you have sown will be uncorrupted
and in its time will come to life again and bear fruit. Why don\'t you
also believe this Bible that God proclaims and promises you in His Word
that our body, when it is scraped into the earth and buried, will rise
from the earth and come to life again?

Our Lord God is a good husbandman, who carries us all in his cloth, that
is, in his law; because we are all sinners and transgressors of his
commandments, we must also all die, Rom. 5:12, although we do not all
die in the same way, but one dies on the bed of a fever, of pestilence
2c, the other dies in the war in the battle, yet death takes us all
away, so that it is all said that God takes hold of his cloth, scatters
it around him like the sower, and sows us into the earth. Just as you
believe in the field that something will come of the grain that is sown
into the earth, so you should also believe here in our Lord God that
something will come of the deceased body that is plowed into the earth.
For our Lord God no more digs our bodies into the ground with the
opinion that they will remain in the ground and decay forever than a
farmer throws grain into the ground with the opinion that it will perish
and perish. Yes, it is much less God\'s opinion that our body should
remain eternally in the earth than the farmer\'s with the grain. Just as
the grain of the opinion is sown and covered up, so that it loses its
form, so that it is no longer known, so that neither grain nor the form
of a grain is seen there, and instead a beautiful stalk grows up that
bears fruit: so also our body of the opinion is buried in the earth, so
that it loses its form, so that it is not seen.

1\) Erlanger: dem.

[\
1304 Erl. \<2. 12 \"d, 8S-SI. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 39-44. W. VIII,
1443-1446. 1305]{.underline}

I see neither a human body nor a bodily form, and instead a beautiful,
clear, lovely and joyful body rises into another being and life.

\(7\) But we are clever Hans Pfriemen, in good German, coarse,
unintelligent fools, who always let ourselves be preached to, and hear
daily that God is our husbandman, who not only sows us in the earth, but
also speaks that he will give rain and sun, moisture and sap, prosperity
and blessing in due time, abundantly and abundantly, so that his grain
will grow and flourish; as he also faithfully does. The preaching of the
Gospel and the holy sacraments, baptism and the Lord\'s Supper, are the
rain; our Lord God lets it fall on his seed and thereby makes it moist.
The Holy Spirit is the sun, through which He makes His grain alive, and
finally raises it from the dead. But we go there, we turn a deaf ear to
it, we remain coarse and unintelligent, yet we want to be clever, and we
are true Hanseatic priests who master God\'s doors.

\(8\) Therefore St. Paul here answers them that ask how the dead shall
rise, saying, Thou art a fool, and remainest a fool. Your own field, and
your faith and science in your field, testify that you are a fool in
your skin. You believe that your grain, which you sow in your field,
will grow up in its time, gain a stalk, blossom beautifully and bear
much fruit; and you cannot believe that God\'s grain, which he sows in
his field, will come forth again on the last day and come to life. You
can believe in yourself and your work of the field, but you cannot and
will not believe in God and His work of the field. Are you not a gross
fool? God\'s work should be much more certain to you than your work,
since God is a different cultivator than you are.

\(9\) Such a likeness of the field and seed he gives here, as if to say,
Thou fool, go to the husbandman, he hath a fine Bible concerning the
article of the resurrection of the dead; therein shalt thou study, and
learn to understand what thou prayest in infantile faith, saying, I
believe a resurrection of the flesh. For the same article is written on

The seed of the field and of the garden is written and painted before
thine eyes, and thy field and the ground which thou sowest may teach
thee what thou shalt think of the resurrection of the dead. When summer
comes, the grain shoots out of the earth, and when it has sun, rain and
weather, it greens, grows, shoots, blossoms and stands cheerfully, and
no decay or death is to be seen in it, as before in winter, but a
cheerful form and life.

\(10\) This is a strong preaching of the resurrection. For as the grain
is sown in the field, and loses its form in the earth, and decays, but
springs up again out of the earth, and before our eyes, as it were,
rises again from death very merrily and finely: so also we are sown in
the earth, and are sheared as the grain. But it is for a winter that we
lie in the earth and rot; when our summer comes, at the last day, our
grain will spring forth, so that we will see not only a green blade of
grass and an erect stalk, but also a strong, thick ear, and will become
rich farmers, that is, eternally blessed. The rain, the sun and the
wind, that is, the Word, the sacraments and the Holy Spirit, prepare us
for this.

With such great seriousness he calls us fools. For just as the wise Hans
Pfriem considered the sower a foolish, senseless farmer, because he
throws the grain into the ground, and yet he himself is a crude Hans
Worst and an incomprehensible, foolish fool: so are they also crude Hans
Wörste, who ask: How will the dead rise? With what kind of body will
they come? Will they also eat and drink? \"Thou fool, that which thou
sowest shall not live, except it die first.\" The grain must first decay
and lose its form if it is to come to life and bear fruit. For its decay
serves to give it another, more beautiful form. So our body, as it lives
now, must also lose its form and put on a new form, if it is to go to
heaven and live forever. If the body did not decompose in the earth, it
would never become a new, living body; life must come out of death.

Item 12: \"That which you sow is not the body that is to become, but a
mere grain,

1306 Erl. (S.) 2ol\>, Sl-SS. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1446-1448. 1307

namely wheat, or the other one. But God gives him a body as he wills,
and to each of the seed his own body.\" So he wants to say: The body of
man, when he is dead and buried, is not the body that is to become. In
the resurrection it will take on a different form, be much more
beautiful and glorious than it is now, just as the grain, after it
decays, grows again much more beautiful. It retains its essence and
nature, but it takes on a different form, is not a dry, wrinkled grain
when it grows out of the earth, but a green, fresh, living grain. The
same will happen to the human body; when it has rotted in the earth, it
will rise again much more beautiful and glorious. It will remain the
same body of a man as it was created, but it will be a different form
and custom of the body, will not eat, drink, feed, beget children, keep
house 2c., but will not need any of the things that belong to this
transient life and preservation of the body. The same body and soul that
each one had will remain in its nature, with all its limbs, but it will
not keep the form it now has, without what belongs to its essence; will
also not be the same custom of the body as it is now.

\(13\) But the difference of male and female will remain, as God created
each one, just as the grain retains its kind and nature. From a grain of
wheat grows nothing but a stalk of wheat; from a grain of barley nothing
but a stalk of barley, and so on, each remains in its nature and
essence; the grain brings the same kind, the grain of barley does not go
into a stalk of wheat; the grain of wheat does not go into a stalk of
oats. As nature is created, and remains according to the word, that each
one should bear fruit according to its kind, and have its own seed with
itself, each one according to its kind, Gen. 1:12, so also God will give
to each one his own body in the resurrection. What is created a man,
that shall remain a man, male or female; God will not change His
creature and creature. As every man is sown, so shall he rise again of
the same kind and nature, but much more beautiful and glorious than he
was sown, having sharp eyes that can see through

see a mountain, and have silent ears that can hear from one end of the
world to the other.

\(14\) If God is able, through your hand and work, to make the grain
that you sow in the field and hide in the ground so beautiful and
glorious that everyone who sees it delights in it, should He not also,
without your work and labor, by His work alone, be able to bring forth,
clothe, adorn, and give a new form to our human body that He sows in the
ground? Why do you want to argue a lot and ask how this is possible?
Well, you fool, shouldn\'t you have learned from the creatures that such
a thing is not impossible with God?

\(15\) Yea, sayest thou, how can the dead bodies go out of the graves,
because they are rotten and become earth? How is that possible? How do
you always remain a Hans Pfriem; you think it is impossible that all men
rot and decay in the earth, but look at your own work and labor in the
field. You throw the grain into the muck, bury it so that it rots, and
wait until winter is over so that you can see it again, much more
beautiful and abundant than you sowed it. So you must also wait here
until the winter is over, and our body rises again. When it is
resurrected, you will see it come forth again. For this purpose Christ
has gone before us with his resurrection, and has broken the way for us,
and made the way that we should follow him. Therefore we 1) have no
reason to doubt this article.

\(16\) And not only in the grain, but also in other creatures it can be
seen how life comes out of death through God\'s creation and
omnipotence. If you go to the cherry tree and touch its branches around
Christmas, you will not find a green leaf, sap or life on the whole
tree, but a barren, bare tree with dead wood. But if you come back after
Easter, the cherry tree begins to come alive again, the wood is juicy,
and the little rice gains eyes and nodules.

1\) Erlanger: je.

1308 **Erl. (2.) 2°b, \[s-ss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 39-44. w. VIII,
I418-I4SI.** 1309

At Pentecost, little eyes become little bushes, which open up; and out
of the little bushes come white flowers. When the little flower opens,
you see a stem; out of the stem comes a seed, which is harder than the
tree; inside the hard seed grows another seed, not as hard as the first
seed, but somewhat softer, so that it 1) serves for eating, just as the
marrow grows in the leg. The cherry grows around the hard core, covered
with a skin, just as the flesh grows around the leg and is surrounded by
the skin; and the cherry grows so merrily round that no wood turner can
make it so round.

\(17\) How does it happen that through the little rice on the cherry
tree, which is dry and dead around Christmas, like broom rice, a nodule
grows, and out of the nodule comes a white flower, out of the flower
comes a stem, and through the stem grows a seed; this again brings a
seed inside, and a cherry outside? The stem is first of all a small
point in the flower, so that one could hardly pierce it with the point
of a needle; nevertheless, a stone grows through it, which has its
marrow, flesh, blood and skin. Is this not a wonderful creature of God?
No creature can make such a creature; no man, no king, no matter how
powerful he may be; no doctor, no matter how learned, wise and prudent
he may be, can create such a little cherry. And if we did not see it
before our eyes every year, we would not believe that such beautiful,
lovely fruit could grow so wonderfully from a scrawny little rice.

Where does the cherry tree come from? Does it not come from a dry, dead
pit? When the birds eat the cherries from the tree, and the pits remain
on the stem, they become withered and dry, fall down under the tree, or
are scattered in the garden in some other way; people walk over them
with their feet and pay no attention. Over a year a little tree shoots
out of the kernel; it grows larger from year to year, so that over ten
or twenty years it is a large tree, and for one kernel, from which it
has grown, it bears many thousands of cherries. Do you say around
Easter: Ho, how

1\) \"he\" put by us instead of \"she\" in the original, where also
\"the core\" is found.

should the little eye become a cherry, and the pit a tree? You fool,
have you never seen it before? Let Margaret\'s Day 2) come, and I will
show you the cherries that have grown from the little eye. And see about
a year, two, five, ten after that, whether a large tree will not stand
where a small stone now lies.

Therefore, dear Hans Pfriem, open your eyes, look at the cherry tree, it
will preach to you about the resurrection of the dead, and teach you how
life comes from death. If the cherry tree could speak, it would say to
you, \"Dear, look at me in winter, how barren, how bare, how barren, how
dead I am; you will find neither leaves nor fruit, neither sap nor life
on me: But come again after Easter, and I have sap and life; I am white
with blossoms, green with leaves; come again about Margaret, and I have
ripe cherries, and all the world is gracious to me; he that looketh upon
me is astonished at me, and saith, Behold, how full hangeth the cherry
tree; how marvelous a creature of God is this?

\(20\) Yes, you say, the cherry tree is all a common thing, and happens
annually; therefore I cannot consider it a miracle, for I see it before
my eyes; but that the dead should rise, that I do not see. Thank you,
Hans Pfriem, for putting God\'s miraculous work out of your sight and
speaking so rudely and incomprehensibly of His creature. Is it not sin
and shame that you pass by God\'s creatures and works as if you were a
block and stone that has no understanding? You have eyes, ears, reason
and senses, yet you are not as wise and understanding as a cherry tree.
You speak with your mouth: I believe in God the Father, the Almighty
Creator of heaven and earth, but you do not believe from your heart, and
you do not respect His creature and His work. Although it is a common
thing with the cherry tree, and happens annually, it is not without
God\'s power, creation and omnipotence that cherries grow from a barren,
dead shoot, and cherry trees from small, dead seeds. God has in the An-

2\) \"Margaret\'s Day\" is July 13.

3\) Erlanger: wunder.

[1310 Erl. (2.\> 2°d, 96-98. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, usi-iisi. 1311]{.underline}

The Creator spoke in the beginning of the creature \[Gen. 1:12\]: \"Let
the earth bring forth grass and herbs to sow, and fruitful trees, that
every one may bear fruit after his kind, and have his own seed with him
in the earth. The same word spoken by the Creator brings forth the
cherries from the barren rice, and the cherry tree from the little seed.
And so surely does God\'s creation and work proceed that none steps out
of its kind, but each bears fruit according to its kind. The cherry tree
does not go out of its kind, unless it is transplanted and grafted into
another kind; otherwise everything goes so surely that it is not
lacking.

So God preaches to us daily about the resurrection of the dead, and has
presented to us so many examples and experiences of this article, how
many creatures there are, if we pay attention to them. What happens in
our homes? Where do chickens, ducks, geese come from? Do they not come
from dead things? A matrona takes eggs, she puts them under a hen, duck,
goose 2c. Comes Hans Pfriem, and says: What do you intend, you foolish
woman, that you put the hen, goose 2c. over the eggs? They will trample
and break your eggs; rather eat the eggs with your children, that is
much better for you than for them to be trampled and broken. No, says
the matrona, let me alone, I will not eat them; you are a fool, and do
not know what I am doing; for two weeks, for a moon, for six weeks, I
will show you the shells of the eggs, and in exchange there shall sit in
the nest young chickens, ducks, young geese; there shall then One egg,
of the eggs which I now lay under the hen, lay me a whole shock of eggs.

22 We see this in the experience that it happens: In Lent there are
eggs, around Easter there are young geese, the same lay eggs again over
a year. What does this do? The Word does it, that God blessed the living
creatures in the water, likewise the living creatures on earth, and the
birds under the sky, and said \[Gen. 1, 28\]: \"Be fruitful and
multiply, and fill the waters and the earth.\" The same word does it
that God said to the hen, goose 2c. sit on the eggs, and hatch young
chickens, geese 2c. And

over a year the same chickens, geese 2c. lay eggs again.

\(23\) So our house, yard, field, garden, and everything, is full of the
Bible, since God not only preaches through His miraculous works, but
also knocks at our eyes, stirs our senses, and shines into our hearts at
once, if we will have it, so that we may pay attention and perceive how
this article of the resurrection of the dead is formed and painted in
the creatures. The egg must become so that it is neither fit to boil nor
to fry, neither to eat nor to drink. It loses its shape, so that neither
yolk nor white can be distinguished in it, and everything that is in it
becomes white as yolk, as if it were rotten; nevertheless, out of the
same egg, which has lost its shape and is no longer suitable for
anything, a young, living chicken crawls. Is the not dead resurrected?
Yes, it is more than dead raised. For before it was not so much as a
dead chicken, but a mere egg; and such an egg, which no longer had the
form of an egg; but now it is not an egg again, but a living chicken.
Aren\'t these miraculous works of God? And yet all the world goes by and
does not pay any attention to them.

\(24\) For Christ to feed five thousand men with five barley loaves and
two fish \[John 6:11\] is a great miracle, and one can only marvel at
it. But what is it compared to the miracle that God feeds every year
with new grain, which he lets grow from the earth, not a few hundred
thousand, but many thousand times a thousand, that is, people without
number \[Ps. 104, 24. ff.\]. Therefore also St. Augustine says:
Quotidiana miracula Dei non facilitate, sed assiduitate viluerunt,
God\'s miraculous works, which happen daily, are held in low esteem, not
because they are so easy, but because they happen so constantly and
without interruption. That God rules the world and sustains the
creatures is a miracle that people are accustomed to, and because it
happens daily, it seems to be little, and no one considers it worthy to
notice it and consider it a miracle of God, even though it is a greater
miracle than that Christ fed five thousand men with five loaves \[John
6:11\] and made wine out of water \[John 2:9\].

[1312 Eri. (s.) sod, SS-100. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 39-44. W. vm,
iisi-iiss. 1313]{.underline}

\(25\) I have often heard my dear father say that he had heard it from
his parents, my forefathers, that there were many more people on earth
who ate than the sheaves of all the fields in the whole world that were
gathered annually. Now no strong, healthy man can sustain himself on one
sheaf for the year, but a man must have three or four bushels a year at
the least. Now make the calculation, and you will find that more bread
is eaten annually than grain from all the fields is cut and gathered
annually. Where does so much bread come from? Must you not confess here
yourself and say: It is God\'s miraculous work, who blesses and
increases the grain in the field, in the barn, the flour in the box, the
bread on the table; but there are few who pay attention to it and
realize that it is God\'s miraculous work.

Tell me, is it not a great miracle of God\'s omnipotence: a woman
conceives, bears, gives birth to a son, who has body and soul, grows,
becomes strong and tall, stands, walks, lives and weaves. If you ask
where such a son comes from, reason, medicine, experience, and also
God\'s word say: This son\'s first beginning is a drop of blood. How is
it possible that from a small drop of blood such a living, rational man,
so great in person and length, so sharp in intellect, so rich in senses,
should come into being? St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Augustine, St. Ambrose,
St. John Hus, I Doctor Martinus, from what did they all come? Is not
their first beginning a drop of blood? But we are Hans Pfriemen, who
neither understand nor want to notice anything.

A housemother should be almost surprised to death about it, if she
wanted to consider it right: Today she has an almond eggs, the same she
puts under a hen, goose 2c. Over four or six weeks she has a basket full
of young chickens and geese, which eat, drink, grow and become big.
Where do they come from? The eggs open in their own time, then the
little chickens and geese sit, peek out with their beaks, until they
finally crawl out. The mother, the old hen,

1\) \"large\" is missing in Walch.

the goose, does nothing to this, except that it sits over the eggs and
warms them. But it is God\'s omnipotence that makes the eggs become
young chickens and geese.

\(28\) So it is with the fish in the water, and with every plant that
grows out of the earth. From what do fish grow? Their first beginning is
the spawn that swims in the water; from this, by God\'s word and
omnipotence, carp, perch, pike and all kinds of fish swarm in the water.
An oak, beech or spruce tree grows out of the earth several fathoms
thick and many cubits high; what is its first beginning? Earth and
water; the root draws its sap and moisture from the earth; it drives it
over itself with all its might, so that the tree grows large, thick and
long 2c.

29\) In 3) the same creatures one sees, who only wants to notice it,
vain examples of the article of the resurrection of the dead. For
everything comes forth from dead things: the fish that swarm in the
water, the trees that stand and grow green in the forest, the men and
animals that weave on the earth. For the spawn from which the fish grow,
the sap which the root draws from the earth, the eggs from which the
chickens and geese crawl out, the drop of blood from which the human
being initially grows, what is it but all dead things? Nevertheless,
living creatures come out of it. What makes this? God\'s omnipotence and
word, which the eternal, omnipotent Creator spoke in Genesis 1:20: \"Let
the waters be filled with living creatures that weave, and with birds
that fowl on the earth under the firmament of heaven.\" Item, v. 24:
\"Let the earth bring forth living creatures, every one after his kind,
cattle, vermin, and beasts of the earth, every one after his kind.\"
Item, of man, v. 28: \"Be fruitful and multiply, and replenish the
earth.\" Such is the word and omnipotence of God.

\(30\) Since we have so many examples in all creatures, which all
testify that God created all things from nothing, that is, brought them
forth from death, and still does today.

> 2\) Barme - Barbe. 3) Walch: AuS.

1314 Eri. (2.) 20b, roo-102. interpretations on the I epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, i4ss-i4ss. 1315

If we believe that the Lord will one day bring forth creatures from
death, we should strengthen our faith from this article that the dead
will rise again, so that we have no doubt about it, but certainly
believe that our body, when it is buried in the earth, will come forth
again in its time and come to life.

What were heaven and earth, animals, men, angels and all creatures six
thousand years ago? Nothing. But God brought them forth and created them
by his word and omnipotence. He had no seed from which to make them; He
created the seed from nothing, and from it He made the heavens and the
earth, and all that is in them. It was a raw seed which God first
created from nothing; as Moses says \[Gen. 1:2, 1: \"The earth was
desolate and empty.\" From the same seed God brings forth heaven and
earth. Then he speaks to the heavens, v. 3: \"Thou heaven, give lights,
sun, moon, stars, that they may shine upon the earth. And to the earth
he says, v. 11: \"O earth, let grass and herbage spring up, and fruitful
trees, that every one may bear fruit after his kind.\" Item, v. 24:
\"You earth, bring forth living creatures, each according to its kind,
cattle, worms, and animals on earth, each according to its kind.\" And
to the waters he says, v. 20: \"Let the waters be filled with living
creatures that weave, and with fowl that feed in the earth under the
heaven.\" Then he speaks to the fish, v. 22: \"Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the waters of the sea, and let the birds multiply on the
earth.\" And to the people he says, v. 28: \"Be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the earth.

\(32\) Since God, through his word and omnipotence, created heaven and
earth and all creatures from nothing, that is, brought them forth from
death, and still brings them forth daily from death, should he not be
able to raise the dead according to his art, that is, through his
powerful word and divine omnipotence? I mean, he is an almighty
husbandman; what he builds, sows, plants, that is not lost. He leaves us
his art and omnipotence, so that he can raise the dead.

The Lord will and can resurrect all the animals of the earth, the fruits
of the field and all creatures.

\(33\) Therefore, when we fall sick, become diseased, die, are buried in
the earth, and are buried, let us not be rude and foolish, nor wise
Hansen Pfriemen, and say, How will the dead rise? How is it possible
that the dead body, which rots and decays in the earth, will become
something? but say: Dear Hans Pfriem, go into the garden and ask the
cherry tree how it is possible that from a dry, dead branch an eye
grows, and from the same eye cherries grow? Go into the house and ask
the matrona how it is possible that from the dead eggs, which she lays
under the hen, live little chickens grow? For since God does this with
the cherries, little chickens, 2c., should you not give God the honor
that, even if He causes winter to come upon you, and you die and are
buried in the earth, He will nevertheless bring you forth again from the
earth in the summer and raise you from the dead?

34 The body that is buried in the ground is not the body that is to be;
it is of the same nature and kind, but much more beautiful and glorious.
For a dead, corruptible body is sown, and a living, incorruptible body
is raised. It is sown in shame and dishonor, and will rise in honor and
glory. A weak, invalid body is sown, and a strong, vigorous body will
rise. A natural body is sown, and a spiritual body will rise. An earthly
body is sown, and a heavenly body will rise. Just as the grain that is
sown in the earth is to be counted an earthly body compared to the grain
that grows out of the earth with the stalk and with the full ear, for it
is more beautiful, more lovely and more glorious: so also we will be
much more beautiful in the resurrection, when we shall take off this
corruptible, mortal body and put on an incorruptible, immortal body.
Then we will no longer eat, drink, work, sweat, suffer hunger, thirst,
hardship, but will live in God eternally, and our body will blossom,
much more beautiful than roses, will no longer stink,

[1316 **Eri. \<20 sod, \>02-104. sermon on I Cor. 15, 39-44**. **W.
VIII, 1489-1462.** 1517]{.underline}

2c., but to be eternally healthy and fresh, and without all sin and evil
desire.

35 Thus this article of the resurrection of the dead is powerfully
demonstrated by the grain in the field, by the cherry tree and other
trees in the garden, by the fish in the water, by the birds and animals
on earth, and finally by our own bodies and lives. Who does not want to
believe it, let him always go, and remain a coarse fool and Hans Pfriem.
Some dispute and ask: where our Lord God will take so much fire on the
last day, that he will judge the world by fire. Item, when God otherwise
causes lightning and thunder to happen, they dispute about it, and
pretend that there is a fire in the air that is greater than the world,
and that is where lightning and thunder come from. Aren\'t they gross
fools and unintelligent fools, even though they pretend to be very wise?
These are the same fools of whom St. Paul says here, who ask \[v. 35\]:
\"How will the dead rise? And with what kind of body will they come?\"

Pliny is also such a wise fool. When he hears preaching of the
resurrection of the dead, he is offended and angry at it, and says: \"If
our dead body, which is burned to powder or rots in the earth, is to
rise again from the dust and earth, where will he take hearing, face,
reason and understanding? Or, if he has hearing, sight, reason 2c., for
what will he need them? But if he has none, what kind of being and life
will it be? Where will they all have room, lodging and dwelling, if they
are to rise from the dead? And finally he concludes that it is all
childish folly and a vain, lazy poem of wretched, mortal men, who would
like to live forever and never stop, which is impossible, since there is
no difference between the breath of a man and that of an unreasonable
animal.

\(37\) Of Pliny this is no wonder, for he is a pagan and has neither the
Word of God nor the Scriptures. For a pagan who does not have God\'s
word and the Scriptures cannot speak and hold otherwise. But of the
chief priests and Sadducees of the Jewish people, of Annas and Caiphas,
it was a miracle, for they had the Word of God and the Scriptures.

the holy scriptures, and were the highest rulers and heads of the people
of God; nevertheless they were true Hans priests, and stank in such
suckling faith that they thought nothing at all of the resurrection of
death; just as today cardinals, bishops, and the pope with all his court
servants are stuck in such suckling faith. The chief priests and
Sadducees should have believed Moses and the prophets, because they read
them in their schools on every Sabbath day; but they did not understand
Moses or the prophets, as Christ had charged them, Matt. 22:29, and
taught and preached against this article publicly, drowning in avarice
and the pleasures of this life, just as the pope, the cardinals, and the
bishops look at money and property, dominion and power, and say: Let us
take money and power, be great lords, rule, and live in pleasure; when
we are dead, nothing will come of it. These are true epicures and swine,
who have neither fear of death nor hope of eternal life. Why should we
fear, they say, or what should we hope for, because there is no life
after this life?

Come on, let\'s go, it\'s going the way it should go. Praise and thanks
be to God that we have lived through the time. For since our highest
heads of the Christian faith, as the Pope calls himself with his own,
have followed in the footsteps of the high priests and Sadducees, and
believe neither resurrection, nor angels, nor spirit, nor God, that is,
nothing at all, Acts 23:8. 23, 8, then, if God wills, the last day will
not be far away. For just as Christ came in his first future, in the
time of the Jewish Sadducees, so he will come in his other future, in
the time of the Christian, I would almost have said un-Christian
Sadducees. They believe as much as a cow and a pig believe, and yet they
want to be heads of the church and masters of the faith, and they
condemn our gospel and put us under ban. Let them make; darkness has
surrounded them; yet light shines in the dark place, blessed is he who
pays attention to it, the day will soon dawn and the morning star will
rise \[2 Petr. 1, 19.\]. The holy scripture shines forth; I hope we will
also see the dear Lord come in the

1318 Eri. (2.) s \"d, i \"t. sis f. Interpretations on the 1st epistle
to the Corinthians. W. vm, E-\"\". 1319

Clouds of heaven, that He may let His voice be heard: \"Arise, arise,
you who are under the earth, come forth \[Dan. 12:2\], arise from the
dead \[Eph. 5:14\]. Our dear God grant that I may live to see it, amen.
(1) (39) For our dear Lord Jesus Christ must do it with his kingdom;
otherwise it is lost. He is the one who was before heaven and earth, and
made them, and

1\) This sentence is missing in Walch.

will also change and negate it in turn. He will make the old essence of
this life obsolete, and make everything better; as David says in the
102nd Psalm, v. 26. 27.: Your years last for ever and ever; you founded
the earth before, and the heavens are the work of your hands. They will
pass away, but you remain. They will all become obsolete, like a
garment. They will be changed, like a garment, when you change them.
Therefore shall we pray that his kingdom and the last day come. Amen.

**The third sermon, from the last pose of God, about 1 Cor. 15, 51. 52.
53.**

Held in the parish church on Sunday Vocem Jucunditatis \[May 10\] 1545.

**1 Cor. 15, v. 51-53. Behold, I tell you a mystery: we shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed, and that suddenly in a moment, at
the time of the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead
will rise incorruptible, and we will be changed. For this corruptible
must put on the incorruptible, and this mortal must put on
immortality.**

This is too much for one sermon; for the text is too rich, and the
matter too great and high, of which the apostle speaks in this place,
that we cannot reach it, nor at once act upon it with dignity. But
because the time demands it, we must speak of it as much as we are able
and have time.

\(2\) It is proper that at this time, after the feast of Easter, the
article of the resurrection should be preached and acted upon; not only
of the resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, who rose from the dead for
all our sakes, even as he died for all our sakes; but also of our
resurrection, that we may be well grounded in the faith, and be fully
assured that our bodies shall come forth again, and live. For the
resurrection of Christ is of no use to us if we, for whose sake Christ
rose from the dead, do not follow him, and

just as he, so also we will rise from the dead. But now we will not be
able to follow him and rise with him to life, because we believe that
his resurrection has happened for our benefit. We will not believe
either, but we always preach about it, and do this article without
ceasing, so that it may remain in our hearts.

The resurrection of Christ concerns us, as we sing at Easter: \"Christ
is risen from the dead, let us all rejoice, let Christ be our
consolation. So it is: Christ\'s resurrection shall be our consolation.
If it is to be our consolation, we must believe it. If we do not believe
it, it is of no use to us. For for his sake Christ was not allowed to
rise again, just as for his sake he was not allowed to die. For our sake
he died and rose from the dead, so we must accept his death and
resurrection, rejoicing in them with all our hearts, singing and
believing that all these things are our salvation and comfort, and that
we too will surely rise from the dead just as he rose from the dead.

4 In this epistle, St. Paul violently pushes the same article against
all reason. Shortly before this text he answered those who ask how the
resurrection will take place. For our body will be buried, stinking,
rotting and decaying, so that no evil carrion will be left.

[1320 Erl. (L.) sod, sit-sis. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 51-53. W. vm,
1321]{.underline}

on earth than the body of man when he is dead. Reason then says, \"How
can a new body, more beautiful and glorious than the sun, rise from such
a wretched, stinking corpse, which decays and is eaten by maggots and
worms? Well then, says St. Paul, if our corpse does not rise again, then
Christ died in vain, and rose again from the dead in vain. But if Christ
died and rose again for our sake, then our body must also rise again.
There is no doubt about it.

\(5\) So also we say, If it be not that we rise from the dead, what
shall we do to sing? Christ is risen, let us all rejoice, let Christ be
our consolation? If Christ is to be our joy and comfort, as we sing,
then our body must rise again from the grave, decaying, rotting and
stinking, however horrible it may be. And what we sing is certain, and
has no doubt; for the holy scriptures bear witness, God has spoken it,
that our body will be more beautiful, more glorious and clearer than the
bright sun.

6 We preach these things forever, if God would have us believe them as
firmly and surely as they are so abundantly preached to us. But because
of our unbelief, this text will not become false, nor will God, who has
spoken such things, become a liar. With our weakness, God could have
patience; but that we become tired, weary and weary of hearing God\'s
word, that is terrible. I have often said that one should hear God\'s
word with all seriousness and diligence, because it is due to us; 1) the
time would come that we would like to hear it, if it could be due to us.
Whoever does not want to hear it, let him always go, and he will know
who will be sorry. I do not preach to you, but it is the Holy Spirit who
speaks through St. Paul; he wants to be unnoticed by you. If the pope
would now give his triple crown, and the Turkish emperor all his
kingdoms, to hear such a sermon, they must do so.

1\) \"gebühren\" is used here in the meaning of \"zutheil werden\".

yet they do not hear it. They did not want to hear it when they could
have heard it; therefore, even if they wanted to hear it, they should
not hear it.

\(7\) When God speaks and gives His word, He gives it abundantly, pours
out His treasure abundantly, opens the heavens wide, cries out and says,
\"All to heaven, all to heaven! Then it is time to open one\'s ears and
listen. But if one does not want to hear his word, he is silent and
takes his word away purely. Thus it is: If we did not want to hear God
when he spoke to us, we may hear the devil when God is silent. If we did
not want to go to heaven, because it was open, God can close heaven and
open hell; then we can see where we will stay. It happened to the Pope
and the Turk that God took His word from them; they did not want it any
other way; they were justified, as the saying goes: Volenti non fit
injuria, he who wants it that way is not wronged; arbitrariness breaks
the law of the land.

\(8\) Now God is also closing heaven and closing hell, pouring out his
word abundantly through the preaching of the gospel, and speaking
confidently, but no one wants to hear it almost anymore. So it will also
happen that God will close heaven and open hell, so that people will
have to go in with heaps, because they do not want to go to heaven now,
because it is open. Therefore let us listen diligently, because God is
speaking to us, lest He take away His word and be silent. If he takes
away his word and is silent, we are finished. If we lose God\'s word
once, we will not get it over again. I have been a monk for fifteen
years, and I would have liked to hear some righteous preaching, but it
could not come to me so well. Now we have God\'s word in abundance, but
we oppose it as if it were none of our business. Well then, if we are to
lose God\'s word, we may find out what we have done. It would be
advisable for us to listen, because God speaks to us and calls us so
faithfully and entices us kindly. But enough of that now, let us turn to
the text.

1322 Erl. (2.) 2vd, Slö-Sis. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. vm, I468-I47I. 1323

So far, St. Paul has given a powerful proof of the article of the
resurrection, that the wretched, miserable, human flesh, which dies,
rots and decays in the earth, will come forth again from the earth and
rise again; besides, he also indicates with what kind of body the dead
will come. Now he says how it will be on the last day, in the
resurrection from the dead, and puts a special piece, the like of which
is not found elsewhere in the holy scriptures. \"Behold,\" he says, \"I
tell you a mystery.\"

\(10\) Mystery means a secret thing done out of sight, set apart from
sense and reason, and hidden from all the world, a hidden thing that
cannot be obtained by any reason but by faith alone. So now he says, \"I
will tell you something secret and hidden, as it were, in one ear. Not
so that no one will hear it or know about it except you alone (because I
am an apostle and teacher of the Gentiles, and my word goes out publicly
to all the world, so that everyone to whom my word comes will hear it),
but so that they will not all believe it. I write it publicly, that it
may be preached publicly, and that all the world may hear it, but it
will not go to the hearts of all. Therefore it is a secret, and remains
a secret, so that everyone may hear it; but many will not pay attention
to it; to them it will also remain hidden, whether they already hear and
know it. It is obvious, and yet secret. It is manifest that it is
preached openly, and set upon the candlestick, that it shineth more
brightly than the sun. It is hidden and secret, so that the world will
not believe it or respect it, especially the epicureans and scoffers, 1
Pet 3:20.

\(11\) What then is the mystery? This is it,\" answers St. Paul: \"You
may ask, \'If the dead rise again, how will it be on the last day? Who
will bury the other? 2c. This is how it will be: \"We will not all fall
asleep, but we will all be changed.\" The last day will come in such a
way that it will be a joyful day for the faithful and true Christians,
but a terrible day for the unbelievers, the wicked, the miserly, the
usurers and false Christians. For this is how it will be: We will not be

to offer the sacrament to all on the bed, to place it in the coffin and
to carry it to the grave. For this is what he calls \"falling asleep\",
when one lies on the little bed of rest, gives up the spirit, is carried
out and buried in the earth. This will not be needed, he says, on the
last day. Then it will not be said: Come, hear confession, absolve him
of sins, give him the sacrament, bury him, but when you will sit over
the table and eat, stand over the box and count the thalers, lie in bed
and sleep, sit at the tavern and drink, be at the dance and jump, soon
in a moment you will be changed, that is, dead and alive again.

12\) \"To be changed\" means to be changed to a new life, to come out of
the nature and life of this world into another, new nature and life,
since one no longer needs food and drink, clothes and shoes, money and
goods, sleep, work, marriage and the like, which belong to this life.
Those whom the last day shall strike, saith he, shall not be buried, but
shall in a moment and suddenly be changed. We shall not all fall asleep;
but all, both they that lie in the graves, and they that dwell on the
earth apart from the graves, must be changed. For there shall be another
being and another body, which neither eateth nor drinketh, neither
worketh nor sleepeth, neither marrieth nor begetteth children, neither
handleeth money nor counteth thalers, and in sum, which needeth no more
of the things that pertain unto corruptible life. This is the
transformation, that those who have fallen asleep and lie under the
earth, at the same time with us who are still alive, and we with them,
will be changed to a new life.

013 These secret things I tell you, saith he, because they will not all
believe it, but will think it foolishness and a mockery: to them also it
shall be a secret secret: but see that ye hear it, and believe it. For
it will surely come to pass. Though we be not all buried, yet must we
all be changed at the same time: for this body is not fit with its
nature and use as it is now; it is too foul, full of sin, full of
mortality, full of filth and filthiness. What good can come out of it

1324 **Erl. (2.) sod, SIS-S20. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 51-53. w. VIII,
I47I-I474.** 1325

become? Therefore he must become different, must be cleansed and
purified, so that he no longer sins, does not drink wine, does not fill
himself, does not drink, nor does he need these temporal goods and
beings anymore.

14 Now this is the secret of which St. Paul says here, that is, a
secret, hidden little piece, which only those who are true Christians
respect and take to heart. Popes, cardinals, bishops, great lords of
this world, item, usurers, adulterers, drunkards and silent men do not
believe it, nor do they respect it, because it is incredible to reason
that everything should change in a moment. Should God completely clean
up the whole world, says reason, in a moment? How can he, who died 5000
years ago, and has lain in the grave and decayed for such a long time,
suddenly be changed with me, who am still alive? Ei, how foolish thing
do you pretend? It is not believable. Well, says St. Paul, I tell you in
one ear, on the last day it will be so admitted: They that are under the
earth, and are not yet risen, shall rise again, and with them that are
yet on the earth shall be quickly and effectually changed. Believe this
for sure. But if thou wilt not believe it, let it be: for thine unbelief
it shall not fail; it shall surely come to pass.

Momentum, ictus oculi, means a moment when the eye opens and closes;
this happens quickly and nimbly. That is why it is called thunder and
lightning, because before the eye is opened and closed, the lightning
has happened. So also in the last day it will happen quickly and nimbly,
as the lightning travels. He who now has the candelabra in his mouth and
drinks, he who lies in bed and sleeps, he who stands at his work, he who
counts his money, shall not be left room for, but before an eye is
opened and closed, he shall be changed. If Adam, Eve, Abraham, Sarah,
and other fathers, have not been raised with Christ, 1) as the Gospel of
Matthew \[Cap. 27, 53\] says, and I believe it to be true, then they and
all who have been raised with Christ will be changed.

1\) This sentence is to be understood according to the house postilion
(Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XIII, 449, § 15) in such a way: If Adam
2c. has not already risen with Christ and gone to heaven with him, they
will be changed together with all\.... will be changed. Cf. 16 of the
following, fourth sermon.

We are in the graves, and together with us, while we are still alive on
earth, we will be transformed into another being in one breath. This is
how it will be, I tell you in one ear, I mean it faithfully and well. If
you believe it and take it to heart, good for you! If you do not believe
it and despise it, woe to you! It will come to pass, and for your sake
it will not cease.

16 And this will happen, he says, \"at the time of the last trumpet. For
the trumpet will sound, and the dead will rise incorruptible, and we
will be changed\". He speaks of the last day, as he speaks of it in 1
Thess. 4, 16. 17. when he says: \"He himself, the Lord, will come down
from heaven with a shout and the voice of the archangel, and with the
trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ will rise first; then we who are
alive and remain will be caught up together with them in the cloud to
meet the Lord in the air\". 2c. He tells three things, so Christ will
have with him in his last future: the shout, the voice of the archangel,
and the trumpet of God. And speaks after the manner, as it happens in
the field in the battle. For the shouting in the field, keleusma, means
when the men of war in the army exhort and urge one another to fight
chivalrously: Add to it, add to it, add to it, add to it, add to it!
Trumpets are the trumpets used in battle.

When the battle begins and the enemy attacks, the trumpets or trumpets
are blown, the drums are beaten, and the taratantara is played, and a
battle cry is made: \"Come, come, come! The chief lieutenant or captain,
to whom the warlord has given command of the field, exhorts the people
of war to attack the enemy in a chivalrous manner: Hui, hui, hui! And
the warriors shout: Fresh at them, fresh at them, fresh at them! strike
dead, strike dead, strike dead! That\'s why, when one part has won, they
say: \"Change part has become small sound. When the Turks go to battle,
their slogan is, and the whole army shouts: Allah, Allah, Allahu,
Mahomet Regil Allah! It is not God, because God, Mahomet is God\'s
servant. So did

[1326 Eri. (2.) 20d, 320-S22. interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, 1171-1478. 1327]{.underline}

The Greeks were also in conflict, had their slogans and shouts, their
trumpets and trumpets.

18 In the same Greek manner St. Paul speaks here, saying: \"On the last
day, when Christ comes down from heaven, there will be a shout: Hui,
hui, hui! the great angel will beat the drum, be it the angel Gabriel,
or another angel. For Gabriel is the highest power among the angels, the
highest commander in heaven, who wields the sword, who is the king\'s
marshal, who has the emperor\'s greatest power in the field, as the name
implies: Gabriel, God\'s power, God\'s might. When he wants to exercise
his power, he strikes everything dead that lives on earth. Such an
archangel or chosen angel before other angels, who is God\'s power, will
beat the army drum and make his voice heard, and God will blow his
trumpet. But there will not be such a weak shout, nor such a small
voice, nor such a trumpet made of brass or copper, as on earth, or of
silver, as the trumpets of Moses were, Numbers 10:2, but there will be a
strong, powerful, heavenly and divine shout, voice and trumpet.

This is how it will be: Christ the Lord will descend from heaven with
his shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trumpet of God.
A black cloud will rise. This will be followed by such lightning and
thunder that the whole earth will shake, and all the people on earth
will be terrified and tremble. This will be the trumpet and drum, that a
thunderclap will go into each other, until the last thunderclap will
come, which will throw heaven and earth and everything into one heap.
Then you will be dead and alive again in an instant; that is when the
transformation will take place.

20\. I understand by the voice of the archangel and trumpet of God
lightning and thunder. For this is the voice of the divine majesty, as
the77. Psalm,v. 18.,says: Vocem dederunt nubes, \"the clouds thundered,
and the beams went forth\"; item, v. 19.: Vox tonitrui tui in rota, \"it
thundered in the heavens, your lightnings shone on the ground, the earth
stirred, and prayed of it.\" And Ps. **68,** 34.: Dabit voci suae vocem
virtutis, \"he.

will give power to his thunder.\" This is the voice of the Majesty, when
God speaks in the language of His Majesty, no man can hear it and live.
Christ, as a human being, speaks tolerably, and his voice is friendly
and sweet. But God\'s voice, in his majesty, is another trumpet and
trumpet; it blows down a house in an instant, so that all the dust comes
out, and shatters a tree to pieces; therefore, when it kirrets, it comes
in an instant; what it strikes, that lies down.

\(21\) So it shall come to pass, when Christ shall come down from heaven
in his glory to do battle with his enemies, that is, to take vengeance
upon the wicked, that the archangel, whether it be the angel Gabriel,
who is the power of God, or another angel, shall cause lightning and
thunder to go forth, and God shall blow his trumpet and taratantara,
shall beat his drum, that it shall shake in the air with all power. Then
the shouting will take place, and not only the angels, but also all
creatures together 1) will shout: Whoo, whoo, whoo! Fresh to them, fresh
to them! Lord, the enemies have blasphemed your name long enough, have
shed enough of your saints blood, Ps. 79, 3. it is time for you to take
revenge on them and they will be judged. Strike dead, strike dead,
strike dead! Then heaven and earth will fall in a heap with a great
crash, \"the elements will melt with heat, the earth and the works that
are in it will burn up\", 2 Petr. 3, 10.

22 Thus we read in the prophet Isaiah, Cap. 37:36, when Sanherib, king
of Assyria, lay before the city of Jerusalem, the angel of the Lord went
forth, and made his voice heard, and beat a drum, and cried with his
taratantara. Then there was such lightning and thunder, and the
thunderclaps were joined together with power, that the whole Assyrian
camp lay full of dead bodies, and those who could flee fled. Then was
the voice of the Majesty, and the trumpet; and when it sounded, the
whole land trembled, and in a moment lay there-

1\) Walch: the.

[1328 **EU. (S.) 2od, 322-324. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 51-53. W. VIII,
I476-U7S.** 1329]{.underline}

down a hundred and five and eighty thousand men. For God had previously
proclaimed that He would strike Sanherib from Jerusalem from heaven,
Isaiah 30:30, 31, 32: \"The LORD will sound His glorious voice, and His
outstretched arm will be seen, with wrathful anger, and with flames of
devouring fire, and with rays, and with heavy rain, and with hail. For
Assyria shall be terrified at the voice of the LORD, which smiteth him
with the rod: For it shall pierce the rod utterly, and shall be well
struck, when the LORD shall bring it upon him with timbrels and with
harps, and shall fight against it every where.\"

23 Pugnabit contra eos Tnuphah, as the Hebrew text says, which we have
interpreted, he will fight against them everywhere. Tnuphah means
ventilatio, motio, a weaving, when one weaves something back and forth.
Therefore the weaver has the name in the Old Testament \[2 Mos. 29, 24.
3 Mos. 9, 21.\] and is also called Tnuphah, therefore that one pulled it
back and forth in much Oerter, against morning, evening, noon and
midnight. The priests in the papacy imitate Mosi (but without command,
yes, against Christ\'s command); when they stand before the altar and
say mass, they do cross-strokes. So I will say that Tnuphah here is
called a cross stroke: He will fight against them Tnuphah, that is, he
will strike them with thunder and lightning, from all four places of the
world, he will beat Assyria right, thunder, lightning and fire shall be
the kettledrums and whistles; as it happened. For when the angel of the
LORD went forth, there was a sound: a sound of going forth, a sound of
coming down, a sound of noon, a sound of midnight. So shall it be in the
last day, when Christ shall come to judgment: there shall be lightning
and thunder one into another, and there shall be a right bellum tnuphah,
lightning and thunder and fire everywhere: tnuphah of the morning,
tnuphah of the evening, tnuphah of the noon, tnuphah of the midnight.

24\. when Sodom and Gomorrah perished, Gen. 19, 23. 24. there was, I
think, God\'s voice and trumpet; as soon as the pious Lot came with his
two daughters to the little town Zoar, and the sun had risen on earth,

In a moment the whole land was turned back and destroyed, and all the
inhabitants of the cities, man and woman, child and child\'s body, were
dead and sunk into the abyss of hell. There was no time to count money,
nor to leap about with the mace, but in a moment all that lived was dead
and sunk. That was God\'s trumpet and drommete, there it went: Pummerle
pum, plitz, platz, schnür, schnür.

025 And it came to pass, when the people of Israel passed through the
Red Sea, and Pharaoh the king followed with his army \[Exodus 14:19\].
When the children of Israel had gone out of Egypt, and Pharaoh was
pursuing them with his horses, chariots and horsemen, the angel of God
arose and sat down between the army of Egypt and the army of Israel, and
a dark cloud shone all night so that no part could come to the other.
When the sea was divided as a wall on the right hand and on the left,
and the children of Israel had passed through on dry land, and the
Egyptians followed them into the sea, the Lord looked on the Egyptians
in the morning, v. 24.And the weather, which the angel had kept the
night before, went again, and made a terror in the army of Egypt, and
cast down the wheels of their chariots, 1) and overthrew them with
violence, and caused the waters to return, and covered the chariots, and
the horsemen, and all the power of Pharaoh, which followed the children
of Israel into the sea, and smote Pharaoh and all his people to the
ground, that there remained not one of them.

This is now the kettledrum of our Lord God, or as St. Paul calls it
here, the voice of the archangel and trumpet of God. For when God
thunders, it sounds like a kettledrum, pummerle pum, and the
thunderclaps do not jest. St. Paul calls it the voice of the archangel;
for God in His majesty speaks through the thunder, so that the whole
earth trembles, and all the world is terrified and soon dead. When such
a voice and the last trumpet of God will sound, then the sun will shine,

1\) Erlanger: and.

[1330 Erl.\<s.,sol\>, \[st-sss. Interpretations on the-1st epistle to
the Corinthians. W. vm, iirs-iiW. 1331]{.underline}

Moon and all creatures cry out: Strike dead, dear Lord God, strike dead!
There are the wicked, who do not know you, and the false Christians, who
have not been obedient to the Gospel of Christ, who have all blasphemed
your name, persecuted your saints on earth and killed them; strike dead,
it is high time, make an end of the being. That shall be the shouting of
the field, and the taratantara of God, that all the heavens, and all the
air shall go: Kir, kir, pummerle pum. For there will be a terrible,
unheard-of weather, the like of which has not been seen since the
beginning of the world, and all creatures will stand in such a way that
the end will be there.

Then the last trumpet of God will come, that is, the last thunderclap,
which will suddenly strike heaven and earth, and everything in them,
into one heap. There we will also be transformed, that is, changed from
this mortal being into an immortal being, when heaven and earth will
dissolve. All this will happen suddenly and in a moment, and the last
trumpet, that is, the last thunderclap, will do this; for it will be a
real outburst of thunderclaps, will be good, great, powerful and
almighty, and will penetrate completely and strike well. The
thunderclaps that are happening now are only a prelude and prelude to
that last thunderclap; but that, the last thunderclap, will be the right
trumpet of God that will end the whole world. We often see that a
thunderclap breaks a large, two- or three-bladed oak in two in an
instant, and often crushes it into small pieces, which four carpenters
would not be able to do in a whole day. So now a thunderclap at this
time, which is only a prelude and prelude to that last thunderclap, is
able to do this: what should not the last thunderclap be able to do,
which will be great and almighty, and the end? God will then speak in
His majesty and glory; not as Christ speaks on the cross, saying \[Luc.
23, 34.\]: \"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do\";
which voice quiets God\'s wrath, and preserves the world to this day,
but will speak in His divine majesty and insufferable language, with
thunder and lightning: \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\",
\"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\",
\"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\", \"Pummerle\",
\"Pummerle\".

pum, kir, kir, schlag todt; to this all creatures will cry out: Amen and
yes.

For it will be the right war and the right battle, which Christ will
wage in his glory against all the devils in hell and the wicked on
earth, in which battle he will crush all his enemies with thunder and
lightning. Then the word will be fulfilled that He says John 5:27, 28,
29: \"God has given the Son authority to execute judgment, because He is
the Son of Man. Marvel not at this: for the hour cometh, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth;
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of judgment.\"

St. Jerome has his thoughts, as he writes: Sive comedam, sive bibam,
sive aliquid aliud faciam, semper vox illa videtur sonare in auribus
meis: Surgite mortui, et venite ad judicium, I eat or drink, sleep or
wake, or do something else, the voice always hums in my ears: Arise, ye
dead, come to judgment. Not that it will take so long until the voice
resounds in the air, and these very words are expressed with all
syllables, but the last thunderclap will indicate as much as the words
give. For God will accomplish everything in a moment, so that it will
not take so much time. And St. Jerome continues: Quoties diem judicii
cogito, totus corde et corpore contremisco. Si qua praesentis vitae est
laetitia, ita agenda est, ut nunquam amaritudo futuri judicii recedat a
memoria, \[that is:j as often as I think of the day of judgment, my
heart and whole body are frightened. If there is any joy in this present
life, let it be used so that the seriousness of the judgment to come may
not pass out of our mind nor fall from our memory.

\(30\) And it is certainly true that he who believes with all his heart,
and believes that he must die and come to judgment, will not be tickled,
and will not do much mischief or evil. As also Sirach says Cap. 7, 40:
\"What you do, then consider

[1332 **Erl. (S.) sob, 3SS-S28. sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 51-53. W. VIII,
1482-1485.** 1333]{.underline}

the end, you will never again do evil\". If a human heart is frightened
when it hears the terrible stories and horrible examples of the great
and serious wrath of God, that God has destroyed the world of the wicked
with the flood of sin \[Gen. 7, 23\], and has turned back and condemned
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah with brimstone and fire from heaven
\[Gen. 19, 25.\], how then should it not be terrified when it hears that
God will require the last world with lightning, thunder and fire for the
last judgment, when the heavens, as St. Peter says \[2 Ep. 3, 12.\],
will be melted by fire, and the elements will melt with heat. For those
stories are only examples of the future wrath and judgment of God, as
also the apostle Peter says, 2 Ep. 2, 6, that God has set an example for
the wicked who will come after.

Now the merciful God did not want us to be suddenly attacked with the
day of judgment, so He gives us grace and honor, warns us faithfully,
lets His word be preached to us, calls us to repentance, offers us
forgiveness of all our sins in Christ, promises us that guilt and
punishment shall be lifted if we believe in His Son, tells us to wait
for our calling, and to do our commanded work. If we do this, he grants
us to eat, drink, be of good cheer and joy. For we must eat and drink if
we are to live otherwise on earth; but we must not forget God and the
life to come. Is this not a kind, pious God, who means it faithfully and
completely fatherly with us? He speaks to us no differently than a
father speaks to his children, and says: Dear children, repent, believe
in my Son whom I have sent to you, be pious and obedient, and do your
appointed work; then eat and drink, and use the temporal goods that I
have given you; but see to it that you use this world and the temporal
goods in such a way that you wait for the last trumpet, so that when it
will sound and the last thunderclap will rise, you will be ready and
skilled in holy conduct and godly behavior. If you do this, there will
be no need for you.

32\. such faithful warning and friendly

We should take the admonition of our gracious God and dear Father to
heart and say: \"Well, dear God, because you want these things from me,
and it is pleasing to you and blessed to me, then I will turn to you
with all my heart, I will believe in your Son, I will carry out my
ministry with all diligence, and I will eat and drink and use the
temporal goods in this life in such a way that I do not forget the last
trumpet, but remember your future without interruption. For why should I
be afraid of the last day, because thou hast promised me grace, life,
and salvation through the word? Come, dear Lord JEsu, and put an end to
this life and being; I have eaten and drunk enough; I will gladly go
with you all the hours when you come with your day. That would mean to
prepare ourselves rightly and to use this life rightly, if we did our
duty in faith and waited for the life to come.

But there are few people who take it to heart and put themselves into
it. But what will become of them? How will such people finally stand
when they come before the court? Peasants, citizens, nobility, princes,
who now live in all security, do not hear God\'s word, do not let them
be told, remain godless, proud, envious, hateful, malicious, drowned in
avarice and usury, lie in gluttony and pleasure, practice shame and
vice, and do all sorts of things as if they wanted to live forever here
on earth. Oh how suddenly and unawares they will be hurried with the
last day! Oh how the last thunderbolt will come far too early for them!
Now they do not believe that it will happen. When they hear of the last
day, they mock and laugh, and say: Ha! it is still a long time away,
what do you tell me about the last day? If I had money to count until
the last day comes, I would be a blessed, desired 1) man.

34\. although the holy scripture has proclaimed it before, that the
nearer this day will be, the less faith and love, and the greater
security there will be in the world. Those of Sodom and Gomorrah were
just such people, as the wicked, crude people are in our time; they did

1\) desired \-\-- that I have a desire for, as Phil.

4, 1.

[1334 Erl. (s.) sob, SS8-ssa. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VUI, 1485-1487. 1335]{.underline}

They tormented, as St. Peter says \[2 Ep. 2, 8\], the righteous soul
from day to day with their unrighteous deeds, made the good old man
preach, warn and mourn; but in the meantime they sang of the slave,
mocked him as a fool, and did not turn to any punishment. This is
exactly what our noblemen, peasants, burghers, nobility 2c. are doing
today. Ha! they say, let the last day come; if we still have such a long
time until the last day comes, let us be stingy, usurious, fornicators,
knaves, drunkards, devourers, and live in all kinds of pleasures; there
is no need.

We must suffer such harmful people. Well, what they will gain with it,
that they will experience all too soon. With such certainty they
themselves bear witness that the last day must not be far off. And
indeed, it is all to be expected that the last day will soon come. Lot
preaches, shouts and cries, the sun rises, the gospel shines and shines;
but not only the pope and the Turk, but also our false evangelicals do
not ask anything about it. That is why it looks as if a morning weather
is about to come; such weather is usually terrible and dangerous, and
does not joke. Then it will happen as it happened in the days of Lot.
When Lot had come to Zoar, and the sun had risen on earth, there arose
thunder and lightning \[Gen. 19:23, 24\]. Those of Sodom at first took
it for a mockery, and said: Ha! have you never seen more weather in the
sky before? But soon, when the sun was black and the sky was dark, the
LORD rained down brimstone and fire from heaven, and Sodom and its
people lay on the ground.

Gomorrah with all inhabitants, young and old, in abyss of hell. So the
last day and last thunderclap will also hit our safe, proud Junkers
before they know it.

\(36\) Now let him who is to be advised look to it, repent, and improve
himself, for the last day will not remain outside. The last trumpet of
God will therefore sound, and the heavenly Taratantara will sing before
we think. Then heaven and earth will fall in one heap, and all men will
be dead and alive again in a moment, and changed to another life. This
is how it will be on the last day, it will be a terrible and comforting
day: terrible, to all unbelievers and godless; comforting, to all
believers and godly.

37 \"For the dead,\" continues St. Paul, \"will rise incorruptible. For
that which is corruptible must put on that which is incorruptible, and
that which is mortal must put on immortality.\" The time must come when
another life will begin, and such a life when sin and death will cease,
and all plagues will end. It must one day be fulfilled what is written
\[v. 54\]: \"Death is swallowed up in victory.\" The time must come when
death will cease completely, so that it can never again challenge us.

38\) May our dear Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, grant us His Holy
Spirit, that we may wait and hasten in right faith and godly living to
the future of His day, so that in the resurrection of the dead we may be
drawn together with the elect and blessed in the air toward the Lord,
and be with the Lord always, amen.

1336 **Erl.cs.\>sob.sz\"-zss. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 54-57. W. VIII,
1487-1491.** 1337

**The fourth sermon, from the saying of the prophet Hosea Cap. 13, 14.,
about 1 Cor. 15, 54-57.**

Held on the Sunday of Trinity, May 31, 1545. \*)

**1 Cor. 15, 54-57. But when this corruptible shall put on incorruption,
and this mortal shall put on immortality, then shall be fulfilled the
word that is written: Death is swallowed up in victory. Death, where is
your sting? Hell, where is your victory? But the sting of death is sin.
The power of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who has given us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.**

\(1\) This is probably a little too sharp, and an unusual speech; but we
Christians must nevertheless speak of it, because we are to be the
people who are to have a special wisdom and knowledge before other
peoples on earth. The pope, the Turk, the Jew, the Gentile know nothing
of this; we Christians alone have to do with such things. To the pope,
the Turk, the Jew, and the Gentile, such speeches are mere riddles and
dark words. For who has told reason that it could know that God\'s Son
became man for the purpose of redeeming sin and saving from death? No
book teaches this without the Bible and holy scripture alone; just as no
book teaches what sin, law, death, and victory against sin and death are
without the Bible and holy scripture alone.

2 So far St. Paul has preached of the resurrection of the dead, and has
powerfully demonstrated that all men will rise from the dead, some to
the judgment of eternal death, and some to the resurrection of eternal
life. And this resurrection from the dead will take place in the power
and authority of the resurrection of Christ. For Christ\'s resurrection
and ours live in one another from the beginning of the world to the end.
From Christ\'s resurrection Adam, Eve and all the saints, from the
beginning of the world until now, take power and authority to rise
again. That is why he sums it up.

and speaks as if it were a resurrection. \"If Christ is not risen,\" he
says, v. 17, 18, \"we are still in our sins, and those who have fallen
asleep in Christ are lost. But if we believe that Christ is risen, we
will surely follow him, and also rise from the dead.

3 Christ\'s resurrection and our resurrection are connected; indeed,
they are one resurrection. He therefore that admits that Christ is risen
from the dead, cannot in any wise deny that we should not also be risen,
Posito antecedente bonae consequentiae, necesse est poni consequens, If
the first is true, then the other must also be true, which follows from
the first; if the other is not true, then the first is also not true.
Therefore Christ also sits at the right hand of God, and pours out his
Holy Spirit upon us, that he may draw us after him, and that we may
follow him, and rise with him. Therefore, if we believe that he sits at
the right hand of God and sends us the Holy Spirit, we should also
believe that we will rise from the dead just as he rose from the dead.
But that he sends us the Holy Spirit is proved by baptism, the Word and
the Gospel.

\(4\) Such an outpouring of the Holy Spirit does not take place in
Turkey and in the true papacy, except for those who are imprisoned among
them and have previously received baptism and heard the Word. In the
Turk\'s Alkoran, Pabst\'s decree and the Jews\' Talmud nothing of this
is found. Since they do not know about the antecedens, it is no wonder
that they do not believe the consequens. But in the Christian book,
which is the Bible, it is written; we Christians preach it, sing it,
paint it. Because we have the word and have been baptized into it, we
also die happily to it, and are sure that we

\*The original print has no date, but the Wolfenbüttel manuscript has
the inscription: Concio D. M. L. die Sanctae Trinitatis. Absoluturus
Epistolam Pauli. 1. Cor. 15.

1338 Erl.!s.)sob,sg6-ss8. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, I4SI-I4S8. 1339

have already been resurrected with Christ according to the soul, and on
the last day will also be resurrected with him according to the body.

\(5\) St. Paul says: \"If Christ is risen for his sake alone, our
salvation is lost, and the joyful Easter we are waiting for is not ours,
nor is the last day, which will be a day of salvation for all
Christians. But if Christ has risen from the dead for our sake, and has
become \"the firstfruits of them that sleep\" \[1 Cor. 15:20\], our
salvation is certain, and we also shall rise from the dead, and keep the
happy Easter day with him at the last day. Interweave Christ\'s
resurrection and ours, and make them one resurrection.

6 Our dear Lord Christ also says, John 3:13: \"No one goes up to heaven
except the one who came down from heaven, the Son of Man, who is in
heaven. Where are we then? Where then do we go up, who have not come
down from heaven, even as the Son of man? Listen to what he, Christ,
says further, v. 14, 15: \"And as Moses heard a serpent in the
wilderness, so must the Son of man be heard, that whosoever believeth in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life.\" There he also
connects Christ with his ascension, and those who belong to him, that
is, who believe in him, and says clearly: \"We who believe in Christ
will also go to heaven. For this reason Christ was lifted up on the
cross, rose from death, and ascended into heaven, that he might give
eternal life to those who believe in him.

\(7\) But if those who believe in Christ are to be undecayed and have
eternal life, they must not remain in death, but be raised from the
dead, as the apostle says here, \"That which is corruptible must put on
that which is incorruptible, and that which is mortal must put on
immortality. Our body must decay, snakes and toads must eat it, as
experience shows daily that man\'s body becomes such a disgraceful
carrion that no one can suffer the stench. That is why it is buried so
deeply in the earth that it is set aside and we cannot stand it. But how
shamefully he decays,

he must come forth again and put on incorruption; and however deeply he
sinks into death, he must rise again from death and put on immortality.
This we must believe, for to this we are called through the gospel; to
this we were baptized, to this we received absolution and the holy
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Whoever does not want to
believe it, let him renounce his Christianity. The pope with his bunch
does not believe it; for our sake he may well read it, we let him go.

Now St. Paul continues and preaches from the prophets: \"Then shall be
fulfilled the word that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. In
Christ all things are fulfilled, as he himself speaks on the cross
\[John 19:30\], \"All things are finished.\" But we also belong to it.
For all that was done through Christ was done for our sake. Therefore
Christ is not alone concerned, but we also belong to it. Death must be
overcome for our sake, that it may be devoured and swallowed up not only
in Christ\'s person, but also in us. The last day must come for our
sake, so that we too may have a joyful Easter with Christ, because we
believe in him.

9 First, he uses a saying from the prophet Isaiah, Cap. 25, 8: Absorpta
est mors in victoriam, \"death is swallowed up in victory.\" That this
is spoken of the resurrection of the dead can be seen from the fact that
the prophet speaks shortly before, v. 7: \"He (Christ, true God) will
take away the covering on this mountain, so that all nations will be
covered, and the covering, so that all Gentiles will be covered.\" When
one buries the dead, one covers them in a burial cloth; such covering
goes through the whole world, for death spares no man, but takes them
all away. But our Lord God will cover the same and take away the
covering of death, that is, He will make the dead alive in the
resurrection from the dead. \"For he will swallow up death forever, so
that there will be no more death, but only life. This is what the Lord
of hosts will do, that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Mary, the
true God, blessed forever and ever.

10 Sanct Hieronymus interprets it thus:

1340 Eri. (s.) sov, SSS-S40. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 54-57. w. vm,
i4ss-i4W. 13H

Praecipitavit mortem in sempiternum. The Seventy (Septuagint)
interpret\'s: Devoravit mors praevalens. Some interpret: Absorbuit
mortem in finem. But St. Paul interprets it best: Absorpta est mors in
victoriam: \"death is swallowed up in victory\", that is, death is
swallowed up completely. On that day, when this mortal will put on
immortality, then also this word will be fulfilled, so that we, who
believe in Christ, will sing with all the saints and elect of God:
\"Death is swallowed up 1) in victory\", death now lies down completely
and has no more power. Now this word is fulfilled forever and ever. For
death is swallowed up, and departs after the soul, through the gospel,
and through faith in Christ; but in that day it shall be fulfilled, for
death also shall be swallowed up, and depart after the body, through the
resurrection of the flesh. It was fulfilled and accomplished in Christ
fifteen hundred years ago, but in that day it will also be fulfilled and
accomplished in us.

11 They interpret the word Lanäzach in many ways, but it comes down to
one. Some interpret it: in finem; others: in sempiternum. St. Paul
interprets it: in victoriam. The interpretation is various, but the
opinion is one. I will leave it as St. Paul interpreted it: \"Death is
swallowed up in victory,\" that is, death is swallowed up so completely
that life triumphs over death and has the upper hand. The Lord of hosts,
Christ, raised from the dead, \"because it was impossible that he should
be delivered from death,\" Acts 2:24. 2:24, has swallowed up death
whole, so that life reigns and triumphs over death, and the tyranny and
kingdom of death have an end in Christ. Death lies below, is swallowed
up in life, has lost, and never rises again; life lies above, keeps the
victory, throws up its hand, and says, \"Won! Won!

For St. Paul gives two kinds of victory. The first victory is that of
death, which reigns and triumphs over all the children of men, from the
first man Adam to the end of the world.

1\) Erlanger: until in.

He speaks of the victory in Rom. 5:12: \"Through one man sin entered the
world, and death through sin, and so death has come to all men, because
they are all sinners. This is death\'s victory and triumph, that death
reigns through sin, has power and right over all men, so that no man, be
he emperor, king, prince or lord, be he as rich, great, strong as he
ever will, he must endure, death becomes his lord.

The other victory is that of life, which reigns in and through Christ
and triumphs over death. He also speaks of this victory in Rom. 5, 17:
\"If for the sake of one man\'s sin death reigned through one man, much
more shall those who have received the abundance of grace and of the
gift of righteousness reign in life through one man, Jesus Christ. And 1
Cor. 15:21: \"Through One Man cometh death, and through One Man the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam they all die, so in Christ they
shall all be made alive.\" This is the victory and triumph of life, that
life in Christ reigns and triumphs over death, and that death cannot
hold not only Christ, but also all men who have been baptized into
Christ and believe in Him.

14 This is what the apostle is talking about when he says: \"Death is
swallowed up in victory. So he wants to say: Death lies under, has lost
its kingdom, power and victory. He had the upper hand, and for sin\'s
sake all the world was subject to him, and all men had to die; but now
he has lost the victory. For against the kingdom and victory of death,
our Lord God of hosts has given another victory, the resurrection of the
dead in Christ. Death has long sung: Io Triumph! I, death, am king and
lord over all men, I have the victory, and lie on high. But our Lord God
lets him sing a little song again, which reads thus: Io Triumph! life is
king and lord over death, death has lost and lies under. Death has
probably sung until now: Victoria, Victoria! Io! won! here is vain
death, and no life. But God now lets him sing again: Victoria, victoria!
Jo! won! here is vain

1342 **Erl. (2.) 20d, 340-342. interpretations on the -1st epistle to
the Corinthians. W. VIII, 1498-1499.** 1343

Life, and no death; death has overcome and died in Christ, life retains
the victory and has won.

Such a song shall be sung by us in the resurrection of the dead, \"when
this mortal shall put on immortality. Now death strangles us men
miserably and in many ways: one by sword, another by pestilence; this by
water, another by fire; and who can tell all the ways that death
strangles us men? Death lives, rules, reigns, conquers and sings: Won,
won! I, Death, am king and victor over all the world! I have power and
right over all that lives on earth; I strike dead and strangle all men,
young, old, rich, poor, high, low, noble, ignoble. Defy me! But death
shall soon hiss and sing itself to death, the cantate shall soon be laid
to him. For on Easter Day another little song has risen, which reads
thus: \"Christ is risen from the torment, we shall all be glad, Christ
will be our consolation. Death, where is your victory? Where is he who
lay in the grave and whom you killed on the cross?

16 We now sing this hymn in the person of Christ and of those who have
risen with Christ from the dead, as we believe, and St. Matthew reports
this in clear words. For they are through and retain the victory over
death. But in the resurrection we will also sing this little song in our
own person; then we will also laugh at death for ourselves, mock it, and
say: \"Death, where are you now? Here is vain life, I am lord and victor
over you. Earlier you ate me and ruled over me, now you leave me
uneaten, I rule over you. Before I was afraid of you, but now you can no
longer do anything to me; before you put me in the grave among the
worms, and painted a hideous form on me, now I have risen from the dead,
and shine more beautifully than the sun. Behold, how do I please thee
now? Before you frightened me, now I offer you defiance: bend me a
little hair.

17 The prophet Isaiah proclaimed these things long before, that the LORD
of hosts, our

Lord Jesus Christ shall reign over death, and have such victory as shall
endure forever. He will, he says Cap. 25:8, swallow up death unto
victory, that is, he will devour death so purely that death will never
again have power or authority, but life will have the victory and the
upper hand forever. In chapter 26, v. 19, he also proclaims the
resurrection of the dead, saying, \"Thy dead shall live, and rise with
the body. Awake, and glorify them that lie under the earth: for thy dew
is the dew of the green field. But the land of the dead thou shalt
overthrow.\" He speaks to the dead as if they were already alive,
indicating that the resurrection of the dead is certain. Be fearless, he
says, you who are in the grave and dead, you shall come forth and grow
like the green seed in the spring. He speaks of it very gloriously, and
uses the simile of the seed and the field, as St. Paul also does; and
the prophet and the apostle use almost the same words. When we die, we
are God\'s grain; it must rot in the earth, but in the spring it comes
forth again gloriously and grows green. The prophet does the same in
other chapters.

18 But St. Paul did not want to introduce more sayings from the prophet
Isaiah this time, but leaves it at the one: Absorpta est mors in finem,
in sempiternum, in victoriam, death is swallowed up to the end, death is
swallowed up eternally; or, which is still better, as St. Paul gives it:
\"Death is swallowed up in victory.\" Such things begin in this life,
but in that life they will be completed and purely fulfilled. Now we
sing this little song in the person of Christ; there let us also sing it
in our own person, rejoicing joyfully, and striking death a cliff.

\(19\) We Christians have this wholesome teaching and rich consolation
from the holy Scriptures. Pagans and unbelievers do not have this
comfort, for they find nothing of it in their books. Therefore, when we
Christians read such things in the Bible and Holy Scriptures, we should
also thank our dear God for this treasure from the bottom of our hearts,
accept such promise with joy, firmly base ourselves on it, and sing this
song.

1344 **Erl. ts.) 20b, S42-S44. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 54-57. W. VIII.
I48S-ISV2.** 1345

We should sing with a joyful heart against the victory of death, and
look forward with gladness to the last day as our final redemption. Here
in this life this victory begins in us through faith in the Word, but
there, in that life, it will be fulfilled purely. In the meantime, death
triumphs over our body, from Adam to the end of the world. But in that
day we shall have the victory also after the body, from everlasting to
everlasting, so that life shall reign and rule against death forever.

But where did we get this victory? God has given us this victory, says
St. Paul. Praise and thanks be to God, who has given us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ. The victory is ours, we lie on high, we
shall surely rise from the dead; then we shall sing, \"Death is
swallowed up in victory.\" But we have the victory because God\'s Son,
our Lord Jesus Christ, has overcome death, and the Father has given us
the victory against the victory of death through His Son. And this is
now the saying that St. Paul introduces from the prophet Isaiah, Cap.
25, 7. 8. which prophesies that the LORD of hosts will remove the
covering on this mountain, so that all nations will be covered, and will
swallow up death forever.

\(21\) On top of this saying of the prophet Isaiah, he adds another
saying from the prophet Hosea, Cap. 13, 14: \"I will deliver them from
hell and save them from death. Death, I will be a poison to you. Hell, I
will be a pestilence unto thee.\" But the apostle puts the two sayings
together, makes a saying out of it, and interprets it thus: \"Death is
swallowed up in victory. Death, where is your sting? Hell, where is your
victory?\" But how the apostle\'s interpretation agrees with the
prophet\'s words, I do not want to say now, but will save this for the
school, where one is used to deal with it for the scholars.

22 So St. Paul speaks from the prophet Hosea: \"The sting or spear of
death shall be gone, death shall be defenceless through Christ\'s
resurrection, so that it no longer has a sting or a spear. And what the
sting of death is, he interprets himself, when he says: \"The sting of
death is sin.\" What a strange German is this? Death\'s spear, sword,

sharp edge, pestilence, misfortune, and what may be there, so that death
strangles, he summarizes all this and calls it the sting or point of
death, so that death cuts, stings, strangles and strikes death, and
says: the sting of death is sin, but the power of sin is the law. This
is a true Pauline and evangelical theologia, of Christ\'s victory over
sin, death and hell. He makes law, death, and sin into vain persons, as
if they were three men of war, and as if Christ had to fight against
three heads of armies. And this is a very comforting painting, that he
paints sin, death, law like this.

23\. Rom. 5. 6. 7 he has finely exposed and interpreted this painting.
Rom. 5, 13: \"Where there is no law, there is no respect for sin. Item,
v. 20: \"The law came in next to it, so that sin might become more
powerful.\" Item, Rom. 6, 23: \"Death is the wages of sin.\" Item, Rom.
7, 8. ff: \"Without the law sin was dead; but I lived without the law.
But when the commandment came, sin revived; but I died.\" If sin were
not, death would have no right nor power over us, would have no sword
nor spear to strangle us. What would death do to a holy and righteous
man who was without sin? Even if death would like to strangle such a
man, he would have no poison, sword or spear. Therefore sin is the sting
of death. Through sin death strangles us. If I have no more sin, I will
soon strike death a cliff.

\(24\) St. Paul speaks here of sin, which is called sin, that is, which
is alive and terrifies the heart and conscience. For even though all men
are sinners, yet they do not all understand what sin is; the great, rude
multitude in the world go safely along, having good courage, until
suddenly they lie in hell. Such people do not feel what sin and death
are and what power they have until sin and death have swallowed them
whole. For this is the nature of sin, that it first sleeps and rests, as
the Lord 1) says to Cain Gen. 4:7: \"Is it not so? If you are righteous,
you are

1\) Erlanger: \"Adam\" instead of: the HErr.

1346 Erl. (p.) 20d, \"14- Z47. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, IS02-isat. 1347

pleasant; but if thou be not godly, sin resteth at the door.\"

\(25\) When a sinner commits wickedness and mischievousness, he does not
feel the sin so soon, nor is he frightened by it, but he continues to
commit wickedness and mischievousness more and more; this is a sleeping
sin. But when sin awakens in his heart and conscience, gnaws and bites
him, he does not know how to stay awake, that is a living sin. Like a
snake, when it lies in the grass and sleeps, it is as if it were dead;
but if it wakes up, it will strike and sting. So sin also lies and
rests, letting the sinner walk safely for a while, as if it were dead.
But when it is revealed and comes alive in the conscience, it terrifies
and kills. St. Paul calls it the sting of death; but it is nothing else
than the damned groaning of the heart, 1) when man cries out, \"Oh, I am
lost. When the sting stings, the person cannot remain alive, but must
die, even if he is otherwise healthy, if he is not healed by the comfort
of the gospel.

\(26\) I knew a bullfinch in Erfurt, who had good courage, went safely,
and heaped many sins upon himself in his life. When he fell ill and was
about to die, he cried out in woe, saying, \"O Lord God, who would have
been a sowherd for this? Similarly, it is said of a bullfinch in
Naumburg, who cried out on his last journey: \"O Lord God, I have had
enough, money, goods, and whatever my heart desired; if I now also had
one who would lead to hell for me. This is the sting when sin awakens in
the conscience, and makes man afraid that he does not know where to
stay. In German, we call it the Reuel; when a death-slayer and murderer
comes to the knowledge of his sin, the sin kills him from that moment
on, if he is not helped by right consolation.

27\. crude, insolent people know nothing of this sting, go safely, and
do not feel before what sin and death is, until death has even devoured
and swallowed them up, like

1\) \"the damned groaning of the heart\" stands for: \"the groaning of a
heart that feels that it is damned.\" Similar is the expression in § 29
of this sermon: \"the infernal groaning\".

happened to these two bullfinches. But Christians must experience and
feel daily in themselves what power sin and death have. For this sting
comes not only to the gross sinners, as adulterers, fornicators,
death-row thugs and murderers, at the time of judgment, but also to
pious people before the world, who must bite themselves in the heart
with their sins, that they did not fear God, did not believe and trust
in Him, did not serve Him. As I have seen under the papacy in the
monastery some monks who went there in constant mourning and sighing: Oh
God! oh God! I would have kept my order. Especially the tender and
fearful hearts often feel the sting of death. I have very often had to
feel and taste such a sting, spit and poison, that is, the rebuke in my
conscience, that I broke out in a cold sweat.

\(28\) The same groaning in the heart and conscience, whether from
gross, outward sins or from subtle, inward sins, such as unbelief and
blindness, is called the sting of death by St. Paul, because death
strangles a man through such groaning, even if he is healthy. Elsewhere
he calls it a living sin, as Rom. 7, 9. where he says: \"But when the
commandment came, sin came to life again; but I died.\" Where death does
not find such a sting in us, it must leave us satisfied and unchoked,
for it has no victory against us where this sting and poison is gone.
Yes, death would have no power nor right against us if it were not for
sin.

\(29\) But from where does sin get such power that it becomes so alive
and strong to strangle and kill us? Listen, he says, I will tell you,
\"the power of sin is the law. But what he says of death, that will he
also say of hell. Therefore, what has been said about death, \"The sting
of death is sin, but the power of sin is the law,\" should also be
understood about hell, namely, \"The sting of hell is sin, but the power
of sin is the law. Sin is the sting of death; that is, the evil rebuke
in the heart, as said, is the right poison that kills man. When sin
awakens, and the remorse comes,

1848 **Erl. cs.) s°d, S47-S4S. Sermon on 1 Cor. 15, 54-57. ,W. VIII,
ISV4-ISV7.** 1849

and says: You are a child of death, you are lost and damned, so man goes
over it, if he is not helped. Death strangles all men through sin, when
it awakens in the heart and comes to life, yes, takes away body and
soul. For if it lasts long, man must not only die, but also despair. So
does hell. Death and hell would have no power over us if it were not for
the sting, that is, the newcomer, the evil little dog, the hellish
groaning in the heart; the same sting makes death and hell so powerful
against us.

\(30\) But how, saith he, is sin made manifest? Through what does the
rebuke come into the heart? Answer: \"The power of sin is the law. The
remorse comes through the law, as he says elsewhere, Rom. 3, 20:
\"Through the law comes knowledge of sin.\" Death could not harm us if
sin did not come alive, biting and stinging in the conscience. Sin,
however, would not come to life, but would sleep, if it were not for the
law, which accuses us and says: \"You do not believe and trust in God,
you do not fear God, you are sure and ungodly; item, this and that you
have done. Thus the law awakens sin in us, that man looks at the law and
finds that he has not kept it. When he then confesses and must confess
that he has done and sinned against the law, then follows the newcomer,
the evil conscience, which finally works death.

The law awakens the evil dog in the heart, namely sin; but sin and evil
conscience work death. Initially, sin rests and sleeps as if it were
dead. When a man has sinned, he goes safely, thinking that he has no
sin; but the law awakens sin so that it comes to life, and gives death
power and authority against us. So we go to death and hell. But this is
not the fault of the law. \"For the law is holy, and the commandment
holy, and just, and good,\" Rom. 7:12. But this is the guilt and cause
that sin first rests and sleeps. The little snake lies in the sun and
sleeps, as if it were dead; but beware of it, it is awake.

and it will drive you into hell. Therefore it is sin\'s fault that it
works death through the law; as St. Paul also says Rom. 7:13: \"Sin,
that it might appear to be sin, it has worked death for me through
goodness, that sin might become exceedingly sinful through the
commandment.\"

How do we get rid of all this? Who will take away the law, \"the
handwriting that was against us,\" Col. 2:14, the evil conscience from
our hearts? No human being is able to do this; indeed, no creature,
neither in heaven nor on earth, can take away the evil conscience or the
sin that the conscience feels. But it does, he says, \"Thanks be to God,
who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.\" Through
JESUS Christ we have the victory, for he came down from heaven for us
men and for our salvation and became man, suffered death for us on the
cross, descended into hell, rose from the dead and ascended into heaven,
put away sin, death and hell in his body, fulfilled the law completely,
and shut its mouth so that it must stop accusing and condemning us.

This is the victory, that death has lost its sting, that the law can no
longer awaken sin, nor sin strengthen death. For Christ has atoned for
our sin, and the handwriting, the law, has been erased, taken out of the
remedy, and pinned to the cross, Col. 2:14. But God gives us such
victory through the Word, through the preaching of the Gospel, and
through the ministry of the holy sacraments; we are to believe the same
Word.

\(34\) If therefore the law setteth upon us, saying, Thou hast done
this, and thou hast done that, and wilt bring us to death through sin;
then shall we cleave unto Christ, saying, Yea, I am a sinner; but I
believe in Jesus Christ, who suffered and died for me, and for my sake
was raised from the dead, and sitteth on the right hand of God,
representing me. When death hears this, it must depart. For Christ, the
Son of God, shed his blood for the cause that death, sin and the law
should be dead, so that the law should no longer be binding on us.

[1350 Erl. (2.) 20b, p49 f. Interpretations on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. VIII, ISV7-IS0S. 1351]{.underline}

nor sin awaken, and death can no longer terrify us.

\(35\) So Christians, out of a joyful spirit and firm faith, defy the
law, sin and death, saying: I know of no sin; but if I have sinned, I
believe in Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who is in heaven, and feels
neither death, nor the sting of death, sin, nor the power of sin, the
law, but has overcome all these things for my good. Whether my body
already dies, there is nothing in it; the soul does not die, and the
body will also rise again from the grave in its time; I dare to be happy
and confident, and sing with dear Simeon \[Luc. 2, 29\]: \"With peace
and joy I go\" 2c.

In this life we have victory in word and faith, and began to sing this
little song in the spirit. But in that day we shall have the victory in
revelation, also bodily and visibly: then shall we perform this little
song in body and soul, and sing joyfully with all God\'s elect: Where is
now the sting of death? Where is the evil dog, the evil conscience?
Where is now the power of sin, the

Law, so would have gladly driven me to despair on earth? \"Death is
swallowed up in victory, sin is completely dead and done away with, hell
is purely extinguished and extinguished. To God be eternal praise and
thanksgiving.

\(37\) This is St. Paul\'s Theology, which to understand we must take
the fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters to the Romans, where the apostle
expounds it further and more extensively. Here he has summarized it
briefly and woven two sayings from the prophets Isaiah and Hosea
together and brought them into one; but there he expounds it more
extensively. May our dear Lord God grant us His grace, that we may keep
these things in our hearts with firm faith, strengthen ourselves in
them, joyfully ride on this victory in Christ when our hour comes, and
thank Him here and there from the bottom of our hearts for all the
abundant grace and good deeds shown to us in Christ, amen.\" 1)

1\) Here follow in the original edition the passages: Ezk. 37, 1-14; 2
Petr. 1, 16-18; Rom. 14, 10-12 and 2 Cor. 5, 10, which Walch also
printed. We leave them here because they do not differ from the version
in our Bible.

1352 **\"I-I. \"ai. Ill, IL6 f. Luther\'s letter. W.IX, 1-r.** 1353

**VI Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians.**

**D. Martin Luther\'s shorter interpretation of the epistle of St. Paul
to the Galatians. \*)**

> 1519 and 1523.

Newly translated from the Latin.

**D. Martin Luther\'s letter to the first edition of the shorter version
of the Epistle to the Galatians, published in 1519.**

> To the excellent men, teachers of pure and true theology, Messrs.
> Petrus Lupinus von Radheim (Radhemio), Custos, and Andreas Bodenstein
> von Carlstadt, Archidiaconus, ordinary canons of All Saints in
> Wittenberg 2c., his teachers to be highly honored in Christ, D. Martin
> Luther, Augustinian, wishes Heil!

Dear Sirs! Some time ago I blurted out some trifles about indulgences,
as it seemed to me, quite insignificant things about insignificant
things, but, as I have now learned, the very greatest things in the very
most important matters. For I, in wonderful foolishness and exceedingly
grave error, have judged the sins and errors according to the measure of
the divine commandments and the holy Gospel of Christ, but those, my
friends, as they are excellently wise people, have for all

The Pope\'s authority and the prerogatives of the Roman Church are the
only yardsticks by which to measure the quality of the works. This is
the reason why we are of such different opinion and I have incurred such
violent attacks (turbas) on the part of the most Christian and most
spiritual (religiosissimos) teachers of sacred theology, and what I have
always feared has happened to me, that one has judged me one way and
another another way. Some have regarded me as a godless, others as a
biting, others as a vain man, others still differently, which is the
common lot of all who build on the road (as they say in Proverbs), and
let the public writings go out. I find almost as many masters as I have
readers, and for free, under whose wholesome (felici) instruction and
guidance I had to learn, - so that I would not be obstinate after all
and become a heretic, - that no one could have a harder

\*) As we learn from a letter of Luther to Johann Lang of October 26,
1516 (Walch, old edition, vol. XXI, 561, ? 4), Luther began on October
27, 1516, to interpret the Epistle to the Galatians, and continued with
it during a series of semesters (Köstlin, Martin Luther, vol. I, p.
291). On March 13, 1519, he wrote to Spalatin (Walch, old edition, vol.
XXI, 625, § 4) that he had the Epistle to the Galatians in his hands
(parturio), that is, that he was preparing his lectures on it for
printing. On September 3 of the same year, the printing was completed in
the office of Melchior Loithers in Leipzig (Walch, old edition, vol. XV,
appendix, no. 44, ? 12) (ibicl. no. 35, i; 3), and on October 3, he sent
two copies to Staupitz (ibiü. no. 36, ? 1). The title of this first
edition is: In epistolam Pauli ad Galatas, F. Martini Lutheri
Augustiniani, commentarius. On the title page follows a poem of eight
lines (ogdoastichon) with the superscription: Inbor uä lövtoroni. The
interpretation is preceded by a note from Otöo dorinanus in Wittenberg
\"to the reader\". Some scholars, e.g. Seckendorf, think that
Melanchthon is the author of this letter, but Walch (also the Weimar
edition) is against this view, both because of the spelling and because
of the content, namely because of the verdict given on Aristotelian
philosophy. This is followed by a dedication of Luther to his former
teachers Petrus Lupinus and Carlstadt. Before the interpretation, there
is an ogdoastichon by Johannes Pucher and a hexastichon by Hartwig
Stoterroggius, addresses of the book to the reader. After the
interpretation of the letter to the Galatians follows a final speech of
Luther and a postscript of Saul OouriiroUus Lrs-.

1354 Lrv 6ai. Ill, 127 f. Interpretations on the \'Epistle to the
Galatians. W.IX. 3,\'. 1355

They are not interested in this, even if in the meantime he has denied
Christ and faith in Christ, that is, if he has played a child\'s game.

In this matter I had, when I was at Augsburg, a very fatherly and kind
teacher, as you know, and through the most illustrious government of
these most illustrious men it has come about that this new and wonderful
freedom of the Christians is going on, according to which everything
else remains unpunished, and only One Law is left, against which one
sins today.

This is the power of the Pope and the prerogatives of the Roman Church.
Therefore, if one closes one\'s eyes and gives one\'s consent to the
whole puddle of shameful deeds and corruption, which, under the innocent
and holy name of the pope and the Roman church, flood all countries from
the city of Rome, it is something holy, 1) if one praises it and
worships it as the highest virtue, it is piety, but if one rebels
against it, it is theft from God. So great is the wrath of the Almighty
Lord\'s anger, so great a punishment has our ungodly ingratitude
deserved, that we have so long

1\) The comma shall be placed before laudasse and erased after this word
in the editions.

tarmns, by which, just as in the first letter, Melanchthon is to be
understood. In another print from 1519 (without indication of place and
printer!), the poems just mentioned are missing, and instead of them, an
epigram by Stoterroggius and a hexastichon by Pucher are inserted, in
which Luther addresses the Christian. Another print from the year 1520
contains all the poems just mentioned. Without them, but otherwise
complete, the first edition of 1519 is printed in the Basel collection
of Adam Petri: Doetoris Llurt. DutUsri Incmdrutionnm purs nrm. Xnns
Domini NDXX, iVIsnss äulio, p. 389. Similarly in the Latin Jena (1579),
Dorn. I, lol. 368, but the preface of Otiro derinanns and the epilogue
of ?unln8 Oommoüus are not included. Both pieces are found in Latin in
Seckendorf, IDst. Dntk., lid. I, p. 137, ? 85, additiv, and in Walch,
old edition, vol. IX, preface, p. 2 f., note d and i. Luther\'s
dedication to Lupinus and Carlstadt is printed in Aurifaber\'s
collection of letters, Dorn. I, col. 132; in Löscher\'s Reformation
Acts, vol. Ill, p. 928 and in De Wette, vol. I, p. 329. - In 1523 (not
1524, where the Jena edition places it) Luther revised the first edition
and made several changes with it. Prefaces and postscripts, including
the dedicatory writing, were omitted. The latter probably happened
mainly because Carlstadt had fallen away, and because Luther had gotten
to know Erasmus better in the meantime. The changes in the text are
mostly omissions, especially of those passages in which he had referred
to Jerome, Origen, Augustine and other church fathers, also where he had
referred to the translation and the notes of Erasmus to the New
Testament. This revised edition appeared in Wittenberg in August 1523
(without indication of the printer) with a short preface by Melanchthon,
in which he reports that Luther had overlooked the old edition and made
changes where he thought it necessary. The title reads: In spistoluin
Dardi sä (lulatus iVIart. Dutksri ooiuinonturius. Drasovdit Dkil.
Älvluvodtovis Draskatio. IVittsmdvrMS Nsn8s iluAtmto -tnno MDXXIII.
Already in November 1523 a reprint appeared at Strasbourg by Johann
Herwagen, another in January 1524 without place and printer, another in
November 1525 by Andreas Cratander at Basel. This altered edition is
found in the Latin collections: in the Wittenberg (1554), Dorn. V, toi.
213d, with Melanchthon\'s preface; in the Jena one (1603), Dorn. Ill,
lol. I, without this preface; and in the Erlanger: Oommsutsrins in
opistolain 8. kauli ad 6ulutn8, Dom. Ill, x\>. 121, the text of both
redactions, with sämmtlichen Vorreden, Nachreden und Gedichten, auch
denen, die nicht von Luther sind. In the Weimar edition, Vol. II, 436,
the same is found as in the Erlangen edition. But the arrangement is
such that the first redaction forms the text, and the deviations of the
second editing are recorded in the margin, - The interpretation of the
letter to the Galatians had been translated into foreign languages much
earlier than into German, namely reported Seckendorf, Di8t. Dntd, lid.
I, x\>. 134, §83: \"Pallavicinus relates, lid. I, oap. 24, n. 7, that
already in this year 1520 Luther\'s books, among which was this first
Commentary, had been translated into Spanish and printed at Antwerp.\"
It was not until 1525, with Luther\'s permission, that a translation was
published by \"Vincentins Heidnecker, the Bavarian\" after the altered
old edition, with a short preface by Bugenhagen of January 21, 1525, in
which it is indicated that this translation came out with Luther\'s
will. This German translation is in the collections: in the Wittenberg
(1559), vol. XII, p. 1, with Bugenhagen\'s preface; in the Altenburg,
vol. I, p. 151, likewise; in the Leipzig, vol. X, p. 451, and in Walch,
vol. IX, 1, also with Luther\'s dedication and final speech. - The
arrangement of the text in Walch and in the Erlangen edition is such
that the second modified edition of 1523 is taken as a basis, but that
which was omitted from the first edition of 1519 is inserted again and
made recognizable by square brackets. We will also proceed in the same
way. However, instead of Heidnecker\'s outdated and very faulty
translation, we offer a new one, which is based on the Weimar edition;
however, we have followed the readings of the improved redaction much
more than the Weimar edition, which was based on the first printing. We
have omitted all extraneous appendices, including Bugenhagen\'s preface,
which is found in Walch and in the Weimar edition, and have retained
only that which comes from Luther himself. On the other hand, many and
indeed large pieces of the first redaction, which are missing in Walch
(probably about a hundred columns), we have added according to the
Latin.

1356 in, 128-13.\" Luther\'s attribution. W. ix, 4-7. 1357

have to endure the tyranny of hell, by which, as we see, sighing in vain
with many groans, the holy and terrible name of Christ, in which we are
justified, sanctified and made glorious, is used for such abominable,
such foul, such frightful abominations as avarice, tyranny, unchastity,
godlessness; we see that it is forced into the service of vice, and,
what is the uttermost evil, that the name of Christ is blotted out by
the name of Christ, the church is laid waste by the name of the church,
and we are only mocked, deceived, and brought to ruin by the things by
which we should be saved in the first place. Therefore, I have decided,
while those are engaged in the very greatest things, while they are
biting, while they are carving themselves with awls for their Baal,
while they are sacrificing to the Lindish of God, while they are
praising the extravagants 2) and their declarations, those most faithful
witnesses of Roman scholarship, boast highly of laying me on the least
things, that is, on the sacred Scriptures, and that is, on those pieces
of them which come from the least author (as even his name testifies),
from the apostle Paul, 3) who was so not at all the highest among the
apostles, or a pope, that he has been called \[1 Cor. 15, 9.\] even the
least among the apostles, who was not worthy to be called an apostle; so
much is lacking that he should boast of being the most holy one \[Eph.
3, 8.\]. Moreover, he was descended from the tribe of Benjamin, which is
called by Joseph the least of the brethren. And so that there was
nothing in him that was not very small, he did not consider himself to
know anything except Jesus Christ, but not even Him other than the
Crucified One \[1 Cor. 2:2\], that is, the least and the last of all,
knowing very well that he was certainly of those greatest of all things,
which are the first and the last of all.

1\) Lindio Deo -to Hercules; cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. XVIII,
575, note 2. \"To sacrifice to the Lindian God\" - to deal with curses
and berwünschungen.

2s Extravagantes are the papal constitutions, which were added to the
Roman canon law soorpus suris ounoniois, after it had received its
conclusion under Pope Clement V by the so-called Clementines at the
beginning of the 14th century.

3\) Paul (Latin) \-\-\-- the Small.

The first is that the apostles are not allowed to act as a completely
unskilled and unlearned apostle, namely, about the power of the Roman
Church and its decrees, but that this is only the right of the
exceedingly great theologians.

But I hope that this work of mine will be the more successful, because
it is about things that are nothing, namely about the power of Christ,
by which he is mighty in us even against the gates of hell, about the
privileges of the heavenly church, which does not know the very great
city of Rome, nor the most holy Jerusalem, nor any place, nor does it
seek Christ here or there, but in spirit and in truth worships the
Father. For how should such great men care for these trifles, or be
irritated by them, because they are outside their sphere (facultatem)?
Now I appear in public all the more safely, since I abstain from the
things by which those people are irritated, and deal with very small
things that suit my smallness. By the way, if there is still something
left of that old tragedy that arose because of the big things, I leave
it to them; partly because I stand alone (Unus), am small and weak, but
partly and mainly because they stand idle all day, but I am overloaded
with business, because it is superfluous that both parties toil away at
the matter. It is unfortunate enough that one party has sorrow and
sadness.

Furthermore, my dear sirs, to speak to you seriously: I hold the Roman
Pontiff and his decrees in as high esteem as anyone, and exclude no one
but the prince of this governor, Jesus Christ, who is our Lord and the
Lord of all. I prefer his word to the words of the governor in such a
way that I have no hesitation in judging all the sayings and deeds of
the governor according to it. For I want him to be subject to this
unbreakable rule of the apostle \[1 Thess. 5, 21.\]: \"Test everything,
and keep what is good.\" I will not suffer, I say, that any one should
pull his neck out of this yoke, whether he have the name of a mother or
of a teacher of the churches, and so much the more, because we have come
to this our

1358 Lri Ill, 1S0-13S. Interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 7-9. 1359

We have seen that some conciliarities are rejected, others are
confirmed, that theology is treated according to opinions, that the
understanding of rights depends on the arbitrariness of a man, and
everything is so confused that almost nothing certain is left to us. But
it is clearer than the sun that even many decrees are not in accordance
with the evangelical understanding, so that the really existing need
forces us to take refuge in the rock of divine Scripture, which is
firmly founded, and not to believe in a sacrilegious way that anyone can
be whoever he wants to be, who speaks, sets or does such things that
have no foundation in the holy Scriptures. And I think that one should
not be afraid of what Cardinal Cajetan and Silvester Prierias
flatteringly say against it, who pretend that even in matters of faith
the mere word of a man is sufficient.

St. Augustine teaches that no one should be believed, no matter how
great holiness and learning he may possess before others (I believe even
the very holiest), unless he can prove his doctrine from sacred
Scripture or by some acceptable rational cause, lest we be deceived into
playing another game. But these good fathers (auctores) in Christo want
to force us into this deception by force. St. Peter fell so many times,
and once he erred to very grave danger for souls, after he had received
the Holy Spirit, and we exalt men who crawl far below apostolic
sublimity above the perfection of the apostles! As if Christ had lied
when he promised that he would be with us until the end of the world, so
we look for other Christs on whose beck and call the Church should be
based. It is enough that the Roman bishop is the highest bishop. It
should be considered extremely ungodly to attribute to him a power and
wisdom equal to that of Christ, as some are subordinate to him. But, to
confess it openly, I myself almost do not know which and where the Roman
church is, since these abominable chatterers play with the names of the
Roman church in such a way, play their jokes and mix them up.

fen. Silvester divides it into three churches: the pope, the cardinals
and the people. Since this distinction is magisterial and sufficient,
and the members do not agree with each other, he concludes that the pope
and the cardinals are outside the church and are to be considered
pagans, since they are not in the essential church, or he will have to
place three Christs before these three churches. Yes, also Christ will
not belong to the Church according to this so great Gewährsmanne, since
he is neither the Church according to its power (virtualis), nor
according to its representation (reprae- sentativa), nor the essential
(essentialis) Church. 1) The Cardinal Cajetan pretends to be the Roman
Church everywhere in Germany, being learned enough to invent apostolic
breviaries (brevia) under its name. It is the Roman Church that good
scribe (copiista) who, when he wanted to issue that very beautiful
declaration (declaratoriam) 2) of which Cajetan, as befits him, boasts,
and found in his form neither Scripture nor any rational grounds, but
that such had been custom and usage since time immemorial, scribbled
just this with all fidelity on the parchment. They pretend everywhere to
be the Roman church, as anyone pleases, while these godless boys only
ape and suck all of Germany with the lead and wax of the Roman court.

What else do they do with these juggleries, with the holy names of the
Pope and the Roman Church, than that they consider us Germans to be
nothing but fools, 3) simpletons, dolts and (as they say) barbarians and
beasts, also laughing at our incredible patience with which we allow
ourselves to be mocked and plundered. Therefore, with the great
confusion that reigns in things and in words, I return from the so great
forest of the Silvester 4) to the

1\) On this distinction of the Church, compare the dialogue of Silvester
Prierias, Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 314, and Luther\'s
response to it, ibid. col. 360.

2\) This may refer to the decree found in Walch, old edition, Vol. XV,
756 sf.

3\) Here, with the Weimar edition, Ulsnnos is to be read instead of:
PIsnnonss in the other editions.

4\) s tanta Liivsstroruru siiva is a game with New Year\'s Eve\'s name.

[1360 LH. \<ua. Ill, IW-M. Luther\'s letter. W.IX.S-I2.
1361]{.underline}

I will return to the city of Augsburg, and in the meantime I will follow
the judgment by which the princes of Germany at the last imperial diet
made a distinction between the Roman church and the Roman court in a
right, holy and sublime manner. For how could they have refused the
tenths, twentieths and fiftieths (that is, the marrow of the whole of
Germany, by which it would suddenly have become a desert), which they
knew had been decreed by the most sacred (sacratissimo) (that I say so)
Roman Council, and which were demanded by such high legates of the
apostolic see, if they had not at last, though late, become wise, seen
that it was not a decree of the Roman church, but a little fief of the
Roman court? For they saw (it is wonderful to say, and not possible that
a Silvester or a Cajetan could believe it) that the Council and the Pope
were mistaken and could be mistaken, that the name of the Roman Church
is something different from what is done under the name of the Roman
Church; that it is something different to be an envoy of the Roman court
than to be an envoy of the Roman Church; the one brings the Gospel, the
other seeks money. Where did these barbarians and beasts get so much
power of judgment? Therefore, God, finally tired of the blasphemies
against him and the mockery and abuse of his name and the name of the
holy Roman church, wanted to warn the Roman great ones that they should
put aside joking and playing and finally take care of the affairs of the
church with seriousness before they force blood out of them by snubbing
Germany too hard \[Proverbs 30:33\].

Therefore, I also follow this extremely beautiful example of these lay
theologians and distinguish in the longest, broadest and deepest way
between the Roman church and the Roman court. Of the latter I know that
she is the very pure bridal bed of Christ, the mother of the churches,
the mistress of the world, but in spirit, that is, she rules over sins,
not over the goods of the world. She is the bride of Christ, the
daughter of God, the terror of hell, the victory over the flesh, and,
what shall I say, \"it is all hers\", as Paul 1 Cor. 3, 21. 23.

says: \"But she is Christ\'s, but Christ is God\'s.\" But this (the
Roman court) is known by its fruits. Not as if it is to be considered
great that our goods and rights are snatched from us, since it is
decided in heaven that the Christians shall be oppressed in this life
and suffer violence from nimrods 1) and mighty hunters. And the church
will not be delivered from this situation in any other way than through
death. It is a palm tree; the more it is depressed, the higher it rises
in Kades. But this is a lamentation that all tears cannot sufficiently
mourn, that this is done by brothers and fathers to brothers and
children (as the Lord says in the prophet Jeremiah \[Cap. 19, 9.\] that
children are eaten by parents), which the Turk would hardly do, or if it
happened, the holy name of Christ would not be used as a cover for such
heinous abominations, which is the most intolerable insult to Christ and
the church. Property and life may perish, but the name of the Lord is
eternal; why should we suffer it to be so shamefully defiled? So one
must not resist the Roman church in any way, but that kings, princes,
and whoever else could resist the Roman court, would be far more godly
than if he himself resisted the Turk.

But perhaps I am speaking too much and too freely about this. However,
for the sake of those who, with those scoffers, mock Christ without end,
I am compelled to explain myself, so that they may know that they are in
error when they cry out that I am hostile to the Roman church, since I
embrace not only the Roman church but also the whole church of Christ
with the purest love; secondly, that I am certain that I must die one
day and give an account at the future of our Lord Jesus Christ of the
truth, whether I have concealed it or spoken it, and in general of the
pound which I have been entrusted with.

1\) The Erlangen edition reprinted from the Jena one: \"nimbrotos\". The
same spelling is also in the Basel collection and in the Weimar edition,
but with a capital initial letter.

1362 u-\"i in, is8-l42. Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians.
W. ix, 12-n. 1363

has been trusted, so that I will not be judged as one who has buried it.
Whoever wants to be angry may be angry, if only I am not found guilty of
having kept silent in an ungodly way, since I am aware that I am a
debtor of the word, as unworthy as I am. The word of God has never been
acted upon without blood or danger. But, as it 1) died for us, so it
again demands of us that we also die for it in its confession, and \"the
servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you; if they have kept my word, they will also keep
yours.

But I come back to myself and hand over to you, my dear sirs, or (to use
Paul\'s word \[Gal. 2:2\]) discuss with you this work of mine on Paul\'s
letter, which is admittedly small, and not both an interpretation and a
testimony of my faith in Christ, so that I have not run in vain and not
grasped Paul\'s meaning sufficiently. For here, because it is God\'s

1\) \"it\" - \"the word\", namely Christ, Joh. 1, 1. Also still in the
Syngramma Suevicum, St. Louis edition, vol. XX, 533,? 10, the preached
word and \"the word\", Christ, are mixed into each other in such a way.

If this is the greatest thing and certainly (serio) the greatest thing,
then I wish to be instructed by every child. Admittedly, I too would
have preferred to wait for the interpretations of Erasmus, which he
promised long ago, since he is a man who stands very high in theology
and whom even envy cannot harm. But since he postpones it (God grant,
not for much longer), this circumstance, as you see, forces me to go
public with it. I know that I am a child and unlearned, but nevertheless
(I may boldly say this) I make use of Christian godliness and
scholarship, and in this very aspect I am more learned than those who
have turned the divine commandments into nothing but a laughing stock
and a mockery through their ungodly prancing with human laws. I have had
only one thing in mind, whether I would like to achieve that through my
work those who have heard my lectures on the apostolic letters would
understand Paul better, and that they would be fortunate enough to
precede me in this. But if I have not done this, then I will gladly have
done this work in vain; then it remains an attempt by which I wanted to
encourage others to the theology of Paul, which no good man can
interpret badly to me. Farewell.

**What the epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians is about. \*)**

\(1\) After the Galatians were first instructed by the apostle in the
right faith, that is, that they should put their trust in Jesus Christ
alone, not in their own righteousness or in the righteousness of the
law, they were then again turned away by the false apostles from putting
their trust in the works of legal righteousness, because they were very
easily deceived by having the name and example of the great and true
apostles falsely held up to them, and there is nothing in the whole life
of men by which they are more easily deceived than

superstition, that is, the false and unfortunate imitation of the
saints. If you look only at their works and not also at their heart,
there is a danger that you will become a monkey and a leviathan, 2) that
is, attach an addendum to it, by which you make a superstition or
godlessness out of true religion.

2\. for (to show this by the present example) the apostles kept in the

2\) \"Leviathan, that is, an adjunct.\" Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol.
XIX, 819,? 5.

\*) Everything that is enclosed in square brackets in the following
interpretation is found only in the first redaction of 15191 If here and
there such brackets are set for another reason, then this is expressed
in a note.

1364 Lri. 6-u. Ill, 142-144. shorter interpretation of Galatians 1, 1.
W. IX, 14-18. 1365

The Jewish congregations added some ceremonies of the law, as Jerome
testifies that Philo had written such things from Marcus. But since
those foolish people did not know for what reason they were doing it,
they immediately added for their own sake that this was necessary for
salvation, which, as they had seen, was held by such great apostles, and
that no consideration should be given to the one Paul, who had neither
seen nor heard Christ on earth.

3\) But the apostles held these things, as Peter obviously explained in
Acts 15:7-11, not as necessary but as free and not harmful to those who
did not trust in them for salvation. 15:7-11, not as necessary, but as
free and not harmful to those who did not put their trust in them to be
saved, but in Jesus Christ. For to those who believe in Christ, all
outward ceremonies and bodily righteousness are not necessary.

is either commanded or forbidden, pure, a middle thing (indifferentia),
permitted, unless someone wants to submit to them voluntarily or for the
sake of love. In order to bring the Galatians back to this realization,
Paul is so zealous that he does not take Peter and all the apostles into
consideration, as far as their person, status, that is, their dignity
and (as they say) high position (qualitatem) is concerned.

\(4\) Finally, he boasts with a kind of holy pride that he has received
nothing from them, even that he has been praised by them; nor does he
deviate in anything from the opinion of the apostles in that in which he
saw that the gospel truth might be blasphemed by the unintelligent,
considering it far better that he himself and also the apostles should
be blameless than that the gospel of Christ should be deprived of its
honor.

**The first chapter of Paul\'s epistle to the Galatians.**

**V. 1. Paul, an apostle.**

Since Greek is now spoken throughout the Christian world, and the notes
of the great theologian (theologicissimi) Erasmus are in the hands of
everyone and are used diligently (teruntur)\], it is not necessary to
indicate what apostolus means in Greek, unless for those for whom fruit
Erasmus, but\] I write. For \"apostle\" means the same as a
\"messenger\", and as St. Jerome teaches, it is a word of the Hebrews,
which among them is called sila 1), a man who was called a \"messenger\"
by \"send\". So it is said in John, Cap. 9, 7. \"Go to the pool of
Siloah (that is interpreted, sent) and wash.\" Well aware of this
mystery, Isaiah, Cap. 8, 6. says: \"This people despises the waters of
Siloah, 2) which goeth still.\" \[But also Gen. 49, 10. it says: \"until
Shiloh come,\" which Jerome translated: Who shall be sent.

1\) Probably means XXX, Piel of XXX

2\) Hebrew:

From this passage, Paul in his letter to the Hebrews (Cap. 3, 1.) seems
to call Christ an \"apostle,\" that is, a Sichs. Lucas also remembers a
certain Silas in the Acts of the Apostles (Cap. 15, 22.)\].

2\. but this is more to be noted, that \"apostle\" is a humble
(verecundus) name, but at the same time a wonderfully high and venerable
one, which expresses a special humility \[but at the same time also a
great sublimity\]. The humility lies in the fact that he is sent, and
the name proclaims an office, a servitude and obedience; then it serves
so that no one, moved by the name, as if it denotes a high dignity, puts
his trust in it and boasts of it, but by the name of the office is
immediately pointed to the one who caused it and sent him. The glory and
majesty of the messenger and servant can already be taken from the
sender, so that he is received with reverence. This is not like our
time, when the names apostleship, bishop\'s office and the like have
begun to be words that do not denote an office, but a dignity and a
benefice.

1366 Lri. Ooi. Ill, 144-146. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 18-20. 1367

Christ calls these, John 10:8, by the opposite name, not sent ones, but
\"they that are come,\" and, interpreting himself, \"thieves and
murderers,\" since they are such people as bring not the word of him
that sends them to feed with it, but seek their gain, wherewith they
kill the sheep. He says, \"All who came before me,\" that is, were not
sent, \"have been thieves and murderers.\" And, as the apostle says,
Rom. 10:15, \"How shall they preach, where they are not sent?\"

Would to God that in our time the shepherds and leaders of the Christian
people would consider these teachings! For who can preach if he is not
an apostle? But who is an apostle but the one who brings the Word of
God? But who can bring God\'s word but he who has heard God? But whoever
brings his own teachings, or those of human laws, or decrees, or
philosophers, can he be called an apostle? Rather, he is a man who comes
from himself, and a thief, and a murderer, and a corrupter, and a
strangler of souls. In Shiloh the blind man washes himself and receives
his sight \[John 9:7\], and the waters of Shiloh are healing, not the
strong and proud waters of the king of Assyria \[Isa. 8:7\]. \"He
(namely, GOD) sent his word and made them well.\" \[Ps. 107, 20.\]

4\. if a man comes with his own word, it only becomes worse with the
woman who has the issue of blood \[Marc. 5, 25. f.That is, to put it
plainly: as often as the word of God is preached, it makes consciences
cheerful, wide and secure against God, because it is the good and lovely
word of grace and forgiveness; as often as the word of a man is
preached, it makes a conscience sad, narrow and trembling in itself,
because it is a word of law, wrath and sin, indicating how much man has
not done and how much he is guilty of.

5 Therefore, the church has never been more unhappy since its beginning
than it is now, and it becomes more so every day, since it is tormented
to the utmost with so many decrees, laws, statutes, with almost
innumerable tortures, and indeed far more horribly inflicted than it was
in the time of the martyrs.

tyrer by the executioners; and the popes and bishops (pontifices) do not
care at all about this ruin of the souls, they do not care at all about
the damage of Joseph \[Amos 6, 6.\], that they even heap pain on pain of
the wounds (as if they were doing God a service).

**Not of men, nor by men, but by JESUS Christ, and GOD the Father, who
raised him from the dead.**

Immediately from the beginning he secretly stabs at the false apostles
of Galatia, covertly indicating that they were not sent by Jesus Christ,
but either by themselves or by other apostles, whose teaching, however,
they treated falsely.

\(7\) It is important to note that Christ did not want anyone to become
an apostle through men, or through the will of men, but only through his
calling. Therefore the apostles did not dare to choose Matthias, but
obtained him through their prayer from heaven \[Apost. 1, 23. ff.\]; and
Paul he also called from heaven \[Apost. 9.\] and made him an apostle,
but especially through the voice of the Holy Spirit, Apost. 13, 2. which
says, \"Separate unto me Paulum and Barnabam for the work whereunto I
have called them.\" So he boasts Rom. 1, 1. that he was \"set apart to
preach the gospel of God\". By this 1) he is set apart with Barnabas to
minister to the foreskin and the Gentiles, since the other apostles were
sent to the circumcision (that is, the Jews).

8\) And notice that Paul emphasizes so strongly that the name
\"apostle\" is the name of an office and not of 2) dignity, that he uses
it as a participle, as it were, saying: 3) \"An apostle, not an apostle.

1\) \"By this,\" that is, by the Holy Spirit. Instead of quod in the
Wittenberg, Jena, Dow. Ill, the Erlangen, and the Weimar, which seems to
us to be incorrect, we have adopted quo with the Jena, Dow. I, and the
Basel edition we have adopted quo.

2\) \"not\" is inserted by us, because after what is said in ? 2, a non
seems to be missing in the text.

3\) Here we have resolved \"\<l.\" with \"liosns. The resolution by
vivus, which is found in the Jenaer, Dow. Ill, seems to us inadmissible
here according to the context.

[1368 Lri. 6-\>r III, I4K-14S. Shorter interpretation of Galatians 1, 1.
W. IX, 20-23. 1369]{.underline}

From men\", which is as much as: not sent from men, if the speech is not
formed according to the Hebrew way 1), as Ps. 45, 9 \[Vulgate\]: \"Myrrh
and aloes and cassia from your garments, from the ivory houses\"; all of
which is intended that you see with how great care Christ founded and
fortified his church, so that no one should presume to be a teacher if
he was not sent by him or through those who were sent by him. For just
as the Word of God is the first and greatest benefit for the Church, so
the Church cannot be corrupted by any greater harm than by the word of
men and the statutes of this world. God alone is true, all men are liars
\[Ps. 116:11\]. Finally, just as David once left behind all the means
(impensas) with which Solomon could build the temple, so Christ left
behind the gospel and other writings so that by these, not by human
regulations (decretis), the church would be built. How miserably this
has been neglected, even perverted, for more than three hundred years
now, is sufficiently shown by the condition of all things in the church
as it is before our eyes today.

9 From this passage, St. Jerome states that there are four kinds of
apostles: the first, who were called neither by men nor through men, but
by Jesus Christ and God the Father, as the prophets and all the apostles
were called in the past.

10\. the second kind are those who are called by God but through men, as
the disciples of the apostles, and those who follow the apostles in
right order (legitimate) until the end of the world, as the bishops and
the priests; and this kind cannot exist without the first, from which it
has its origin.

11\. the third kind are those who are appointed by men or through men,
not by God, as happens when someone is appointed by the favor and
efforts of men, as we now see that very many are appointed not by God\'s
will (judicio), but by God\'s will.

1\) namely, that the verbum is to be omitted and completed from the
context.

The people are elected to the priesthood by the purchased favor of the
people. Thus says Jerome. If, then, this evil was already rampant in
Jerome\'s day, what is it to wonder if it triumphs and reigns today? For
to this kind must belong all those who impose themselves on episcopal
and priestly offices before they are called; these are naturally vassals
and seek their own honor, and therefore we see sufficiently what benefit
the church may have from them.

The fourth kind are those who are called neither by God, nor by men, nor
by men, but by themselves, such as the false prophets and the false
apostles of whom Paul speaks. Such false apostles are people who carry
out their wickedness by pretending to be apostles of Christ; and the
Lord says, John 10:8: \"All who have come have been thieves and
murderers.\" Jer. 23:21: \"I sent not the prophets, neither did they
run; I spake not unto them, neither did they prophesy.\" One must be on
the highest guard against this evil. For this reason Christ did not want
the devils to speak, even though they spoke the truth, lest under the
pretext of truth they should lie to death, since he who speaks from
himself can speak nothing but lies, as Christ says John 8:44. Therefore,
2) so that the apostles would not speak from themselves, he gave them
the Holy Spirit, of whom he says \[Matth. 10:20\]: \"It is not you who
speak, but it is your Father\'s Spirit who speaks through you.\" And
again \[Luc. 21, 15.\], \"I will give you mouth and wisdom. \"2c.

\(13\) I cannot pass over here (although it is something small) a
complaint which is raised especially by many clergymen and priests, and
which is foolish, but nevertheless a very strong temptation, namely,
that they complain that they have their pound from the Lord, and
therefore, compelled by the evangelical commandment, they are driven to
teach. Therefore they believe, biased

2\) In the Erlangen edition, as in the Jena, 1\'oin. I, and the Basel
edition, which contains the first redaction, uncls is placed before John
8.

1370 Lr. Ill, 118-1SI. Interpretations On the Epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, SS-LV. 1371

in a very foolish conscience, that if they do not teach, they will bury
their Lord\'s gold and be guilty of damnation. This is what the devil
does to make them waver in the profession to which they are called.

\(14\) O my dear brother, by one word Christ delivers you from this
lamentation. See the Gospel, which thus says \[Matt. 25:14\], \"He
called his servants, and committed his goods unto them.\" It says, \"He
called them.\" But who called you? Wait for the one who calls you, and
in the meantime be unconcerned (securus). Yea, if thou wert wiser than
Solomon and Daniel, yet flee it more than hell, unless thou be called to
spread the word. If God has need of you, he will call you. If he will
not call you, you will not burst with wisdom. Finally, it is also not
true wisdom (scientia), but it only seems so to you, and quite foolishly
you imagine that you can create fruit. Through the word, only he creates
fruit who is called to teach without wishing to do so. For one is our
master, Jesus Christ \[Matth. 23, 8\]. He alone teaches and produces
fruit through his appointed servants. But he who teaches without being
called does not teach without harm to himself and his hearers, for
Christ is not with him.

\(15\) By saying that he was sent \"not by men\", the apostle confronts
the false apostles; by saying \"not by men\", he confronts the believers
who were sent by the apostles. Therefore he uses this entrance
(exordium) against three kinds of apostles, and Jerome testifies that
some Jews who believed in Christ came to Galatia and taught there, that
Peter and James and John also kept the law, as we will see below.

16 But it seems to have no purpose that he inserts the resurrection of
Christ here. But the apostle likes to remember the resurrection of
Christ, especially against those who trust in their own righteousness.
So he remembers it also in the greeting of the letter to the Romans, and
that with many words, because there he also argues violently against the
righteousness of works. For those who are such people must inevitably
accept the resurrection of their own righteousness.

deny, even ridicule, the resurrection of Christ. For Rom. 4:25 says,
\"Christ was given up for our sins and raised for our righteousness.
Whoever, therefore, misses the fact that he wants to be justified in
another way than through faith in Christ, rejects Christ and considers
his suffering and resurrection to be useless. But he who believes in
Christ who died also dies with Christ to sin, and he who believes in Him
who rose again and lives also rises in the same faith and lives in
Christ, and Christ lives in him \[Gal. 2:20\].

\(17\) Therefore the resurrection of Christ is our righteousness and our
life, not only as an example, but also in virtue. Without the
resurrection of Christ no one rises, no matter how many good works he
does, but through his resurrection everyone rises, no matter how much
evil he may have done, as is further explained in the letter to the
Romans. Perhaps he may also always remember the resurrection in his
greeting, because the Holy Spirit was given through the resurrection of
Christ, and through this Spirit the gifts of the apostleship and others
were distributed, 1 Cor. 12, 4-11, so that he \[Paul\] affirms (asserat)
in such a way that he is an apostle by divine power, through the Spirit
of the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

**V. 2. And all the brothers who are with me.**

18\. \"All the brethren,\" he says, by which, as it seems, he also
opposes the same false apostles who (as Jerome says) pretend that even
Paul himself preached a different doctrine among others than among the
Galatians; then it is also very useful to rebuke the people by stating
that many have the same opinion and agree on one thing.

**To the churches in Galatia.**

In other epistles he writes only to the congregation of one city, but in
this epistle he writes to the congregations of many cities and in the
whole country. \[And it is to be especially noted what St. Jerome here
very beautifully remarks, namely, that also the \"congregations\" are
called which the

1372 \"ri. 0-u. Ill, ISI-ISS. Shorter interpretation of Galatians 1, 2.
3. W. IX, 26-28. 1373

Apostle 1) accuses them of being corrupted by error. From this it is to
be learned (he says) that \"church\" can be said in two ways, both of
one that has neither spot nor wrinkle (Eph. 5, 27.) and is the true body
of Christ, and of one that is gathered in Christ\'s name without
complete and perfect virtue, just as \"the wise\" is taken in two ways;
it denotes both those who have complete and perfect virtue, and those
who are only beginning and are in the process of increasing. Of the
perfect it is said (Matt. 23:34), \"I send unto you wise men\"; of those
who are only beginning (incipientibus) it is said (Prov. 9:8), \"Punish
the wise, and he shall love you.\" According to this opinion the other
virtues must be understood, namely, that strong and prudent, chaste,
just, temperate, are sometimes taken in perfect measure (plene),
sometimes not in full measure (abusive). But this, of course, is to be
understood of perfection. For in this life no man is so perfect, not
even an apostle, that he cannot become still more perfect, as the wise
man says (Sir. 18, 6. according to the Vulgate): \"When a man has
brought it to the highest, let him begin again.\" Thus, in comparison
with others, some may well be called perfect, otherwise they too begin
daily, and increase. Therefore St. Augustine does better that he assigns
to the future life the church without spot or wrinkle, which no longer
needs to say, \"Forgive us our trespasses.\" But in this Jerome and
Origen are quite right, that this passage from the apostle\'s letter
serves very well for the argument against the heretics, who immediately
attach to a congregation the name of a Babel, in which also evil ones
are mixed, so that they alone, as if they were the right saints, can
arrogate to themselves the name church. For if there are wicked in a
church, one should certainly hasten to it, and after this example of
Paul, call, exhort, plead, pray, terrify, and try everything to make
them good people, but not in this god-robbing fear of God (as they call
it) and in godlessness.

1\) In the Erlanger \"tunturn\" held: Mines.

(The first two are called \"churches\"). And here notice that they are
still called churches, even though they were in danger through error in
the faith. But because they have the Word and baptism, they are called
churches. But error in faith and word is a weakness in which the love of
the church is exercised. For what kind of love would 2) that be, which
has firmly decided neither to bear the wicked nor to stand by them? It
is a raging that adorns itself with the name of love in a completely
inconsistent way. What do they want to answer here? The apostle calls
those \"churches\" that were not in a life of trouble (for only the
hopeful are bothered by it, but it does not make them heretics), but
stumbled in faith through error, and the whole being perished, from
which they could be called churches.

**V. 3. Grace to you and peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus
Christ.**

20 The apostle distinguishes this grace and peace from that which the
world and a man can give to himself. For the grace of God the Father and
our Lord Jesus Christ takes away sins, being spiritual and hidden. Thus
the peace of God makes the heart of man cheerful, calm and joyful before
God in secret, and, as it is said elsewhere: Grace takes away guilt,
peace takes away punishment, so that righteousness and peace kiss each
other and come together \[Ps. 85, 11\].

\(21\) But when this happens, we soon lose grace and peace with men, the
world, and the flesh, that is, with ourselves and on the part of the
devil; and the wrath and anger of all is stirred up against us. For he
who is in the grace of God does what pleases God. Therefore, he soon
displeases the devil, the world and his own flesh, and while he is
righteous before God, he is a sinner before his flesh and the world, and
thus war arises. War out-

2\) The editions of the first Redaction and the Erlanger have \[st
instead: \[ssst.

3\) Here, only the Jena edition, \^orn. Ill, has a uon, in all other
editions it is missing. Heidnecker offers, \"for such churches alone vex
and make heretics.\"

1374 Lri. \"Li. Ill, 1W-1S5. Interpretations On the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 28-31. 1375

wendig, peace inwardly. Inwardly, I say, not tangibly, and not with a
sweetness that one experiences (experimentali suavitate), which, of
course, is always there, but invisibly and by faith. For the peace of
God is higher than all reason, that is, it is incomprehensible except by
faith. So also conversely, whoever is in grace with the world and with
himself, and is well pleased, immediately sins before God and incurs His
wrath. For, says Jacobus, Cap. 4, 4, \"whoever wants to be the friend of
the world will be God\'s enemy.\" Therefore, war soon follows here as
well, war within with GOD, peace without with the world, for \[Isa. 57,
21.\], \"The wicked have not peace, saith my GOD.\" And yet Ps. 73, 3.
fAccording to the Vulg.\], it is said that He sees the peace of sinners,
and Ps. 37, 7., 1) that the sinner\'s will of courage happily departs.
Therefore this war is also hidden, and without being perceived \[one has
it, at least at times\].

22\. so these four pieces weigh against each other as in a scale: the
grace of God and the indignation of the world, the peace of God and the
restlessness of the world, the grace of the world and the indignation of
God, the peace of the world and the restlessness before God. Thus Christ
says John 16:33: \"In the world you are afraid, but peace in me, be of
good cheer; I have overcome the world\", and Paul further on \[Gal.
1:10\]: \"If I were still pleasing to men, I would not be Christ\'s
servant\", that is, I would not please Him.

\(23\) Therefore, in this greeting, he set forth a brief epitome of his
doctrine, namely, that no one can be righteous except by the grace of
God, certainly not by works, and that the restlessness of conscience
cannot be satisfied except by the peace of God, that is, not by the
works of any virtue or satisfaction.

\(24\) What is the reason that the apostle was not satisfied by saying,
\"of God the Father,\" but added, \"and of our Lord Jesus Christ\"? He
says this to make a difference

1\) Only the Jena edition, ?om. I, and the Weimar one have this citation
correctly.

between the kingdom of grace and the kingdom of glory. The kingdom of
grace is the kingdom of faith, in which Christ reigns as a man who is
set over all things by God the Father, as it says in the 8th Psalm, v.
7; in this kingdom he has received gifts from God for men, as the 68th
Psalm, v. 19, says, until the last judgment. For then, as the apostle
teaches 1 Cor. 15, 24. he will hand over the kingdom to GOD and the
Father, and will be GOD all in all \[Eph. 1, 23.\], when he will abolish
all rule and all authority. This is the kingdom of glory in which GOtt
will rule through Himself, no longer through mankind, awakening faith.
Not as if they were different kingdoms, but in different ways, now in
faith and in a dark word through the humanity of Christ, then in seeing
and in the revelation of the divine nature. That is why the apostles in
general call Christ a Lord, but the Father God, although both are the
same God, but, as I said, because of the difference of the kingdom,
which we are, who will be purified in faith, but blessed in sight.

**V. 4. 5. Who gave Himself for our sin, that He might save us from this
present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father, to whom
be glory forever and ever. Amen.**

\(25\) Every word in these words has a special weight and emphasis,
since he now says that the law and the human will are nothing unless we
believe that Christ was given for our sins. \"Who gave himself,\" he
says, \"as a gift of grace for those who did not deserve it; he did not
give it as a reward for those who were worthy of it, as it is said in
Rom. 5:10, \"While we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through
the death of his Son.\" But he did not give gold, nor silver, nor man,
nor all angels, but rather \"himself\"; there is nothing greater, and he
has nothing greater. He has given, I say, a treasure so immeasurable for
our sins, for something

1376 Dri- 6-a. m, 155-158. shorter interpretation of Galatians 1, 4. 5.
W. IL, 31-34. 1377

so contemptible and exceedingly hateful. O what a mercy and love of God
toward us, which He lays on our hearts with glorious and skillfully
chosen words, and makes the mercy of God the Father exceedingly sweet to
us.

Where are those who proudly boast about free will? Where is moral
philosophy with its erudition? Where is the virtue that is supposed to
come from spiritual (sacrarum) and secular laws?\" If our sins are so
great that they could not be taken away otherwise than by the surrender
of so great a treasure, what do we do when we presume to make ourselves
righteous by our free will, laws, and doctrines, but cover our sins with
a false semblance of righteousness and virtue, and make of ourselves
incurable hypocrites? What good is virtue if sins remain? Therefore, one
must despair of all these things, and where faith in Christ is not
taught, we should consider all virtue to be nothing but a cover of
wickedness and a whitewash of all filthiness, as Christ \[Matt. 23:27\]
describes the Pharisees. The virtues of the Gentiles are nothing but
deception, unless you want to claim that Christ was given in vain for
our sins, so that he wanted to cost so much in vain what we could do
with our strength.

\(27\) But do not pass by this pronoun \"our\" with contempt. For it is
of no use to you to believe that Christ passed away for the sins of
other saints, but to doubt whether this was also done for your sins. For
this is what the wicked and the devils also believe. On the other hand,
you should rely with a steady confidence that he is also passed for your
sins, and that you are one of those for whose sins he is passed. This
faith justifies you and will cause Christ to dwell, live and reign in
you. This faith is the testimony of the Holy Spirit, which He gives to
our spirit that we are children of God \[Rom. 8:16\]. Therefore, if you
pay attention, you will easily realize that such a position of the heart
(affectum) comes from dei-

It is not with you by your own powers; therefore, it must be obtained by
a spirit that is humble and despairs of itself.

28 These are the fables of the school theologians, who only deal with
opinions (opinatorum), that man is uncertain whether he is in the state
of blessedness or not. Beware that you are not even uncertain, but
certain that you are a lost man, as much as you are, but that you must
strive to be certain and firm in the faith of Christ, who was given for
your sins. How can it be that you should not feel this faith, if you
have it, since St. Augustine assures us that it is most certainly
perceived by him who has it?

29 Now behold! Paul does not say: for your sins, but: \"for ours\",
because he was sure; so also this: \"that he saved us\", he does not
say: \"you\". By this word he casts down again, as with a thunderclap,
the insistence on our free will, and on the works of the law and our own
righteousness. It is not these, he says, that save us, but Christ, who
is given up, if you only believe that you will be saved. But this
salvation is a spiritual, not a bodily one. This happens when the soul
dies to the world and is crucified to it, that is, to the evil lusts
that are in the flesh of all men, of which he says Tit. 2:12, expounding
more broadly, \"that we should deny the ungodly nature and worldly
lusts, and live chastely, righteously, and godly in this world.\" In
this passage he has expressed both living in this world (that this world
is not evil), and worldly lusts, because there are many evil lusts in
this world. Therefore, since he is talking about the present world, he
also adds the word \"evil\" here. Otherwise, if he wanted the evil world
to mean only the course of time, he would teach that all who believe in
Christ must soon be taken away from this life. He also explains in 1
Cor. 5:10 that this is not his opinion by saying: \"Otherwise you would
have to leave the world\", as if he wanted to say: I did not want this,
that you should flee from life,

[1378 Lri. 6-a. Ill, IS8-I60. Interpretations of the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, gt-ss. 1379]{.underline}

but flee from the vices and evil lusts that are in the world, as it is
also said in 2 Pet. 1:4,^1^ ), \"Flee the corruptible lust of the
world.\"

30\. But the figurative nature (tropum) of this speech is beautifully
and expansively interpreted by St. Jerome, who says: \"Just as the
forest mountains have an evil name because many robberies take place in
them, just as we detest a sword with which human blood has been spilled
and a cup in which poison has been prepared, not through the fault of
the cup and the sword, but because those who have used them evil deserve
hatred: so also this world, that is, a period, is not in itself good or
evil, but through those who are in it it receives the name \"good\" or
\"evil.\" Likewise, St. Augustine understands by the evil world the evil
people in the world.

But you have to take all this in such a way that you also recognize
yourself as a part of this evil world, because \[Ps. 116, 11\]: \"All
men are liars\", and there is no one who is righteous on earth \[Rom. 3,
10. Ps. 14, 3.\], so that you do not exalt yourself too much over others
in hope. Therefore, since Christ saves you from the \[evil\] world^2^ ),
he surely saves you from yourself as from your very worst enemy, as Paul
says, Rom. 7, 18.: \"In me, that is in my flesh, dwelleth no good
thing.\" Therefore, by your powers you will not overcome the wicked
world and your vices; works are in vain unless Christ alone saves you.
Therefore, beware lest fasting, watchfulness, study, temperance,
sobriety and other virtues make you an incorrigible hypocrite.

32\. \"According to His will\", that is, that we are saved, is not due
to running in our strength, but to the merciful will of God, as it is
said in the 51st Psalm, v. 20 \[according to the Vulg.\]: \"Lord, do
good to Zion according to Your good will\", and Luc. 2, 14 \[Vulg.\]:
\"And on earth peace to men of a good will\", not theirs,

1\) Only in the Jena edition, Dom. Ill, and in the Weimar edition this
citation is correct, in the other editions we find: 2 Petr. 2.

2\) In the old editions: \"ssoulo.nscz\"; instead of: suseulo nsquaiv.
The Erlangen offers: sasoulo, \[nscznol.

but of God\'s will, as it is said in the Greek: εύδοχία. For just as it
is said, \"men of mercy\" \[and \"vessels of mercy\"\], not because they
are accepted by their merit, but by GOd\'s mercy, so also it is said,
\"men of a good will,\" not because they are blessed by their powers,
but because they are blessed by the good pleasure of the divine will, so
that GOd alone is entitled to glory from everlasting to everlasting,
Amen; as here the apostle said. For if we were able to do something, it
would certainly not be to God\'s glory, but to ours. But let this be far
off, that he who is dust and nothing should have praise and honor. See,
then, with how great force (impetu) Paul strikes (percutit) the
Galatians and their teachers by the greeting alone, as with an entrance
that is exceedingly fitting to what this epistle contains.

**V. 6, 7. I marvel that ye are so soon turned away from him that called
you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel, when there is none
other; except there be some that confound you, and would pervert the
gospel of Christ.**

^3^ St. Jerome says that here there is a transposition of words
(hyperbaton) and orders it in this way: I marvel that ye are so soon
turned away from Christ JEsu, who hath called you into grace. In Greek,
instead of \"Christ\'s\" it is \"God\'s\" \[,and it can be translated in
Latin by both the genitive and the ablative, as Erasmus indicates\].
Likewise, \"if there be no other,\" he understands to be as much as,
\"which is nothing or no gospel,\" whereas, if I might make a decision
according to my sense, I should like to believe that the apostle\'s
opinion was that there was no other gospel than that which he himself
had preached; and if the connective \"without that\" were changed to
\"but,\" the sense would be clearer, so that the text would read
\[according to that of which I presume\]:

3\) This whole paragraph is missing in Heidnecker\'s translation. In
order to keep the same count with Walch, we have combined the two
following paragraphs into one.

[1380 Nil. Oai III, 160-182. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 1, 6. 7. W. IX, 36-68. 1881]{.underline}

I am surprised that you so soon let yourselves be turned away from God
(who called you by grace) to another gospel, since there is no other
gospel. But there are some who confuse you and want to pervert the
gospel of Christ. Now if you want to read this with the displacement of
the words (cum hyperbato), you will not be able to read improperly like
this: from him who called you by the grace of God, or from God.

34 It is a vehement statement of Pauli and yet very restrained. He says
that he is surprised, while afterwards he shows that he is indignant and
in great zeal; namely, by attacking them neatly, not with the
impetuosity he had set before himself, certainly to set a good example
for all those who rule in spiritual matters, especially for those who,
even for trivial things, are ready to come out with thunderbolts at
once. He does not say that they err, that they sin, but that through a
greater evil they are completely turned away from the Gospel and
alienated from God. For it is easier for a tree to remain, even though
some of its branches are broken or it is injured by some other damage,
than for it to be completely torn out of its ground and moved to another
place, where it must inevitably wither and become unfruitful.

\(35\) It is so terrible to seek one\'s own righteousness and trust in
the works of the law and free will. For this is to deny Christ, to cast
away grace and truth, and (as he will teach below) to cast oneself up as
an idol, concerning which Job, Cap. 31, 27. 28. \[Vulg.\], says: \"If I
had kissed my hand with my mouth, it would have been the greatest
impiety and a denial against GOD, the Most High.\" For to kiss one\'s
hand with one\'s own mouth is (as the holy fathers hold) to praise
one\'s works, to trust in one\'s righteousness, and by this ungodliness
it happens that we glory not in GOD but in ourselves, and deprive GOD of
His glory. \[This sin is attributed to the worshippers of Baal 1 Kings
19:18. (Vulg.), where it is said, \"Who have not bowed their knees to
Baal, and every mouth that has not worshipped him by

kissed his hand.\"\] And Isa. 2, 8. \"They have worshipped the work of
their hands, which their fingers have made.\" On the other hand, in the
2nd Psalm, v. 12, it is said, \"Kiss the Son,\" as it is in the Hebrew,
instead of, \"Take discipline\" (Apprehendite disciplinam in the Vulg.),
that is, believe in Christ with pure faith, and serve Him. For faith
must be directed to the truth; but there is no other truth than God
alone. Therefore, faith is the true and inward service of God.

From this we understand that the writings of St. Augustine indicate that
there is a twofold evil, namely, one that goes against faith, the other
against a good life. The evil in faith, even in the best life, makes
heretics, arrogant people, who create mobs (schismaticos), whom the
Scripture actually calls godless (Hebrew: XXXXX). Evil living makes
sinners, but without touching the faith, at least of others, that is,
they do not fight against faith, although they know that they do not
have it, and yet should have it; therefore they are easily helped. But a
bad faith (malum fidei) immediately suspects and persecutes the faith of
others to establish its faith. About the word \"to pervert\" St. Jerome
remarks: Because it comes from the Greek μεταστρέφω,

it means to put what is before the eyes behind the back, and to put what
is behind the back before the eyes. Because it is the infinitive of the
future time.

This, then, is the opinion of Paul: Those who dare to drag the gospel,
which is the teaching of the Spirit and of grace, back to the letter,
which has long since been left behind, although it is through the gospel
that one increases more and more in the spirit of freedom. They want it,
I say, but they will not be able to accomplish it.

38\) And nowadays the gospel has truly been overturned in a large part
of the church, since they teach people nothing but the decrees of the
popes and the statutes of men who turn their backs on the truth, or the
gospel is handled in such a way that it is not at all

[1382 in, 1S2-1S4. Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians. W.
ix, 38-iv. 1383]{.underline}

from laws and moral teachings. The knowledge of faith and grace is
contemptible even to theologians. St. Jerome also thinks that the word
\"you let yourselves be turned away\" was well adapted to the Galatians,
because Galatia in Hebrew means \"turning away,\" 1) as if the apostle
had taken the occasion for this entry from their proper name, as if he
wanted to say: You are in truth Galatians, and at once ready to be
turned away; the thing agrees with your name; namely, by allusion to the
Hebrew. And such allusions from foreign languages are not inadmissible
(injucundae), if they are introduced in the right place, as if it were
said of Rome, Verily thou art a Roma in Hebrew (XXX), that is, a proud
and haughty one. For what does the apostle do in the letter to the
Romans but to nullify their pride and arrogance? by taking, as it were,
from the matter itself the allusion to the name of Rome.

**But if we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel to you
than that which we have preached to you, let him be accursed. As we have
now said, so say we again, If any man preach any other gospel unto you
than that ye have received, let him be accursed.**

39\. the Greek word *Ανάθεμα.* is, like.

Jerome testifies, actually a word of the Jews, which is called nmn by
them. Jos. 6, 17: \"This city and all that is in it shall be banished
(/Κά/Α/,ια).\" Hebrew: l\^y, and means as much as desolation, doom,
death. Hence, because it is a word of cursing, it is taken for cursing,
execration, and banishment (detestatione). Thus in the 42nd Psalm, v. 7:
\"Therefore I remember thee in the land of Jordan and Hermonim
(XXXXXXX), in the little mountain,\" where a soul troubled because of
its sins consoles itself by remembering Christ crucified for it and
become a curse. For also \"the dew of Hermon,\" of which it is written
in the 133rd Psalm, v. 3, that it is

1\) Compare the detailed explanation of the Epistle to the Galatians,
Walch, alte Ausg-, vol. VIII, 1639, § 118.

Fall down on the mountain Zion, is badly a word of the crucified son of
God. But the Latin would say: Anathematisatus (an accursed one), or if
you want to express it exactly according to the word: 2) He is something
accursed. The Hebrews often use abstract words. But whether the Greek
word (which denotes that which is hung up and laid down in the temples)
accurately reflects the meaning of the Hebrew word, let the grammarians
see. 3) It is enough for us that the apostle, in his ardent zeal for the
gospel, would rather that he himself and the angels from heaven, let
alone the apostles, should be set apart, cursed, cut off, and
maledicted, than that the truth of the gospel should be in danger. And
he repeats the same again, 4) and doubles it, not because he believed
that the angels from heaven, or he himself, or the apostles would preach
something else, but because he had to suppress, as it were, by a fierce
attack, and (as he writes to Titus) shut their mouths and cut them out
completely and root and branch, those who, invoking the name and example
of the apostles, taught the law, as if to say: You boast to me of the
name and reputation of the apostles; but put on top of that the case
that both I and the angels from heaven taught or could teach otherwise,
I will that they also be accursed; how much less must you be frightened
by the pretense that the apostles taught thus.

40 Would to God that even in our times there were such trumpets of
Christ against the relentless and violent drivers of the papal decrees
and decrees, which, under the name of the apostles Peter and Paul and of
the Roman Church, press upon us that they dare to declare us heretics
with a completely insolent face, if we do not believe everything that is
said, written, sometimes even dreamed, as necessary for salvation.

2\) \"ssntius\" is missing in the Erlanger and in the Weimarschen.

3\) The whole section from the beginning of this paragraph to here is
missing in Heidnecker\'s translation.

4\) Erlanger and Jenaer, Dom, III: rsxstitio instead of rsxstito.

1384 Lrl. \"Li. Ill, \"14-1 \"I. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle
to the Galatians 1, 8-10. W. IX, 40 pp. 1385

Only he is a heretic who sins against the word of faith. Those words of
men concern so much only life (moralia) and are so much without faith
that no greater service could be rendered to the faith by any act of
charity than if they were all at once fundamentally and completely
removed.

What do you think Paul would have done if he had seen that in our time
so many useless, even harmful, human laws are raging over the whole
world and destroying Christ from the foundation of the world, since he
is so incensed against the laws which God gave through Moses and which,
in the Galatians, harmed Christ in only one article?

\(42\) Therefore we must confidently say with Paul, Let all doctrine
perish and be accursed from heaven, from earth, or whencesoever it is
brought, which teaches to trust in other works, other righteousness,
other merits, than those who belong to Jesus Christ. And also in this we
are not rebellious against the popes and successors of the apostles, but
godly and truly against Christ. For this must be preferred to them, and
if they do not want to suffer this, they are to be completely fled as
accursed people (anathemata).

**V. 10. Am I now preaching to men or to God?**

Those who read this letter of the apostle only in Latin, or rather in a
translation, understand the first part of this question in such a way
that an affirmative answer 1) is expected to it, and to the second part
a negative one, so that only remains that he preaches to men for
service, because no one can preach to God for service to whom everything
is revealed. But \"to preach\" (suadere) in this passage is as much as:
to cause to believe, as Apost. 28, 23: \"And preached unto them of Jesus
out of the law of Moses, and out of the prophets\", because no one can
be forced to believe by force, but can only be drawn and caused, as it
is written in Joh. 6, 44: \"No man can come unto me.

1\) In the editions containing the first redaction, and in the Erlanger:
aLriimirt, while in the second atUrrnstivam is found.

unless the Father draws him\". \[However, in our time the Roman court
forces Turks, yes, also Christians to the faith, that is, that one hates
it (the faith) and plunges oneself into ruin\]. But although Jerome,
Augustine, and Ambrose have this mind, we like more the opinion \[of
Erasmus\], 2) that in the Greek accusative:homines suadeo, an Deum?
(cbΟρώπους *πεΐ&ω, η τον ΰ-εόν;)* this is contained, \"Do I now preach
men or God?\" That is, the doctrine which I teach is not of men, but of
GOD, as he will immediately declare himself more expansively, since he
will say that his gospel is neither human, nor of man \[v. 11. 12.\].

But this figurative way of speaking 3) is not rare in the Latin language
either: I read Virgil, I interpret Jerome. And 1 Cor. 1, 24. it is said:
\"We preach Christ, divine power\" 2c. \[So it is a metonymy. 4)\] To
this understanding the preceding fits perfectly, as if he wanted to say:
Why should I not wish that those should be accursed who teach other
things? Do I then teach human things, and not rather divine things,
before which all things, whether they be of heaven or of earth, must
justly keep silence and depart? And it is worthy of cursing, because it
sets itself against the divine. But our 5) translation can also be drawn
here, if the word \"I preach\" is taken in such a way that it governs no
other (absolutum sit a regimine), so that, as Rom. 14, 6.\"Whosoever
eateth, eateth unto the Lord,\" so also here the sense is: That I
preach, or that I am a preacher, I do not do to men, or for the glory or
service of men, but to God, and for the glory of God I render this
service, and to this sense the following rhymes very well: \"If I still
please men, I do not preach to them.

2\) The reading of the first redaction: \^rasrni \[sntsntiu, gut iä quoä
sto. has been incorporated into the text by the Erlangen edition,
although Luther has eradicated the name of Erasmus everywhere in the
second redaction.

3\) This \"tropus\" consists in the fact that the person is named
instead of what comes from that person.

4\) Compare Crull, die Figuren und Tropen, p. 16 f. See the previous
note. - Everything preceding in this paragraph is missing in the old
translation.

5\) namely Luther\'s.

[1386 o-a. Ill, I6S-IS8. Interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, II-H. 1387]{.underline}

2c., as if he wanted to say that he did not want to please men by his
preaching, but only God. And the circumstantial word \"now\" refers to
the whole time of his apostleship, but not to the time when he wrote
this epistle, because in this epistle he does not actually begin to
teach the gospel anew, but he calls the fallen back to it, and fortifies
those who already know it. Therefore he speaks further below (Cap. 4,
22. sf.\] also in images *(άλληγοριχώς),* which is not fitting for such
as are first to be instructed, to whom, as he says 1 Cor. 14, 22.
\"tongues are for a sign\"; so that the meaning is, Cursed be they that
teach otherwise, for, having been converted from the statutes of the
laws, I now teach not human things, but divine; and. Dear one, notice
with all diligence that he presumes to call the law of Moses human
things, which is given through the angels, as will be explained in more
detail below.

**Or do I intend to be pleasing to men? If I were still pleasing men, I
would not be Christ\'s servant.**

44 He says this because the false apostles also taught righteousness
from the law for this reason, so that they would not have to suffer
persecution from the Jews for the sake of the gospel, who raged against
all men for the law of Moses, against the word of the cross, as he
writes in 1 Thessalonians 2:14 ff. 2, 14. f.; and afterwards in the
sixth chapter of this epistle, v. 12, he says: \"They that would make
themselves acceptable according to the flesh, compel you to circumcise
them, only that they be not persecuted with the cross of Christ.\"
Therefore Paul, who stands firm against such pusillanimity of spirit,
teaches that out of love for Christ one must despise men, and not hold
forth the word to please them.

45 \"To men\" is said here with emphasis, because there are only men
after the first birth of Adam, except Christ and his faith. For these,
because they are alienated from the truth, must necessarily be full of
lies and hatred against the truth. In the same way all men are liars. In
this way it is said in 1 Cor. 3, 4:

\"Are you not men?\" and it is almost a disgrace to be called a man
according to the scriptural custom, because it does not call him
according to his nature, metaphysically (for in such a way theologians
see in man only praiseworthy things), but in a theological way, and how
he is in the eyes of God. On the other hand, the righteous are almost
not called men, but gods, Ps. 82, 6. 7: \"I have well said, Ye are gods,
and all the children of the Most High. But ye shall die as men.\"
Therefore, as the53. Psalm, v. 6. \[according to the Vulg.\], rightly
says: \"God has scattered the bones of those who are pleasing to men;
they have become ashamed, because God has spurned them.\" Why? Because
they deny GOD and His word to men for love, fearing persecution; so
again Ps. 34:21: \"The LORD keepeth all their bones.\" What people? The
righteous. Who are they? Those who are displeasing to men. They are
honored because God accepts them. And Luc. 16, 15: \"What is high among
men is an abomination in the sight of God.\" But since we are also human
beings, we must necessarily also be displeased with ourselves, according
to the words of Christ \[Matth. 16, 25.\]: \"He who loves his life will
lose it.\"

\(46\) Let those who have learned from the tree of Porphyry 1) and the
teachings of Aristotle and other philosophers to praise, extol, and love
the reasonable man, then to trust in their resolutions (dictamina), to
justify their motives, how right their opinion is when it is held
against the truth of Scripture. This assigns everything that is human to
falsehood, vanity, and corruption, and teaches for this reason that we
must grieve as often as it happens to us that we are praised as
reasonable men under the pretense (titulis) of free will, yes, even of
all our works, since the one who is a servant of Christ, that is, of the
truth, cannot be

1\) Porphyrius Malchus, a Neoplatonic philosopher and opponent of
Christianity, born 233 A.D. at Tyre, died 304 at Rome, is the author of
a table of logical categories, which is contained in his \"Introduction
to the Categories of Aristotle\". A Latin translation made by Boethius
(died 525 A.D.) was a much used teaching aid for logic in the Middle
Ages.

[1388 Dru 6ai. Ill, 18S-17U Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 1, 10-12. W. IX, 14-47. 1389]{.underline}

can be, as Paul expresses, pleasing to himself or to men.

The word \"to please\" must be understood here in the spirit, that is,
for the will to please, since it is not up to us whom we please \[or
dislike\], which the apostle himself sufficiently explains here.
Although he had first said, \"Or do I intend to please,\" he says
immediately after, not, \"If I still intend to please,\" but, \"If I
still would please.\" So also 1 Cor. 10:32, 33: \"Be pleasing (placete)
to all in all things, even as I also make myself pleasing to all in all
things.\" How then do you make yourself pleasing to everyone? It
follows: \"And seek not what is pleasing to me, but what is pleasing to
many.\" Behold, \"to make oneself pleasing\" is to seek to please all,
though one may please no one or very few. For this is the rule with
Christ and His, that they displease, while they seek to please, and do
that whereby they should please, as it is written \[Ps. 109:4\]:. \"For
that I love them, they are against me,\" and again \[Ps. 69:5\], \"They
hate me without a cause\"; likewise \[Ps. 120:7, Vulg.\], \"They make
war against me without a cause,\" that is, since I gave them cause to
love me. Therefore, according to the example of Christ, we must lose our
good deeds, so that we seek to please everyone, but in no way seek how
we may please, but, as it says in Rom. 15:2, \"Let each one of us so
place himself as to please his neighbor for good (he says), for the
better,\" not at all for their lusts and vanity 2c.

**V. 11, 12. But I declare unto you, brethren, that the gospel which is
preached of me is not of man. For I neither received it nor learned it
from man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ.**

\(48\) Here he shows how just it was that he cursed them, declaring in
long speech (tractu) and with many reasons that he taught not human but
divine things. First, (he says) so that you may know that my gospel is
from God: \"I did not receive it from man, nor did I myself receive it
from God.

but by the revelation of Jesus Christ\". Here St. Jerome makes this
distinction between \"receiving\" and \"learning\": that he receives to
whom something is first made known, and who is led to believe in it. But
he learns who learns to understand by interpretation what was taught in
a figurative way (figurata sunt) at that (receiving). I understand this
as follows: He who begins receives; he who progresses in the knowledge
of the Gospel learns; as if the apostle wanted the verb \"I have
received\" to be connected with the noun \"from a man,\" and the verb
\"I have learned\" to stand alone (absolute), so that this sense would
come out: I have not received it from a man, nor by anyone\'s
instruction (magisterio), nor has it been handed down to me by anyone;
but neither have I learned it from myself, I have not found it by my
effort, nor have I sought it. From God alone I received it through the
revelation of Jesus Christ, and since he himself taught it to me, I
learned it; namely, on his way to Damascus he heard the voice of Christ,
as St. Jerome considers.

49 The same St. Jerome notes that Christ is praised by Paul as God,
because he says: \"not of a man\", but \"through Christ\", so Christ is
more than a man. He also adds the extremely salutary admonition that
there is great danger in speaking in the Church without the revelation
of Christ, that through wrong interpretation the Gospel of Christ
becomes the Gospel of a man, as now happens everywhere where the
Scriptures are falsified, either by opinions received from men or by
glosses invented by one\'s own cleverness (magisterio).

50 In this passage he uses \"men\" not only for evil men, but also for
the apostles themselves, as he will say shortly after that he did not
receive any instruction from them, nor did he confer with them soon
after the revelation. He does this so that he may confirm what he said
above, namely, that even if the apostles, or

[1390 Lri. 6 \"I. Ill, 171-173. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 17-49. 1391]{.underline}

he himself should teach something else (since they are men), one must
nevertheless not cede what he would have taught once and for all
(semel), since he had this neither from the apostles nor from himself.
Therefore, everything that the false apostles taught differently,
whether under the name of the apostles or also under that of Paul, must
be considered accursed, because they could only have a gospel received
from men or rather error; but he had the truth from Christ.

\(51\) The difference between the gospel and the law is that the law
preaches what one should do and not do, or rather what one has already
done and not done, and that quite impossible things should be done and
not done, therefore it only serves for the knowledge of sin; but the
gospel preaches that sins are forgiven, and everything is fulfilled and
done. For the law saith, Pay that thou owest. But the gospel saith, Thy
sins be forgiven thee. Thus it is said in Rom. 3, 20: \"Through the law
comes knowledge of sin,\" and Cap. 4, 15: \"The law only causes wrath,
for where the law is not, there is no transgression.\" But of the Gospel
it says Luc. 24, 46. f.: \"So Christ had to suffer, and rise from the
dead, and preach repentance and forgiveness of sins in His name (note:
\'In His name\', not ours) among all nations.\" Behold, the preaching of
the forgiveness of sins through the name of Christ, that is the gospel.
And Rom. 10:15, \"How sweet are the feet of them that preach peace, that
preach good,\" that is, the forgiveness of sins and grace, the
fulfillment of the law through Christ. Therefore he that is justified by
grace, fleeing from the law unto the gospel, saith, \"Forgive us our
trespasses.\"

\(52\) But why does Christ command and teach many things in the gospel,
when this is the ministry of the law? Likewise the apostles also command
many things, although they are preachers of the gospel. I answer: Such
doctrines, which are preached apart from faith (for believers are
promised salvation and forgiveness of sins in the Gospel), are not
taught in the Law.

announces, as it is Joh. 1, 12. states: \"But as many as received him,
to them gave he power to become the children of God, who believe on his
name\"), are either interpretations of the law, by which sin should be
more clearly recognized, so that grace would be sought the more
ardently, the more one would become aware of sin, or they are means
(remedia) and prescriptions (observationes) by which the grace already
received and the faith given should be preserved, nourished and
perfected, just as it happens when a sick person begins to undergo
medical treatment.

Therefore the voice of the gospel is sweet, as the bride in the Song of
Songs says: \"Your voice is in my ears, for your voice is sweet\"; and
again \[Cap. 1, 2, 3, Vulg.\], \"Thy breasts 1) are better than wine,
fragrant as the best ointment,\" that is, the words of Christ, with
which He feeds His faithful, are better than the words of the law,
because they are fragrant with the ointment of grace, by which, sins
being forgiven, the wounds of nature are healed. Thus Ps. 45:3 \[Vulg.\]
says: \"[Grace is]{.underline} that of which thy lips overflow\"; not
knowledge, not knowledge, of which also Moses\' lips overflow, but
grace, that is, thy words are sweet and pleasant to lost sinners,
because they announce forgiveness and grace to them. This is what David
also prays in the 51st Psalm, v. 15: \"I will teach the transgressors
thy ways, that sinners may turn unto thee,\" as if to say: I beseech
thee, let me not teach the ways of men, and doctrines of our own
righteousness, for by these they are not converted to thee, but only
further turned away; I beseech thee, that thou wouldest open my lips,
that my mouth may rather declare thy praise, that is, the grace by which
thou forgivest sins. For by this it shall come to pass, that a man may
praise thee, glorify thee, and love thee, feeling the benefits of thy
mercy, and not praise himself in his own righteousness.

1\) According to the Vulgate, uksru must be read, as it is also in the
first redaction. Instead, the editions that reproduce the second
redaction have: vsrka.

[1392 **Dri- Oai. Ill, N3-I7S. Shorter interpretation of Galatians 1,
11-14. W. IX, 4S-S2.** 1393]{.underline}

righteousness. For those who are righteous are not taught, are not
converted to you, do not praise you but themselves; they are healthy and
have no need of a physician. Therefore the praise of your grace cannot
be proclaimed to them. Of these it is said immediately after (v. 16,
according to the Vulgate): \"Deliver me, O God, who art my God and
Savior, from the bloodthirsty (sanguinibus), and my tongue shall praise
thy righteousness\", not our righteousness, the righteousness of men,
but thy grace, according to which thou dost impute righteousness to us,
by which thou art also the God of our salvation.

54 Now it has been asked which gospel Paul preached, whether that of
Lucas, of Matthew, or of another, and St. Jerome, according to some
saying of Eusebius or Origen, thinks that the gospel of Luke is that of
Paul, as if there were no more gospels than our four ordinary ones,
while every apostle preached the same thing that all the others
preached. For the Gospel is a good speech, the message of peace from the
Son of God, who became man, suffered, rose again through the Holy Spirit
for our blessedness, as it is described in Rom. 1, 1-4. and as
Zacharias, Luc. 1:68, says: \"He hath visited and redeemed his people\";
and soon after \[v. 77 ff\]: \"That thou mightest give knowledge of
salvation, which is in the forgiveness of sins, through the tender
mercies of our God.\" Therefore, the gospel is preached rightly wherever
the grace of God and the forgiveness of sins, which came about through
Jesus Christ, are preached.

55 Therefore the epistles of Paul, Peter and John are in truth
evangelia, and Paul did not preach the gospel of Lucas or any other man,
as he explicitly says here that the gospel preached by him was not
revealed to him by men or through men, but only by Jesus Christ, as it
is also said soon after \[v. 16\]: \"That he might reveal his Son in me,
that I should preach him through the gospel among the Gentiles. Behold,
the gospel is the doctrine of the Son of God, Jesus Christ.

**V. 13. 14. For you have ever heard my conduct in Judaism, how I
persecuted the congregation of God exceedingly, and cast them off, and
increased in Judaism above many of my like in my generation, and
zealously enforced the law of my father exceedingly.**

\(56\) This must be understood from the context that it was said by the
apostle to confirm what he had already begun, that is, that his gospel
was not from men, but that he taught divine things; although I know that
St. Jerome has something else in mind and leaves the order of the
sentence aside. So the apostle wants to say: \"So that you may know most
accurately that I was not taught by my ancestors, nor by the apostles,
nor by any man, but only by God, so that you may be sure and not be
turned away to human things under any pretext, whether my name or the
apostles\' names, behold, I tell you my story anew and insert it here:
\"For you have ever heard well\" 2c.

57\. But here (as St. Jerome says) there is a wonderful and beautiful
choice of words and a great emphasis on them: \"change\" (he says), not:
grace; \"in the past\", 1) not: now; \"in Judaism\", not: in the faith
of Christ; not like other persecutors, but like a destroyer (grassator)
and robber he devastated \"the community of God\"; not as if he had
believed then that it was so, but now he calls it so, after having
recognized it as such. And again: \"I increased in Judaism\", not: in
the faith of Christianity; \"over many\", not: over all (to remain
modest).

1\) weiland \-\-- formerly. Because de Wette either did not know this
meaning of the word or did not pay attention to it, he omitted the word
\"weiland\" from the heading of the letter in his edition of Luther\'s
letters, vol. 222, he omitted the word \"weiland\" from the title of the
letter: \"An Johann Mantel, weiland Kirchendiener zu Wittenberg,\"
thinking that it also meant \"deceased,\" although it is found in the
Wittenberg edition, vol. XII, p. 169 and in the Jena edition, vol. VII,
p. 371. It has also been incorrectly omitted in the Erlanger, vol. 55,
p. 250 and in the St. Louis edition, vol. X, 2006. Mantel was in
Mulhouse at the time. Cf. Rsbsnstpok, vol. II, p. 39.

[1394 Lri. m, 17S-177. Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians.
W.IX, 52-S5. 1395]{.underline}

den); \"over my like,\" not: over the ancients (senes); \"in my
generation,\" not: among the Gentiles. For thus he is wont to call the
Hebrew people, as, 2 Cor. 11:26: \"In peril among the Jews (ex genere),
in peril among the Gentiles.\" But I do not wish to deny that he did not
at the same time also incidentally, while proving from his history that
he had taught divine things, wish by his example to draw the Galatians
away from the law, so that, while hearing, they might also at the same
time be admonished and moved. If such a great zealot for the law, who
can boast much more of the law and exalt himself according to the flesh
than the false apostles (as he does in 2 Cor. 11:21 ff. and Phil. 3:4
ff. 1), nevertheless considers it filth and leaves it behind, how much
more must we, who are in grace, not return to the law.

\(58\) It should be noted that Jerome uses the word \"paternal law\" to
refer to the Pharisaic doctrines and commandments of men, but I would
venture to believe that Paul means the whole law of Moses. I will not
prove this from any other source than from the writings of the apostle
himself, 2) who says Phil. 3, 4-7: \"If another man thinketh to boast of
the flesh, I much more, being circumcised the eighth day, one of the
people of Israel, of the family of Benjamin, a Hebrew of the Hebrews,
and according to the law a Pharisee, according to zeal a persecutor of
the church, according to righteousness in the law having been blameless.
But that which was gain to me I counted loss for Christ\'s sake.\"
Behold, even the circumcision and the blameless (sine querela)
righteousness in the law he esteems for harm for Christ\'s sake. And
further on \[v. 9.\], \"That I might be found in him, not having my
righteousness which is of the law, but which is by faith in Christ.\"
Therefore he calls the law \"the paternal law,\" because he was
instructed in it by men, by his fathers and forefathers, then also
because his

1\) In the editions: \"Col. 3\"; correct only in the Weimar one.

2\) Instead of Uoeebor in the editions will read äo66bo.

Fathers had received the same from Moses and passed it on to their sons,
according to the commandment Ps. 78, 5: \"That he commanded our fathers
to teach their children.\" For the apostle adapts everything to the
controversy and opposes it to the false apostles, so that he makes it
certain that his gospel is from God, and thus he forces the Galatians to
remain firm in it. Therefore, he also contrasts the paternal law with
the gospel with a certain diminution (tapinosi), since he wants this to
be taken for the divine law.

\(59\) But in order not to give anyone any cause for conscience, let us
deal with this matter in a little more detail, thus paving the way for
what is to be said hereafter. The law, not only the ceremonial law, but
also the moral law, yes, even the most holy Decalogue, which contains
the eternal commandments of God, is the letter and a tradition of the
letter, which neither makes alive nor just, as St. Augustine
superfluously proves in his writing \"Of the Spirit and the Letter\",
but kills and makes sin exceedingly abundant. For however much it may be
taught or held, it does not thereby purify the heart itself. But if the
heart is not purified, what are good works, whether they be according to
the . What are good works, whether they are done according to the
ceremonial law or according to the moral law, but a mere appearance of
godliness and hypocrisy? as Christ says, that the Pharisees appear
beautiful on the outside, but are full of filth on the inside. Hence it
comes about that such a one, although he does not commit theft, does not
outwardly break marriage with the deed, but is inwardly inclined to do
so, and abstains from it either out of the desire of his advantage or
out of fear of punishment, and thus overcomes one sin by another, as St.
Augustine says in his book \"Of Marriages and of Evil Lusts\". For the
desire of advantage and the fear of punishment are sins and a kind of
idolatry, because only God deserves love and fear.

\(60\) Nothing can set us free from this impurity of the heart but
faith, as it says in Acts 15:9: \"He cleansed their hearts through
faith. 15:9: \"He purified their hearts through faith\" so that Paul\'s
word would stand, Titus 1:15: \"To the pure all things are pure,

1396 Lri. \"Li. m, 177-179. shorter interpretation d. Galatians 1,
13-16. w. IX, 55-57. 1397

But to the unclean and unbelieving nothing is pure.\" According to the
same rule he says Rom. 2, 21: \"You preach that one should not steal,
and you steal\" 2c., which St. Augustine interprets thus: You steal,
namely, not with the work of which you preach that it should not be
done, but with your guilty will. If therefore the doctrine of faith is
not revealed, by which the heart is purified and made righteous, the
instruction in all the commandments is a letter and a paternal law. For
the commandment teaches what one should do. Since this was impossible,
the teaching of faith (that is, the gospel) teaches how to make it
possible. For it teaches to take refuge in the grace of God and to
implore God Himself as Master and Teacher, that with the finger of His
Spirit He may write in our hearts His living, luminous and burning
letters, by which, enlightened and inflamed, we may cry, \"Abba, dear
Father,\" and this is not paternal but divine instruction.

61 But notice, dear reader: If the apostle condemns the apparent change
in his Judaism and the righteousness of the law, so much so that he
considers it filth and harm, what will these praisers of nature and the
praisers of moral works object to? If this \"increasing\" of the apostle
was evil, which, after all, is approved by every judgment of reason and
even by the law of God Himself, since also the purpose (finis) (as they
say) of his life was zeal for God and His law: what, then, will be their
actions which they highly praise for another purpose or for a similar
purpose? Of course, what Jeremiah 1) said of such prophets \[Klagel. 2,
14. Vulg.\]: \"Thy prophets have preached unto thee foolish visions, and
sermons, that they might preach thee out of the land, and have not
revealed unto thee thine iniquity, that they might provoke thee to
repentance.\" Therefore they take away the fear of God from men,
teaching safety by babbling that their

1\) Caused by a printing error in the Jena edition, Dom. I: Hioro.
instead of Hioro., the Erlangen edition offers here: Hieronymus, while
all other editions have \"Hiere.\" or Hierenrias.

The first is that moral works are good, and that works done according to
the rule of reason are not sins.

**V. 15. 16. But it pleased God, who separated me from my mother\'s womb
and called me by His grace, to reveal His Son in me, that I should
preach Him among the Gentiles through the gospel.**

It is something else to know the law and to have excelled in its
righteousness, and something else to know the Son of God, for the former
brings blessedness, the latter brings condemnation. And behold, what a
grateful and sincere confessor of divine grace he is! He says: \"The Son
of God was revealed to me not because I had increased in the
righteousness of the Father\'s law, not through my merit, but because it
pleased God that this should happen, whereas I deserved just the
opposite. But that it pleased Him without my merit is proof that He set
me apart for this office (sortem) before I was born, and prepared me for
it in my mother\'s womb, and then also called me by His grace, so that
you might know by all these things 2) that faith and the knowledge of
Christ were not granted to me by the law, but by the grace of God, who
provided and called me beforehand. Therefore, even for you, salvation
cannot come from the law.

Others refer the word \"set apart\" to what Apost. 13, 2: \"Set apart
for me Barnabam and Paulum for the work\" 2c., but in a forced way,
since they must then understand the synagogue by the \"mother\'s womb\"
in figurative speech. I pass over what St. Jerome does here in a quite
precarious and dangerous way. It seems to me that he speaks here
entirely of having been provided, but only briefly and obscurely,
considering it sufficient for the understanding of the Galatians that he
simply affirmed that he had not known Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
through himself or through others, but that he had been provided with a
mother\'s womb.

2\) Wittenberger: is instead of: iis.

1398 Dri- 6ai. Ill, 17S-1SI. Interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, P7-60. 1399

through the revelation of the Father, and that he had preached him and
proclaimed him in the Gospel, so that they might know that they had
learned divine things from Paul. Now he continues, adding a history to
the simple narrative to show that he was not instructed by men, nor did
he teach human things.

**Immediately I drove to and did not discuss it with flesh and blood.**

Here St. Jerome tortures himself extraordinarily and twists the text.
First, so that he would not have to admit that the apostles are called
flesh and blood, and so that he would not be forced to admit to the
blaspheming Porphyrius that Paul is presumptuous (Paulinam fiduciam), he
understands by flesh and blood the Jews and the sinners, especially
since he (Paul) pronounces that he afterwards discussed his gospel with
the apostles, which he here denies (for the same word discussed me, in
Greek προςανε&*έμην,^1^ )* which is here rendered acquievi, is
afterwards \[Cap. 2, 2.) translated by contuli). But we want to let this
go; let it be taken care of whoever wants to. In the meantime, I have
enough to show that Paul, who wants to show that he taught the Galatians
from the revelation of God, did not discuss his revelation with any man
beforehand, but immediately after receiving the revelation preached
Christ, as Apostles 9:19, 20. 9:19, 20: \"He was with the disciples at
Damascus for several days, and immediately he preached Christ in the
synagogues. \"Immediately,\" namely, by not conferring with them
beforehand. Therefore we see here also that Paul omitted something in
his words, so that the sentence would read completely like this:
Immediately I preached the Son of God or proclaimed him through the
gospel; I did not first confer with men; so that the adverb
\"immediately\" completely denies that he was instructed by men, but
rather, on the contrary, that men were immediately instructed by him in
Christ.

1\) What is enclosed here in square brackets is our addition.

den. For as I have said \[§58\], the apostle here acts everything in
such a way that it serves to dispute, in order to prove that he taught
divine things. For this having been proved, as it were, to be his main
ground, it has no difficulty in casting down all that had been presented
to the Galatians in opposition to him.

65\. However, as Jerome testifies, \"to discuss\", which is expressed by
acquievi in this passage, is something different from what we understand
by it; for we discuss what we already know with a friend, and leave it,
as it were, to his heart (sinum) and conscience, that he may either
approve or reject it with impartial counsel; and though the (Latin)
interpreter has not expressed this meaning of the word (id verbi), yet
he has not entirely missed the sense. For he who thus converses with
friends certainly already acquiesces (acquiescit) in his mind and proves
docile toward them. But Paul did not want to be instructed, nor did he
ever have in mind to tolerate a discussion (animum disputandi) whether
what he had heard from GOtte was right or not; and with full right. For
it would have been ungodly to establish the divine revelation, as if he
had doubted it, by the counsel of men.

So Porphyrius does not judge anything that accuses Paul and punishes
arrogance in him, because not out of arrogance, but for the honor of the
divine reputation and the most certain truth, he did not want to
discuss, but could not do it without hurting the divine reputation.
However, he (Porphyrius) also errs in thinking that Paul is speaking
here of the apostles, while he is speaking of those who were in
Damascus, whoever they may have been. For of the apostles he says
immediately after \[v. 17.), \"Neither came I unto them which were
apostles before me.\" So it is others whom he calls flesh and blood, and
as it seems to me, according to his way and that of the Hebrews, he
alludes to the name Damascus, which, according to its derivation, means
blood (XX) and a sack (XX), and in Scripture not infrequently denotes
the hom-

1400 6\^. Ill-rsi-E Shorter Interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 1, 16. 17. W. IX, 60-62. 1401

The word \"flesh and blood\" in the mysterium means \"flesh and blood\",
as if he wanted to say: I did not converse with those who were at
Damascus, for they are flesh and blood. But even this I would not deny,
that this is said of holy men, nor doubt that he himself calls the
apostles flesh and blood, even by power of Christ, who said to Peter
\[Matth. 16, 17.\], \"Flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto
thee,\" that is, thou hast not this from thyself nor from others; and
elsewhere \[Matth. 10, 20.\]: \"For it is not you who speak, but it is
your Father\'s Spirit,\" wherein he clearly indicates that they are
something other than the Spirit and the revelation of the Spirit,
namely, that they are in themselves quite actually flesh and blood. I
like, therefore, this appropriately applied diminution by which he
denies the false

The apostles also call the saints of God flesh and blood to their
chagrin when they are held against the majesty of divine revelation, for
when one begins to extol the words or examples of even such great holy
men against the divine ones, it is time that we confidently regard
everything that is not divine as flesh and blood, indeed, as nothing.

**V. 17. Neither came to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before
me.**

Not only did I not ask the people of Damascus for advice, but I also did
not ask the apostles who were in the apostleship before me (for this
means antecessores meos), which should have happened if I had wanted to
be taught by a man or by a man. For me, the certain and infallible
revelation of the Father was sufficient. Notice here Paul\'s necessary
hopefulness, or more correctly, his equity. He confesses that the other
apostles were earlier than he, but does not say that he is greater, but
again also not that he is less. For even though he says that he is
inferior in person and the least of the apostles, and even that he is
not worthy to be called an apostle, he still holds the office and
ministry in such high esteem (for this is God\'s and not his) that he
does not want to yield to any of the apostles. For the person of the
apostle may be what he wants, but the office is certainly the same.

They teach the same Christ, have the same authority and are sent by him
in the same way. And yet he says 2 Cor. 11, 5: \"I consider myself to be
no less than the high apostles are,\" and Cap. 12, 11: \"I am nothing
less than the high apostles are.\" Behold, he gives them great
precedence, and yet he equals them; in dignity he humbly yields to them,
in office and authority he confidently equals them.

**But he went into Arabia, and came again to Damascus.**

In the Acts of the Apostles Cap. 9, Lucas does not remember this journey
to Arabia, but only writes briefly that Paul was let down through the
wall and came to Jerusalem. Therefore, St. Jerome tries different ways
of explanation (rationes), the second of which I follow, namely, that
after his baptism Paul was at Damascus for some days, as Lucas writes,
during which he preached Christ in the school; then (which Lucas
omitted) he left for Arabia and returned to Damascus, as he says here,
and further that with which Lucas continues, namely, that because he was
being pursued, he was let down through the wall in a basket and came to
Jerusalem. Therefore, St. Jerome struggles to explain why Paul tells
what Lucas did not. I dare to assert this opinion: that he reports this,
as well as everything else, in order to show that he did not come to the
apostles, nor did he learn from them, but rather, trusting in the divine
revelation, he went to Arabia beforehand to teach there, and then, when
he returned to Damascus, he taught the same; for he was so certain of
this through the revelation of Christ that he had received. For he would
not have taught this even in different places if he had thought it such
that he had to discuss it first with the apostles or men. But that St.
Jerome thinks he has been in Arabia in vain, and seeks to investigate
some mysteries, must be credited to such a great man.

1402 Lri. 6ai. m, 184-186. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 62-64. 1403

**V.18. After three years I came to Jerusalem to see Peter and stayed
with him for fifteen days.**

69 Note how carefully he adds: \"over three years\", and not to hearon,
but \"to see Petrum\". For the fact that he says that he taught three
years in Damascus (until he was forced to leave through the wall)
certainly proves that he was not made a preacher of the Gospel by Peter,
but that he had been one for a long time when he came to Peter. \[He
says this 1) to shut up the false apostles, who had used this evidence
to claim that Paul had been taught by Peter, by whose example they had
incited the Galatians to keep the law. 2) But St. Jerome states that in
this passage he assumes a twofold understanding, both that according to
which it is asserted that Paul was taught by Peter, and that according
to which this is denied. But in the \"Letter to Paulinus\" he leans
towards the former opinion by wanting the teacher of the Gentiles (to
use his words) to have been instructed in the mystery of the numbers
eight and seven (ogdoadis et hebdoadis), which I mention for the sake of
this, so that the discerning reader may understand Jerome in such a way
that he does not teach against the apostle Paul, who rejects (detonates)
all this with such a spirit that he is convinced by the strongest
reasons of proof that he has not learned anything from the apostles, but
has received everything from God alone (as has already been said
sufficiently). That St. Jerome likes to play with the mystery of the
fifteen days is not to be despised, but one must definitely believe that
they (the fifteen days) were put in this place by Paul, not only for the
pleasure of the secret interpretation (mysterii), but also out of
necessity, for the sake of the matter and history, perhaps so that he
showed that he had been with Peter long enough, if he had come to teach;
but that on the other hand he did not come to learn, but only to teach.

1\) Added by us.

2\) From here to the end of this paragraph is missing in the old
translation.

to see him as a guest had stayed with him, since it would have taken a
longer time if he had wanted to learn.

**V. 19. But I saw none of the other apostles, except Jacob, the brother
of the Lord.**

70 \[This he states,\] 3) so that they would not say: If not from Peter,
at least you have been taught by the other apostles. But he did not see
them, because (as Jerome says) they were scattered over the whole world
to preach the gospel. If this is true, how can the fable of the division
of the apostles stand, in which it is said that the apostles were
divided in the thirteenth year after the resurrection of Christ, while
here Paul finds them already scattered three years or at most four years
after his conversion, who, as can be seen, was converted in the same
year in which Stephen received his crown? But I leave this to other,
idle people. See what Lucas writes in Acts Cap. 9, 26. ff. that Paul,
since the disciples were afraid of him, was led by Barnabas \"to the
apostles,\" and went out and in with them 2c., while here he confesses
that he saw none of the apostles but Peter and Jacob. So either Lucas
calls Peter and Jacob \"apostles\" in the plural, or what St. Jerome
says is true, that under the name of the apostles many others are also
included, especially in Paul\'s letters, because they were ordained by
the first apostles.

Of this Jacobus, who is usually called the lesser Jacobus by the people,
Eusebius says in the second book of his Church History, Cap. 1, that he
was called the brother of the Lord, because he was a son of Joseph, who
was considered to be the father of Christ. This is stated by St. Jerome
in his book \"Of Illustrious Men\", but he rejects it and says: Jacobus
is, as some suppose, the son of Joseph by another woman, but as it seems
to me, the son of Mary, the sister of the mother of the Lord, whose John
in his Evan-.

3\) Added by us.

1404 Ari. Kai. Ill, 186-188. shorter interpretation of Galatians 1,
19-21. W. IX, 64-66. 1405

gelio commemorates 2c. For John says Cap. 19, 25: \"And standing by the
cross of Jesus was his mother, and Mary his mother\'s sister, Cleophas\'
wife, and Mary Magdalene.\" Likewise Marcus Cap. 15, 40.: \"Among whom
was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of little Jacob, and Joses, and
Salome.\" With this agrees Matthew Cap. 27, 56.: \"Among whom (he says)
was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Jacobi and Joses, and the
mother of the children of Zebedee.\" From this it may be concluded that
Mary the mother of Jacobi, and Mary the wife of Cleophas, are one and
the same person, namely, the sister of the Virgin Mary, who is called
\"of Cleophas\" by her husband, but \"Jacobi\" by her son, and she is
also the mother of Simon and Judas. For also Eusebius says in the third
book of the church history that Cleophas was the brother of Joseph, and
therefore Simon is called the cousin (consobrinujm) of the Lord. But you
see that Marcus Cap. 6, 3. says this quite clearly: \"Is he not the
carpenter, the son of Mary, and the brother of Jacob, and Joses, and
Judae, and Simonis?\" Therefore, the error of those who have invented a
third Mary, whom they call Mary Salome, is quite obvious. For Salome is
a female name, and the woman whom Marcus calls \"Salome\", Matthew calls
\"the mother of the children of Zebedee\". But that there were only two
Marys, namely Mary Magdalene and Mary Jacobi, is sufficiently proven by
Matthew, who almost always calls Mary Jacobi \"the other Mary\" \[Matth.
28, 1\]. 2) \[But we want to put an end to the vexatious trade (taedii),
and understand it in such a way that this Jacobus is called a brother of
the Lord, that is, a matron (fratruelem) or rather a cousin of the Lord,
in order to distinguish him from others who are also called Jacobus. For
all confirm that among the disciples of Christ several had the name
Jacobus, and although St. Jerome in his book \"Against Helvidius\" says
about this passage that he was rather called a brother of the Lord,
because he was like him in virtue and wisdom, than that he was his
brother according to the flesh.

1\) The following section up to the end of this paragraph is missing in
the old translation.

would be more related, we like more the opinion which has been drawn
above from the writings of famous men\].

**V. 20. But what I write to you, behold, God knows I am not lying.**

\(72\) The apostle swears in such a minor matter (as it seems) that they
should believe that it is true that he came to Jerusalem, that he did
not see any of the apostles, and what else he mentioned. Why is this
necessary? He is concerned and feels that he is being harshly reproached
with the name and conversation of the apostles, on which the false
apostles rely. Therefore he swears, since he has nothing else to confirm
his story, and acts holy and godly in this, so that the reputation of
the divine revelation, in which he had taught the Galatians, would not
be diminished by the pretense and the glorious appearance (pompa) of the
apostolic and human reputation, to the detriment of the faith and the
gospel. He swears not only for what he has previously said, but also for
the sake of what he must say afterwards. For in this way those who are
very distressed are wont to swear in the middle of their speech.

**V. 21. After that I came to the countries of Syria and Cilicia.**

73 This is described by Lucas Apost. 9, 29. f. \[He also talked with the
Gentiles (at Jerusalem) and consulted with the Greeks, but they
persecuted him and killed him. When the brothers heard this, they led
him to Caesaria and sent him to Tarsen,\" which is in Cilicia. See,
there you have it, what he did during the fifteen days with Peter. He
did not learn, but taught the Gentiles (for he was supposed to be the
same apostle, or rather he already was), and disputed with the Greeks,
of course also with the Jews, just as Stephen before him, Apost. 6, 9.
ff. Cap. 7. Why is it necessary for us to hear that he came to Syria and
Cilicia? This is the reason: He proves that he did not have the apostles
as teachers anywhere, but that he himself was a teacher everywhere, by

1406 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 188-191. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 66-70. 1407

The purpose of the story is that he will finally feriate all those who
taught and held such things against him, because he taught divine, not
human, things, and they taught human, not divine, things.

**V. 22-24. But I was unknown to the Christian community in Judea. But
they alone had heard that he who persecuted us before now preaches the
faith which he destroyed before; and they praised God above me.**

74 He means that he was not only not instructed by Peter and the other
apostles, but also not by any others who were Christians in Judea and
kept the law mixed with faith; indeed, what serves most to recommend
Paul\'s teaching: although he was not even known to them face to face,
he nevertheless had the testimony of them that he taught the faith (for
this alone he seeks to strengthen in the whole epistle).

\(75\) Thus he already proves by the reputation of all the churches that
he taught rightly, since he was praised by those churches and praised
God for preaching the faith. Since, nevertheless, the false apostles
forced the Galatians to the law by the example of those churches, he
clearly proves that they had not rightly led the Galatians by the
example and reputation of the churches in Judea. Those praise GOD that
Paul preaches the faith, who used to grieve that he disturbed the faith;
they er

but they do not raise a complaint 1) of the law. Why then do those
people try to turn away the Galatians through legal righteousness by
falsely claiming the name of the apostles?

It only remains that the churches in Judea kept the legal things, not as
if they were forced to keep them for the sake of their salvation, but
out of free love, by serving the weakness of others. Oh, God would that
our laws in the Church today would be taught and kept with the same 2)
prudence! But now they rule in such a way that one thinks that salvation
is in them, and that faith has completely 3) gone out. Paul makes faith
the completely free lord over all human laws. We make human laws the
tyrants of faith, but the great and noble ones do not keep them a
hair\'s breadth, in that they do not swallow up the church without
immense aversions (scandalorum vastissimo gurgite) and alone oppress the
subjects with so many unbearable burdens, or sell their Christian
liberty, which is caught by monetary snares, anew in the most shameful
way, dispensing and giving indulgences.

1\) It will be read here with the Basel edition and Heidnecker
(zuorsutss instead of Huasrsutss in the other editions. This confusion
of pisror and quasro occurs often elsewhere as well. Cf. tz 32 of the
2nd chapter.

2\) Wittenberger: simxliei instead of: siwili.

3\) In the editions of the second redaction the reading is xsnitus,
while in those of the first redaction and in the Erlanger xroxs is
found.

**The second chapter.**

**After fourteen years I went up to Jerusalem once with Barnaba, and
took Titum also with me. And I went up for a revelation, and consulted
with them concerning the gospel which I preach among the Gentiles, and
especially with them that were in authority, lest I should run or walk
in vain.**

1\. having sufficiently proved that he was made an apostle by no man\'s
instruction (magisterio), but by divine revelation, he now proves that
he had this revelation so firmly and certainly that he was not at all
afraid to have any men, even the apostles, as judges; then also that

1408 Lrt. 6ai. Ill, 191-193. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 2, 1. 2. W. IX, 70-73. 1409

he had not given way to the impetuous urging of any man.

2 First, he says \"over fourteen years\". If you add to these the three
years he mentioned above, you will find that he had already been
preaching seventeen or eighteen years before he wanted to confer with
the apostles, so that it seems impossible that what he had preached in
so many places, among so many peoples, Therefore, he did not go to
Jerusalem for his own sake, as if he feared (as Jerome thinks) that he
might have preached falsely for seventeen years, but to show others that
he had not run in vain, since the other apostles also approved of his
running. For if he had doubted whether he taught rightly or wrongly, it
would have been an exceedingly great and outrageous presumption and
impiety that he had postponed the necessary discussion and deceived so
many nations with uncertain doctrine.

3\. secondly. He would never have gone to Jerusalem if he had not been
prompted to do so by a revelation of God, but not moved by the impetuous
urging of others: so much is lacking that he undertook the meeting out
of mistrust in the certainty of his teaching, since there was absolutely
no need to go there because of this matter.

4\. thirdly. \[He went\] 1) straight to Jerusalem, where were the rulers
both of the synagogue and of the church, and was ready to confer with
all, not being afraid of the multitude of the Jews, nor even of the most
vehement zealots for the law.

\(5\) Fourthly, not alone, but with Barnabas and Titus, who were of
different nations, and were very proper witnesses, that he could not be
thought to have acted differently when he was under eyes (praesens), and
to act differently when he was absent. Namely, if he had done too much
for the Jews, Titus the Gentile would have betrayed him; if, on the
other hand, he had done too much for the Gentiles, Barnabas the Jew
would have opposed him. Therefore, behold, what a good

1\) Added by us.

Confidence he has. He took these two with him and had both of them as
witnesses.

6 Finally, he stands with both of them (sese offerens) to make it clear
that he was allowed to live with Titus as a Gentile, with Barnabas as a
Jew, and to prove the evangelical freedom in both of them: that one may
be circumcised, and yet it is not necessary to be circumcised. This is
also how one must think of the entire law.

\(7\) Enough has been said above \[Cap. 1, § 65\] about the word \"to
discuss\" (contuli et acquievi). Now note also the Hebrew, or rather the
figurative speech peculiar to the Scriptures, that \"to run\" means the
office of teaching or proclaiming the Word of God. This is taken from
the messengers who are sent and run. Thus I have quoted above from
Jeremiah \[Cap. 23, 21: \"I sent not the prophets, neither did they
run,\" and Ps. 147, 15.: \"His word runneth fast.\" And in the holy
Scriptures there is much of this kind, whereby it is indicated that the
heralds of the divine Word must be ready and faithful messengers, so
that they run more than they walk. Thus it is also said in Isa. 52, 7:
\"How beautiful are the feet of those who proclaim peace\" 2c., and
Ezekiel, Cap. 1, 7. 14., describes his animals in such a way that they
have feet and run, and Eph. 6, 15. commands that they should be booted
on the legs, as ready to drive the gospel. 2) And the service, the
running, the sending of all feet and the like means in the holy
Scriptures the service of the word of God, and also the poets describe
in their Mercurius things that are not very dissimilar to these.

8 Again, note that after fourteen years Paul finds the apostles in
Jerusalem, or at least Peter and James and John, if not all of them, and
he consults with them. It is not that the fable of the division of the
apostles, which is said to have happened in the thirteenth year \[after
the resurrection of Christ\] 3) and which is so highly praised, should
grieve me at all (torqueat), but it only prompts me to admonish that we
should

2\) With the Weimar, Basel and Erlangen editions, we have here the
reading xaratu angenonimen, instead of upxaratu in the other editions.

3\) Added by us.

1410 Li-I. Oai. Ill, 193-195. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 73-75. 1411

not easily fall for such antics (of which there are many nowadays)
against very clear passages of the Holy Scripture, accepting without
judgment any fiction of superstition, adorned only with some appearance
(titulo) of godliness. This is already known \[from the notes of
Erasmus\] what the words: Qui videbantur esse aliquid mean. For also St.
Jerome has: Qui videbantur (that is, those who had a greater prestige
and of whom one had a high opinion), therefore esse aliquid is an
addition.

**V. 3, 4, 5: But neither was Titus compelled to circumcise himself,
which was with me, though he were a Greek. For when some false brethren
had intruded with us, and crept in beside us, to make known our liberty
which we have in Christ JEsu, that they might take us captive, we
yielded not one hour to them to be subjects, that the truth of the
gospel might stand with you.**

9 St. Jerome indicates that earlier in the Latin manuscripts (codicibus)
it was written: \"To whom we have departed for an hour\" (Quibus
cessimus ad horam), in an affirmative way, which he refutes, both from
the Greek and from the clear sense of the preceding sentence, in which
Paul says that Titus was not forced to circumcise himself, and rather
states that he did not depart. After that he struggles with the
connective word \"but\" or \"however\" 1) and says that it must be
deleted, so that it would then stand in this order: \"But Titus was also
not forced to circumcise himself for the sake of the brethren who had
joined in\" 2c. But if my assumption is valid, Paul has here shifted the
words (hyperbaton), or again, according to the Hebrew way, omitted
something (eclipsin), so that the connective word \"but\" belongs to the
tense word \"we did not retreat\", or also another tense word must be
thought in beside the same \[connective word\] (subaudiatur), namely: we
resisted, or: we fought against it and carried the victory there-.

1\) \"86\<Z\" Vtzl \"auteiu\". At the beginning of the fourth verse the
Vulgate says: \[su.

from. And this we did not out of hatred or contempt against the law or
against the works of the law, but for the sake of the false brethren,
who wanted to make a captivity out of freedom for us 2c. But also in
other places he is wont to omit something in such a manner (eclipses
facere), in very violent agitation, and this also occurs not
infrequently in the Old Testament, which, I believe, is sufficiently
known\]. 2) Better thus: \"But for the sake of the false brethren, 3)
who intruded themselves with\" 2c., that is, that he was not compelled
to circumcise himself, this was done, not out of hatred or contempt of
the law, or of the works of the law, but for the sake of the false
brethren, who wished to make a captivity of liberty for us. - Also this:
Quibus neque ad horam cessimus subjectioni could have been said more
clearly: Neither did we yield to them for a time (so Jerome has it) to
be subjects, or that we had submitted, that is, so firmly did we stand
for evangelical liberty that they could not even obtain that from us,
that we yielded for a time, and that only for this once, as if we could
turn back again afterwards, after this yielding had satisfied the minds
of those who are zealous for the law, since we are in the habit of doing
so many things according to the opportunity of the time, the place and
the persons, which we are free to refrain from again later. But this may
be done in those things where divine truth and evangelical liberty are
not endangered; for the sake of these, neither time nor place nor person
need be regarded. \[So much of the grammar.\]

\(10\) Incidentally, this dispute is not about what works of the law
are, but about whether works of the law are necessary or free. For the
works of the law and the law itself are not declared dead and abolished
by Christ in such a way that one may not do them in any way (as St.
Jerome, instructed by his Origen, repeatedly asserts), but only that
without them one believes to attain salvation through Christ alone, who
is the end of all things.

2\) Instead of the preceding, the following is found in the second
redaction up to the dash.

3\) In the Erlanger: ant instead of: untern.

1412 Lri. 6 \"I. Ill, 195-197. shorter interpretation of Galatians 2,
3-5. W. IX, 75-78. 1413

of the law, in relation to whom, as the one who was to come, they were
commanded. For after Christ came, he did away with the works of the law
in such a way that they could be kept as indifferent things, but no
longer compulsory, as he later gives a beautiful example (paradigm) in
the fourth chapter of the heir who is a child. Therefore the other
apostles kept the same with the believing Jews. Paul and Barnabas did
this sometimes, but sometimes not, in order to show that they were
completely middle class and of the same nature as the one who did them,
as he says in 1 Cor. 9:20 ff: \"To the Jews I became a Jew, that I might
win the Jews. To those who are under the law I became as under the law
(though I myself was not under the law). To those who are without law, I
have become as without law.\"

How could he have interpreted the evangelical freedom more clearly? I
came (he says) to the Jews to preach Christ. But in order for them to
hear me, I did not have to use this freedom for their sake, and I did
not have to despise them with their works. I therefore did what they did
until I taught them that it was not necessary, but only faith in Christ
was sufficient. So I came to the Gentiles, but then did nothing of what
I did with the Jews, but ate and drank entirely the same as they, until
I preached Christ to them. How would they have admitted me if I had
immediately aroused their disgust in these indifferent (neutralibus)
things? If it is otherwise free, yes, meritorious, to suffer, to endure,
to die, to work for one\'s brother and for one\'s neighbor, how much
more may any works of the law be done, if this is required by brotherly
love, if only you know that this must not be done out of compulsion of
the law (for this driver is overcome by the child who is given to us),
but out of love that serves voluntarily and cheerfully? Therefore, if
the brother\'s need should require that you be circumcised, you may do
it not only without danger (because you are not doing it for the law\'s
sake, and because it requires you to be circumcised), but also because
you are doing it voluntarily and cheerfully.

nöthigt), but rather let yourself be circumcised with great merit.

\(12\) Wherefore the apostle saith with good consideration, not, He
would not, he would not; but, He was not compelled to be circumcised.
Circumcision would not have been evil, but now that Christ justifies us
by his grace alone, to force you to be circumcised as if it were
necessary in order to be justified would be ungodly and an insult to the
justifying grace of Christ. Therefore, after you have received Christ,
the works of the law are like wealth, honor, power, civil righteousness
and any other temporal things: if you have them, you are not better
before God; if you lack them, you are not worse. But you would be
exceedingly bad if you wanted to claim that they were necessary in order
to please God. Therefore look at the words of the apostle, in which it
is expressed how the matter is to be understood. He says: \"forced,\"
\"freedom,\" \"to take captive,\" \"to be subject,\" by which he
sufficiently interprets this, namely, that such people were among them
who held on to him, because he sometimes kept the law, as he was allowed
and free to do, and sometimes did the opposite, depending on whether he
saw that it served to win souls and to preach the gospel. But they
betrayed him and accused him of not keeping the law, of not circumcising
the Gentiles, 2c., and wanted to force him, which 1) he calls \"taking
captive\" and \"being subject\" here.

\(13\) For this is the liberty of which he boasts that we have it in
Christ, that we are by no means bound to any outward work, not even to
one, but are free in all things, against every person, at all times, and
in every way, unless brotherly love and peace be violated, as it is said
in Rom. 13:8, \"Owe no man anything, but to love one another.\"
Therefore a true Christian, as he says later Cap. 3, 28, is neither free
nor bond, Jew nor Gentile, male nor female, priest (clericus) nor
layman, spiritual (religiosus) nor worldly (religiosus).

1\) Latin: Hnarn, which will either refer to legern, or it is to be
added eoaetionem.

1414 Lri. Ill, 197-199. Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 78-80. 1415

He does not pray, he does not read, he does not do, he does not refrain,
but is completely free (indifferent) to all things, doing and refraining
as a matter comes before him or steps away, as Samuel (1 Sam. 10, 6. 7.)
said to Saul: \"You will become a different man,\" and: \"Do what comes
under your hand, for God is with you. But when one takes a wife, another
enters a monastery, one joins in this work, another in that (mancipat),
he does not do this out of compulsion of the law, but voluntarily
submits to servitude; if he does this out of love, he does very well,
but if he does it compelled by need or fear, he does not act
Christianly, but humanly.

14\. Therefore, people in our time are caught in a very serious error,
especially the clergy and the monks (clerus et religiosi), who for the
sake of the splendor of the external worship, because of their customs
and ceremonies (in which they are so deeply involved that they lead the
souls to perdition without salvation, They so arrogantly despise others
who do not shine in such appearance (speciuntur) that they also quarrel
without ceasing, and dare to testify publicly that they never want to
make common cause with them, nor do they want to keep it with them.

15 To the last. \"The truth of the gospel\" seems to be taken here not
as \"the right understanding of the gospel,\" but as \"the right custom
of the gospel,\" for the gospel is always true, but its custom is not
infrequently perverted by false pretenses (simulatione). For it is \"the
truth of the gospel\" that we know that we have all power \[1 Cor.
6:12\], that all things are pure to the pure \[Titus 1:15\], and that no
work of the law is necessary for salvation and righteousness, 1) since
the law is dead and no longer compels; but that for love\'s sake the law
may be kept, but not as if it were a law.

**V. 6. But of those who had the reputation of what they once were, I am
not interested, for God does not respect the reputation of men
(**personam hominis**).**

1\) sit is missing in the editions of the first Redaction and in the
Erlanger.

In this one place Paul adds \"esse aliquid\" to the time word
\"videbantur\", therefore it is added by the scribes (librariis) also in
the other two places 2). Here again something is omitted. \"But from
those who had the prestige,\" to this add: I received nothing, which he
expresses below, since he repeats it, \"they taught me nothing else\";
he uses the same word contulerunt \[i.e., taught by discussion\] 3) as
above. \[St. Augustine refers the words: \"What manner of men they
were\" to the unworthiness that the apostles were also once sinners, but
he does not care about that. Although he could have answered those who
reproached him that he had been a persecutor of the church and therefore
could not be compared with the other apostles: Now that God does not
regard the person of man, neither the apostleship of those, nor his
apostleship, become small, for the sake of former sins, for God calls
all in like manner to blessedness: yet I like the opinion of St. Jerome
(better), 3) who refers it to worthiness and supposes it to be said
against the false apostles). \"Which they have been\" must be referred
to worthiness, and is said against the false apostles, 4) who boasted of
the honor of the apostles, that they had walked with Christ, had seen,
heard, and received all things, since Christ was present, and therefore
they must be preferred to Paul, and the law kept with them. Paul,
however, does not rebuke the apostles in anything, and admits that what
is held against him is true, but meets them with a very good and
salutary answer, namely, that all this, with which they flourish, does
not belong to the matter at all.

17 For not for that reason is anything true or good, because it is
brought forward by a great man, a saint, or whatever other reputation it
may have, but because it comes from God alone. For what did it profit
the traitor Judas,

2\) The other two passages are: V. 2 of this chapter, and here,
immediately following in this verse. Compare K 8 in this chapter.

3\) Inserted by us.

4\) The words of this sentence up to here are in the second redaction
instead of the section in square brackets.

1416 Dri- Ill, 199-202. Shorter interpretation of Galatians 2, 6-10. W.
IX, 80-82. 1417

that he walked with Christ and had everything in common with the
apostles? Therefore, those vainly praise the outward reputation (larvam)
and outward fame of the apostles against the word of God, which God
reveals and teaches without this \"person\". If God did not respect the
prestige (personam) of the apostleship in Judas, He certainly did not
respect it in the others either.

\(18\) You must note that personam is taken far differently in this
passage than it is now in use in the schools, for it means 1) not a
rational and self-existent being (rationalem individuamque substantiam),
as those say, but an external quality of life, work or conduct,
according to which a man can judge another, praise him, reprove him,
call him \[and everything that is not in the spirit, according to the
saying (1 Sam. 16, 7\]: \"A man looks at what is before his eyes, but
the Lord looks at the heart,\" and Ps. 7, 10: \"God, you test hearts and
kidneys.\" So this, what is before the eyes, of whatever kind it may be,
you understand by person (personas), appearance (facies), outward
appearance (apparentias) and these things concerning the person
(personalia), if you want to understand the Scripture correctly, where
it speaks of the appearance of the person. Man always looks at the
person, never at the heart, therefore he always judges wrongly (male).
God never looks at the person, but always at the heart, and therefore he
judges the nations right \[Ps. 96, 10\]. At last he \[the interpreter of
the Latin Bible) translates πρδςωπου by faciem. Facies however in the

Scripture actually refers to everything that appears outwardly. Thus
Marc. 12, 14: \"You do not respect the appearance (faciem) of men\", and
1 Sam. 16, 7: \"Do not look at his form\" (vultum ejus). Since the word
persona has long since taken on a different meaning, it seems to me that
it would be a good idea to write \"facies\" instead of \"person\"
everywhere in the Bible.

\(19\) You see, then, how very salutary Paul instructs us, so that we
may not be influenced by empty appearances (titulo), names, reputations,
persons, and so on.

1\) significat is missing in the editions of the first Redaction and in
the Erlanger; in the Weimarsche it stands.

2\) Inserted by us.

deceived, let his counsel stand, since he says \[1 Thess. 5:21.\],
\"Test all things, and keep that which is good.\" What do you think he
would say now, if he heard that in the church everything is taught
without all examination by those who boast of the authority, the
holiness, the learning of their warrantors (auctorum)? He boldly asserts
that the reputation of the apostles does not serve the cause at all. But
the prestige of the apostles was holiness, authority, intimate contact
with Christ, and much greater things than you can now find in any pope,
although now only the authority of the pope is sufficient. Only the
holiness of the teachers rules that they teach what they like. But the
authority of the pope is certainly not regarded by God, since it is the
reputation of a man, nor the delusion of holiness, nor the glory of
science: all these are things that are based on the reputation of men
(personalia), therefore not firm enough that it should be necessary for
their sake to believe as truth what they hold.

20 But it is certain that even the apostles themselves did not like this
boasting of their reputation, since they knew that one should boast of
the Lord, not of himself or of what is seen in him, be it power or
holiness; and this reminder of Paul\'s is very good for you to remember.

**But those who had the reputation taught me nothing.**

\(21\) They did not again expound Paul\'s gospel and discuss it with him
(for this is what the word conferre means, as has already been said),
but they did not need to. It was enough that they approved it and (as
follows) saw that the gospel to the foreskin was familiar to him. He
says this to show that he taught correctly even according to the
judgment of the apostles, who boasted against Paul, and that the
apostles stood on his side against the false apostles who boasted of the
reputation of men. Therefore, he now goes into more detail:

**V. 7-10. But again, when they saw that I was trusted with the gospel
to the**

**\
**1418 Ari. 6ai. Ill, 202-204. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 82-84. 1419

**Foreskin, as Petro preached the gospel to the circumcision (for he
that was strong with Petro for the apostleship among the circumcision
was strong with me also among the Gentiles), and knew the grace that was
given unto me, Jacob, and Cephas, and John, which were esteemed pillars;
they gave me and Barnaba the right hand, and became one with us, that we
should preach among the Gentiles, and they among the circumcision, only
that we should remember the poor, which also I have been diligent to
do.**

22 \[St. Jerome thinks that there is a rearrangement of the words here
(hyperbaton), and that what is inserted in the middle must be omitted
and read like this: \"But again they gave me and Barnaba the right hand
and united with us\" 2c. It seems to me that after his manner he (Paul)
is lacking something in the speech, for in the meantime he gets carried
away and digresses to other things, so that he has also inserted an
intercalation (parenthesi), and so he does not return to the speech he
has begun. I would add one word, as: But again they saw and approved the
things which were mine which I had taught, and seeing from this
discussion 2c.\] Behold, Paul and Peter have one and the same gospel,
the one being sent as an apostle to the Gentiles, the other to the Jews.
How then can the false apostles boast of Peter and the apostles against
Paul, since they teach the same thing? If Peter, James and John had not
agreed with what Paul taught the Galatians, they would certainly have
punished him. But now they even praise him and give him the right hand
as a sign of fellowship (dextras societatis). There were not yet
disputes in the church about the primacy of the churches and the popes.
Peter, John, and James do not consider it beneath their dignity that
Paul and Barnabas should be their comrades and equal (aequales) to them
(but in the course of time and vices, as Jerome says, commonality
\[societas\] has ceased and force and precedence have taken its place),
as follows \"Gave they their right hands to me and Barnabas.\"

1\) quod sequitur is missing in the Erlanger.

23 (Also this seems to be spoken after the Hebrew way, \"the rights of
the covenant\" (dextras societatis) instead of: \"the right hand for the
sign of the community (dextras socias) or for the fortification of the
community; if he does not rather want that they did not give them the
right hand for worship and kissing, so that they should confess their
reverence. See that Paul nevertheless preserves the order and reverence
due to dignity. He sets Jacobus before Peter, because he was bishop at
Jerusalem, but the other apostles departed and arrived. For it is said
that the apostles so ordered it that Peter, James and John, according to
the teaching of Christ \[Matth. 23, 11. 12.\], should humble themselves,
since they were higher and greater than the others during Christ\'s
lifetime.

He does not say: He who cooperated (cooperatus), but: \"He who was
powerful\" (operatus). But he understands what he describes in detail in
1 Cor. 12, 4. ff. that \"there are many powers, but One God, who works
all in all\". But also the Greek word εργήσας denotes (like Eras

mus confirms\] more than the Latin operari (to act), namely, to show its
effective power. (Hence Jerome says there was a hidden power working
with Paul\'s power\]. This is the grace of the Spirit, by which he
multiplies the various gifts and works in the apostles, and works
powerfully in the hearers.

\(25\) Behold, with how great delicacy Paul knows how to choose the
words, \"the gospel to the foreskin,\" \"the gospel to the
circumcision,\" \"the apostleship among the circumcision,\" \"the
apostleship among the Gentiles\"; he only gives the names of the
ministry and the work. For he no doubt takes the word \"gospel\" for the
office of preaching the gospel, and says, \"to the foreskin,\" \"to the
Gentiles,\" because he administered this office among the Gentiles.
\"Apostleship,\" however, by its very name expresses the office. But in
our time they are only names of dignity. (For it is appalling to think
how much the gospel is despised by those who go along under its title,
when we consider what the word

1420 Lri. ttai. Ill, 204-207. shorter interpretation d. Galatians .\],
7-10. W. IX, 84-87. 1421

God is, and at what a high price it is brought about that it could be
revealed to men\]. It was not enough for him to say, \"When they saw
that the gospel was confided in me,\" but he adds, \"When they knew the
grace that was given me.\" The ministry they saw, the grace they
recognized. How so? Namely, the grace of wisdom, by which he was rich in
words before others; and of power, by which he had done wonders among
the Gentiles; in word and work the grace was recognized in him. For this
reason, for example, he considered it necessary to present these two
things at the same time, lest someone take upon himself the ministry of
the word who lacks the grace by which he can administer such a ministry.
We see that many are trusted with the gospel and the apostolic office,
but we do not recognize grace in them, for they cannot prove it either
by word or deed.

26\. \"Who were regarded as pillars.\" Dear, why doesn\'t he say, \"They
were pillars\"? Does he not grant them this glory? Far be it from him!
He speaks of the thing as it is. For the fact that someone is a pillar
in the church concerns the person and is according to reputation; God
does not respect this. For this is indeed, as men look at it and think,
necessary for the sake of those who are subject (propter subjectos), but
this is not the thing itself in which one must place one\'s trust. It is
necessary for kings and princes to be, that is, to be regarded as such
and to be considered as such in the opinion of men; incidentally, they
are something respectable (personae) before the world and in outward
life, but inwardly, where God looks, perhaps lower than the lowest
servants.

\(27\) Thus the episcopate, the priesthood, and every order and state in
the church is something respectable (personae), but the thing itself
does not remain for eternity. Therefore, he speaks of them in a very
appropriate way, using the word \"they were regarded for it\" against
the unintelligent people, who do not look at the appearance of the
person differently from the right things themselves. Therefore, the word
\"they were regarded\" (videbantur) must not be taken in the same way as
one would take it.

it is now used, saying of a false or apparent thing, It seems so to me;
but simply, \"They were regarded for it,\" that is, they were thought to
be pillars and respected, and they were real pillars, so far as it can
be in this life, in which all that is seen is only \"person\" and
outward appearance of things.

\(28\) And this is a speech in which something is omitted (ecliptica):
\"That we should preach among the Gentiles, but they among the
circumcision\"; add to this: 1) the gospel, or be apostles, and to this
expression (tropo) of Paul one must already get used to (tandem). But
they did not separate these offices in such a way that Paul should not
have instructed a Jew, and Peter not a Gentile, because the epistles of
both show the opposite (therefore the circumstantial word \"alone\"
cannot be connected with the preceding), but (as Jerome thinks) each of
these two peoples should be sent its own apostle, to the Gentiles the
one who taught the free faith without the burden of the law, to the Jews
the one who tolerated the deeply ingrained law in order to be able to
strengthen the faith gradually.

The poor, whom he calls \"the poor saints\" in Rom. 15, 26, are those
whom the Jews had robbed of their possessions for the sake of Christ, as
he writes to the Hebrews \[Cap. 10, 34\], or those who had given their
goods to the church, as Apost. 4, 32. is written; perhaps also those who
suffered want at the time of the Theurung, which, as Lucas mentions in
the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 11, 28, happened under the emperor
Claudius. But it is certain that what he reports in this chapter took
place under Claudius, if you count the years right.

\(30\) But you see that this is also an apostolic work, the second task
of the apostles, that they take care of the poor. For he seems to have
added this as an exhortation, knowing that the successors of the
apostles would be concerned with other things than the care of the poor.
It would like to make one rightly

1\) In his Bible translation, Luther added this addition: \"preached\".

1422 Sai, III, 207-209. Interpretations on the Epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 87. . 142H

why he equates himself primarily to Peter and remains silent about the
other apostles. Yes, that he also attributes the apostleship to Peter to
the circumcision, and likewise remains silent about the others. Perhaps,
as he was the first among the apostles, so also the false apostles
praised him the most to the detriment of the gospel; or he again wanted
to give a warning against future abominations (moustris) beforehand.

**V.11-13. And when Peter was come to Antioch, I resisted him in mine
eyes: for there was a lamentation come upon him. For before some of
Jacob came, he did eat with the Gentiles: but when they were come, he
withdrew himself, and separated himself, because he feared them that
were of the circumcision. And the rest of the Jews hypocritized with
him, so that Barnabas also was deceived into hypocrisy with him.**

31 (This is the Abel (Judg. 11, 33. 1 Sam. 6, 18.) or the great plain on
which the two most famous fathers Jerome and Augustine fought fiercely.
Jerome based his argument on the fact that Paul had done something
similar, since he, Apost. 16, 3, circumcised Timothy for the sake of the
Jews who were in the same place, but by no means out of compulsion of
the law, since the apostles had already determined in the 15th chapter
that the Gentiles should not be burdened with the burden of the law. But
the father of Timothy had been a Gentile, and what is more, in the same
chapter he teaches that the doctrines and decrees of the apostles are to
be kept, against which he himself circumcises Timothy at the same time.
Likewise, Apost. 18, 18. he circumcised his head at Keuchrea and had a
vow, and Cap. 21, 24. 26. he went into the temple with four men who had
a vow upon them, and purified (sanctificavit) himself with them, and the
sacrifice was offered for him. Likewise, according to his own testimony
1 Cor. 9:20, \"To the Jews I became as a Jew.\" So St. Jerome says: How
presumptuous he is, what right has he to punish Peter, who was the
apostle of the circumcision, for what he, the apostle of the Gentiles,
as he is (rightly) 1) blamed,

1\) Inserted by us.

himself has committed? Therefore he thinks that Paul only used a
hypocritical punishment against Peter, so that Paul, because Peter had
put the preaching of grace in danger by his hypocrisy, punished in a new
way of fighting (as he says), by a new hypocrisy or application of
contradicting. The Greek text seems favorable to this opinion, because
there it says \"according to reputation\" (secundum faciem) or \"before
sight\" (in facie). For as Erasmus says here, the preposition χ \"τα
with the accusative means: after (secundum), or: for the sake of (per);
but with the genitive: before (*in*), or: against (adversus). Here,
however, \^\"τά πρόςωπον means, according to reputation, before sight,
apparently, before others, whereas, namely, with himself, in a pious
hypocrisy, he was of quite a different opinion. This also (seems to be
in favor of this view), 2) that in the Greek it is not said, \"He was
penal,\" but, \"He was punished.\" For he could have been punished by
weak and ignorant people, while yet he was not penal. 3) - St. Augustine
bases himself on this word which St. Paul said above (Cap. 1, 20.):
\"But what I write to you, behold, God knows I do not lie,\" lest, when
Paul calls Peter culpable, and says that he resisted him under eyes and
punished him, this in truth did not happen so, without hypocrisy, and he
did not tell the truth, as he had sworn to tell the truth, and yet he
had lied, at least with a lie of favor (mendacio officioso). And so the
reputation of the whole holy scripture will waver if in one place
something different is said than is meant (aliud dicatur, aliud
sentiatur). It is necessary that Peter had been punishable in truth, and
had been punished in truth by Paul, or Paul must have lied, since he
punished and rebuked him, and even if one could avoid the opinion of St.
Augustine by the Greek text, which does not say: \"punishable\",

2\) Added by us.

3\) The understanding of this already difficult passage is made even
more difficult by incorrect punctuation in the editions. It should be
punctuated like this: Lt iNrni, tiuoä in Arueoo non: Rexreüensüülis
ernt\* 86(1: Ii6xr6N6N8U8 6rut 6te.

1424 Lri. \"ai. in, 2os-211. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 2, 11-13. W. ix, 87-89. 1425

but \"punished,\" as Jerome also notes, it nevertheless always remains
true and certain that he was punishable, by the act of Paul, who would
not have punished an unpunishable man. But let us see the text, which
will be the best judge in this matter\]. 1) First of all, it is certain
that Paul did not punish Peter because he had lived according to pagan
ways (as St. Jerome would have it), for then he would in truth have
punished the same thing in himself, and Jerome\'s opinion would be quite
firm, who thought that lawful things were not permitted after the
passion of Christ and were fatal. For here the holy man erred, misled by
some of his ancestors; but for this he punished him, that he
hypocritized. The hypocrisy of Peter, I say, Paul did not tolerate. For
this he approves, that he had lived after the Gentile manner, and again
after the Jewish manner; but that, when the Jews came, he withdrew, and
separated himself from the food of the Gentiles, he rejects. 2) By this
deprivation he caused Gentiles and Jews to believe that the Gentile way
was forbidden and the Jewish way necessary, while he knew that both were
free and permitted. Therefore, the text also indicates that Peter knew
very well that this was free, because \"before (he says) he ate with the
Gentiles\"; likewise, that he feared those who had come from Jacob, so
that he did this out of fear, not out of ignorance. For Paul does not
say, Why do you live according to the Gentile way? Nor does he say,
\"Why do you return to Judaism? He was allowed to do both; but, \"Why do
you force the Gentiles to live Jewishly?\" This compulsion was
punishable because of hypocrisy and deprivation,

1\) The whole section from the beginning of this paragraph to here is
missing not only in Heidnecker, who translated only the second edition,
but also in all other German editions, also in Walch, although he says
in the preface to the 9th volume, p. 7K: \"The German translation of the
amended edition has been printed, but at the same time that which was
omitted in the same edition and had been in the very first one has been
included. Walch has turned to this statement very little. All longer
sections of the first edition are also missing in his work, as already
noted in the preface to this volume.

2\) In the first redaction and in the Erlanger roxrokat is missing.

The Gentiles and the Jews believed that the Jewish way was necessary,
but the Gentile way was forbidden.

32\) So he does not complain that the other Jews allowed the food,
whether it was Gentile or Jewish (because they knew that this was
allowed), but about the hypocrisy of Peter and the forcing of the
Gentiles and Jews to Judaism as something necessary. Likewise, he does
not complain that Barnabas ate with them in a Jewish or a Gentile way,
but that he was deceived into the same hypocrisy, and that he consented
to forcing Gentiles and Jews into the Jewish life.

For this reason Paul fights against compulsion and for freedom. For
faith in Christ alone is necessary for us to be righteous; everything
else is completely free, and no longer either commanded or forbidden.
Therefore, if Peter had done both with right courage (fronte), he would
not have been blameworthy, just as Paul did both confidently. \[To what
Jerome argues, we say that it must be admitted that the \"punished\"
(reprehensus**)** in the Greek refers to those who accused Peter to Paul
that he had eluded them, and induced Paul to this punishment of Peter;
but he was nevertheless truly punishable (reprehensibilis)**\].**
Further, whether Peter thereby committed a mortal sin (as they call it),
let others see. This I know, that those who were forced into Judaism by
such hypocrisy would have been lost if they had not been set right again
by Paul, because they began to seek their righteousness not by faith in
Christ but in the works of the law. Therefore Peter gave a strong
(efficax) offense with the others, not in life but in faith and to
eternal damnation. For Paul would not have resisted him so confidently
if there had been a slight danger and venial sin here. For he complains
that the truth of the gospel has been abandoned; but if one does not
follow the truth of the gospel, this is already a sin of unbelief.

34\. it does not please me the great trouble that

3\) Jena thorn. Ill has \^nasritrir instead of \^ueritur.

1426 Lri. Quay. IH. 2H-2I3. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 89-92. 1427

The saints are not to be excused and exalted too much, especially when
this is against what the Scriptures say. It is better that Peter and
Paul should be fallen into unbelief, even that they should be cursed, as
he said above \[Cap. 1:8\], than that one tittle of the gospel should
fall away.

35 I do not approve of the fact that the Greekχατά πρόςωπον*,* \"before
the eyes\" (in facie), can be used to prove Paul\'s hypocrisy. Paul was
not hypocritical, but resisted with full conviction (corde) the
hypocrisy of Peter, and \"before the eyes\" is the same as \"before
all\", or publicly, as St. Ambrose also interprets it. So it is also
said afterwards, \"I spoke to Petro before all.\" For I have also said
this above \[§ 18\], that facies (according to the way of Scripture)
signifies that which is public, and the opposite of that which is
hidden, so that there a man can see and judge, but here only God. By
this word he does not show his insolence and hopefulness, as the foolish
Porphyrius accuses Paul, but the necessity and the highest modesty. For
he did not punish Peter until all the others had given their consent,
then his companion Barnabas had also been deceived, and now there was no
one left at all who could stand up for the truth of the gospel, and the
actions of those people had already gained a reputation against
evangelical freedom. It is due to his modesty that he did not punish
soon, but allowed all to be deceived first; but the misery can be seen
in the fact that the gospel had already fallen.

36 Or if one wants to stubbornly stand on the meaning of the Greek word
that \"in sight\" (secundum faciem) should definitely mean: according to
appearance, as John 7:24.: \"Judge not according to appearance,\"
nevertheless this does not enforce that hypocrisy was with Paul; but
rather this will be the meaning, that though he resisted him from the
heart, chastising him with the outward word, yet not from a malicious
heart, as it is said Sir. 7, 26. (Vulg.), \"If thou hast daughters, keep
their bodies, and show not thy face cheerfully against them.\" Thus are

Parents harshly against the children according to reputation, but not
from the heart, but also not in a hypocritical way; and every Christian
must be able to punish his brother and disagree with him, and yet keep a
gentle heart and one mind (unitate) towards him. So it is also said of
God Himself, Klagel. 3, 33: \"For He does not afflict and grieve men
from the heart.\" But who would want to say that God is pious when He
afflicts and grieves men? So also Paul punished Peter with a right
punishment, being hard in his eyes but kind in his heart against Peter.
It is therefore a true guilt that Peter has, which was very worthy of
punishment, and in both no hypocrisy, as St. Jerome thinks for it; but
preceding (prior) was that hypocrisy, by which Peter forced 1) that the
Jewish and legal being had to be kept.

Question: Since Peter, fearing the anger of the weak, withdrew in good
opinion (pia cogitatione), what would Paul do if in the same case there
were weak people on both sides, Gentiles and Jews? Whom should he give
way to? Because it is not difficult to agree with a single one. For if
he ate with the Jews, he would offend the Gentiles, as Peter did; if he
ate with the Gentiles, he would offend the Jews, as Peter feared here.
In such a case, one must preserve and explain the evangelical truth by
showing the reason and cause for it, as Paul does here, since he
punishes Peter in front of everyone, and shows that it is permissible to
live according to the Gentile way; and above (vv. 3-5), since he did not
admit that the Gentile Titus would be circumcised, he did not deviate
even one hour. But if here the weak Jews do not want to follow, they
must be let go. For it is better to keep one part with the gospel truth
than to lose both parts at the same time with the gospel.

38\) But how I would like that this passage \[in the letter\] 2) of the
apostle would be very well known to all Christians, especially to the
religious.

1\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: roMdat
instead of voMdat.

2\) Inserted by us.

1428 Lri. 6ÄI. Ill, 213-215. shorter interpretation of Galatians 2,
11-14. W. IX, 92-94. 1429

The Church is not a place of the religious (religiosis), the clergy
(clero) and the numerous superstitious people who, for the sake of the
papal laws or their statutes, do nothing else 1) but overthrow the
evangelical faith and charity; Nor do they have so much sound judgment
that, if brotherly love requires it, they should cast off their burdens,
unless they have been bought again for money indulgence and permission
(indulta); since neither the popes nor the church can impose (statuere)
anything further than so far as free love is permitted and the good
deeds which one exercises toward the other. For if the pope can forbear
anything, and the cause exists that it is useful, or honorable, or,
which is the highest, love, then you already need no other permission
(dispensatione) than your own. For even no human law can extend so far
as to bind you even a hair\'s breadth in these matters, but must always
exclude these things, willingly or unwillingly. But if this cause is not
present, and you follow your desires alone, then the pope\'s forbearance
will certainly be his own and your ruin and downfall. O woe! How many
torments of conscience has this ignorance of God\'s law and man\'s laws
introduced into the church.

39 I cannot pass over this remarkable story, which is particularly
appropriate here. Of St. Spiridion, bishop of Cyprus, it is written in
the first book of the Tripartite, 2) that he took in a stranger during
Lent and, because he had nothing else, served him pork, praying first
and asking God\'s permission. But when the guest refused and confessed
that he was a Christian, he said: \"For this reason you must refuse no
longer, for all things are pure to the pure, as God\'s word teaches us.
\[Not as if I wanted the commandments of the forefathers to be despised
in any way, but (I want) them to be rightly understood, that where
necessity or love is the antithesis of the commandments of the
forefathers, they are to be obeyed.

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, the Erlanger Und der
Weimarschen non raro instead of non ni8i.

2\) For the Tripartita, see Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. XVIII, 466,
note 1.

(especially if one has first sought the counsel of the confessor or a
good man), such a commandment must be broken with godly humility and
reverence, so that it is not necessary for those confessionalia and
indulta to be sold and bought. For if it is not lawful for you to break
the laws for some other cause, no dispensation, no letter of confession,
no indulgence (indultum) in and of itself will be sufficient for you.
But if there is another cause, you already have no need of these things,
as I have said.\]

\(40\) But I would admonish the bishops (pontifices) that they should at
last let themselves lament the dangers of the church and repeal its
laws, by which, as we see, the consciences are only entangled, or money
is fished, moreover, the trust in Christ is completely stifled, that is,
the true Christians are exterminated and the church is filled with
hypocrites and idols.

**V.14. But when I saw that they were not walking aright according to
the truth of the gospel, I said publicly to Petro in the presence of
all, \"If you, who are a Jew, are living Gentilely and not Jewishly, why
do you force the Gentiles to live Jewishly?**

41 Paul reveals Peter and exposes his hypocrisy (for this alone he
punishes). Peter was hypocritical that he did not live according to the
Gentile way, but according to the Jewish way. But Paul says, \"Yes, you
live according to the Gentile way and have lived that way, and now you
are pretending otherwise, and by this hypocrisy you are forcing the
Gentiles to live not according to the Gentile way but according to the
Jewish way, and so you are forcing them under the bondage of the law.
From this it is clear that St. Jerome did not understand Paul correctly.
For Jerome understands it in such a way that Peter\'s hypocrisy
consisted in the fact that he lived Jewishly for the sake of the Jews by
keeping the law, which he was not allowed to keep. But Paul does not
punish this hypocrisy, nor does he care about it, but the hypocrisy with
which he pretended and separated himself from the Gentile food, as if it
were not allowed to use it;

1430 Li-1. \"Li. Ill, 215-217. interpretations On the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 94-S7. 1431

because this hypocrisy was dangerous to the gospel, not that one.

There were also some who claimed that this Cephas was another, one of
the seventy disciples, as it is written in the Ecclesiastical History of
Eusebius. But this is overturned by St. Jerome in a learned and powerful
way. For with a perverse zeal they wanted to protect Peter, while Paul
had written this to the Galatians in order to shut the mouths of those
who spoke of him in a diminutive way, that his teaching was to be
considered inferior to that of Peter.

43\) On the other hand, he says that he did not get his teaching from
men, but from God; moreover, it had not only been approved by Peter and
the apostles, but Peter himself had also been punished by Him, so that
they now had nothing left to offer to Paul. Paul, since Peter had also
made a mistake in the truth of the Gospel by depriving others of the
freedom he claimed for himself out of fear of the Jews and thus acted
unjustly toward them. In this Paul certainly shows that he is higher
than Peter, but this supremacy (as they say) has not been a cause of
hope, because it is a reputation (persona) of men, which God does not
respect. \[Because of this, the See of Rome and the See of
Constantinople used to quarrel in terrible discord, as if this were the
only thing necessary in the Church, as if the unity of the Church lay in
the prestige of a man and the primacy of power, but not in faith, hope,
and love in the spirit. - This too must not be disregarded, although it
is a well-known and common thing that XXX (Cephe), as Jerome says, is
the same in Hebrew, and even in Syriac, as *Πέτρος* or πέτρα in Greek,
*and* saxum or soliditas in Latin, as is also indicated by the decrees
taken from Leo and Ambrose. So the decree of Nicolaus is in error (if
the title does not lie), which says that Cephe is the same as head, so
that it makes Peter the head of the Church apart from Christ with the
well-known anxious concern (affectione). The Greek

*χεραλη* means head, but not the Syriac cephe\]. ^1^)

**V. 15. Although we are Jews by nature, and not sinners from among the
Gentiles.**

44\. He compares the Jews and the Gentiles. \"We,\" he says, \"are Jews
by nature.\" In legal righteousness, indeed, we surpass the Gentiles,
who are sinners, when compared with us, since they have neither the law
nor the works of the law, but by this we are not righteous before GOD;
this righteousness of ours is an external one. And he treats this
statement in great detail in the Letter to the Romans, chapters 1 and 2,
where he first declares that the Gentiles were very great sinners, but
when he turns to the Jews in the second chapter, he states that even
though they are not such people as he had described the Gentiles, they
are nevertheless sinners, because they kept the law by heart, not
inwardly, and while they boasted of the law, they dishonored God by
transgressing the law.

**V.16. But because we know that man is not justified by the works of
the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ, we also believe in Jesus Christ,
so that we may be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of
the law; for by the works of the law no flesh is justified.**

\(45\) We are justified, he says, because we are Jews by nature, not
sinners like the Gentiles, but through the righteousness of the works of
the law, by which no one is justified before God. Therefore we also,
like the Gentiles, consider our righteousness as filth, and seek to be
justified by faith in Christ, being now sinners at the same time with
the Gentiles, being justified at the same time with the Gentiles, since
God (as Peter says Acts 15:9) \"made no distinction between us and them,
and purified their hearts by faith.\"

46\. but because this passage seems to be inconsistent to those who have
not yet got used to the theo-

1\) Luther means the decree vist. 22. o. Kserosanotn Romans, which is
attributed to Anaclet; in the Corpus jnris osnonwi a decree of Nicolaus
precedes; hence the error.

1432 L-i. in, 217-220. shorter interpretation d, Galatians 2, 16. w. ix,
97-100. 14ZZ.

Since we have become accustomed to Paul\'s logic, and since St. Jerome
also struggles to understand it, let us elaborate on what we began above
about the paternal statutes. Also, among the existing scribes, I see
none who could satisfy in this doctrine, but only Augustine, and even he
not in all places, but only where he fights against the Pelagians, the
enemies of divine grace. This one will make Paul easy to understand and
clear to you.

\(47\) Therefore it must be known above all things that man becomes
righteous in two ways, and that in completely opposite ways (modis);
first, externally, by works of his own power, which are the human
righteousnesses brought about by usage and habit (as they say), as
described by Aristotle and other philosophers, as required by civil and
ecclesiastical laws in ceremonies, as produced by the inspiration of
reason and prudence. For thus they think that by doing righteous things
a righteous man comes into being, by moderation a moderate man, and the
like. The Law of Moses, and even the Ten Commandments, have such a
righteousness effect, namely, where one serves God out of fear of
punishment or because of the promised reward, does not swear by the name
of God, honors parents, does not kill, does not rob, does not break
marriage 2c.

\(48\) This is a servile, reward-seeking, fictitious, apparent, outward,
temporal, worldly, human righteousness, which avails nothing for future
glory, but receives its reward in this life, glory, wealth, honor,
power, friendship, health, or at least peace and tranquility, and less
evil than those who behave otherwise, as Christ describes the Pharisees,
and St. Augustine the Romans in the first book of his De civitatei, Cap.
8. Augustine describes the Romans in the first book of his De civitate
Dei, Cap. 8. This deceives even wise and great men very much, if they
are not well instructed in the holy Scriptures. This righteousness is
called by Jeremiah, Cap. 2, 13, \"wells full of holes that give no
water.\" And yet (as he says there) it causes them to presume to be
without sin, and it is the cause of their actions.

It is completely similar to what we see a monkey do when it wants to
imitate man, or what those who are masked on the stage and in games
show, and it is completely peculiar to hypocrites and idols. Therefore
it is called lying and ungodliness in the Scriptures. Hence comes the
name BethAven, the house of ungodliness. To this kind also belong today
the deceivers of souls who, trusting in free will, make a good (as they
say) resolution, and since they have brought forth the act of loving God
above all things from their natural powers, they immediately presume
most shamefully that they have obtained the grace of God. These are the
ones who want to heal the woman who has the issue of blood (that is the
sinful conscience) with works, consume all her goods, and only make it
worse with her \[Marc. 5, 25. f.\].

Secondly, man is justified inwardly by faith, by 1) grace, where man
despairs of the first righteousness altogether, and eighths it like an
insolent garment \[Is. 64, 6.\], prostrates himself before God, sighs
humbly, and confesses with the publican that he is a sinner, saying
\[Luc. 18, 13.), \"God, be merciful to me a sinner!\" \"This one (says
Christ) went down justified to his house.\" For this (righteousness) is
nothing other than the invocation of the divine name. But the name of
GOD is mercy, truth, righteousness, power, wisdom, and the calling of
one\'s own name. But our name is sin, falsehood, vanity, foolishness,
according to the words \[Ps. 116, 11.): \"All men are liars.\" \[Ps. 39,
6.), \"How nothing are all men!\" 2c. 2) But the invocation of the
divine name, when it is in the heart and done rightly from the heart,
shows that the heart \[of the invoker) and the name of the Lord are One
Thing and are connected with each other. Therefore, it is impossible
that the heart should not share in the same virtues in which the name of
the Lord abounds. But the heart and the name of the Lord are connected
through faith. The

1\) The Jena edition, Dom. I and Dom. Ill and the Basel edition have ot
instead of ox.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger, this
\"sto.\" is incorrectly placed after vunitus.

1434 Art. 6ai. Ill, 220-222. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 100-102. 1435

But faith comes by the word of Christ, by which the name of the Lord is
preached, as it is said \[Ps. 22, 23.\], \"I will preach thy name unto
my brethren,\" and again \[Ps. 102, 22.), \"That they may preach in Zion
the name of the Lord.\" Now as the name of the LORD is pure, holy,
righteous, true, good 2c., so it makes the heart quite like itself when
it touches the heart, or is touched by the heart (which is by faith).

50\. Thus it comes about that all sins are forgiven for those who
believe in the name of the LORD, and righteousness is imputed to them
because of your name, O LORD, because it is good, not because of their
merit, for neither did they deserve to hear. But after the heart has
been justified by faith based on His name, God gives them power to
become children of God \[John 1:12\] by pouring out the Holy Spirit into
their hearts, who enlarges them by His love and makes them peaceful and
joyful, fit for all good works, conquerors of all evil, even despisers
of death and hell. Here all laws cease immediately and all works of the
law; everything is now free, permitted, and the law is fulfilled through
faith and love. Behold, this is what Christ has earned for us, namely,
that the name of the Lord is preached to us (that is, the mercy and
truth of God), whoever believes in Him will be saved.

51 Therefore, if your conscience torments you, and you are a sinner
seeking to be righteous, what will you do? Wilt thou look about to see
what works thou mayest do, or where thou mayest go? No, but see to it
that you both hear and remember the name of the Lord, that is, that God
is righteous, good and holy, and immediately cling to him in the firm
belief that he is such toward you, and immediately you are already so
constituted and like him. But nowhere can you see the name of the Lord
more clearly than in Christ, where you will see how good, lovely,
faithful, just and true God is, since He did not spare His own Son. He
will draw you to Himself through Christ. Without this righteousness

It is impossible for the heart to be pure, so it is impossible for the
righteousness of men to be true. For here the name of the Lord is used
for truth, but there it is used for vanity, because here man gives honor
to God, but dishonor to himself; but there he gives honor to himself and
dishonor to God. This is the right secret art (cabbala) of the name of
the Lord, not of the Tetragrammaton, 1) of which the Jews invent fables
in an exceedingly superstitious way. Faith in the name of the Lord is
the right understanding of the law, the end of the law and absolutely
everything in all. But this name of his he has put in Christ, as he
foretold through Moses.

\(52\) This is the precious (liberalis) righteousness that is given
freely, which is solid, an inherent righteousness, eternal, true,
heavenly, divine, which neither earns nor receives anything in this
life, nor does it seek anything. Rather, because it consists in Christ
and his name (which is righteousness), the righteousness of Christ and
the righteousness of the Christian are one and the same, ineffably
connected with each other. For from 2) Christ it gushes and springs
forth, as he says John 4:14: \"The water that I shall give him shall
become in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.\" Thus
it comes to pass that, just as through alien sin all men became sinners,
so through alien righteousness all become righteous, as it is said in
Rom. 5:19: \"Just as through one man\'s disobedience many became
sinners, so through one man\'s, Christ\'s, righteousness many become
righteous.\" This is the mercy that was proclaimed by all the prophets
before, this is the blessing that was promised to Abraham and his seed,
as we will see hereafter.

\(53\) Now we come back to the text and see how rightly the apostle
says: \"Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, but
only by faith in Jesus Christ, we also believe in Jesus Christ, that we
may be saved.

1\) i.e. Nipp; this name of God is called Tetragrammaton because it
consists of four letters.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlangen one, the
following is missing

1436 Lri- Ill, 222-224. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 2, 16. w. IX, 102-105. 1437

become righteous by faith in Christ, and not by works of the law.\" In
these words he indicates each of these two righteousnesses, rejecting
the former but accepting the latter.

54 You shall do likewise, my beloved brother. First of all, hear that
Jesus means blessedness, and Christ means the anointing of mercy, and if
you firmly believe this unheard-of blessedness and mercy, you will be
justified, that is, believe that he will be your blessedness and mercy,
and then it will be so without any doubt. Therefore, the teaching that
the forgiveness of sins is obtained through insignificant, small
reparations and through forced repentance, is quite ungodly and
exceedingly pagan, leaving this doctrine of faith in Christ completely
undone, as the great crowd of stupid teachers of sentences (senten-
tiastrorum) is now doing theology.

\(55\) Here it is to be noted that the apostle does not reject the works
\[of the law\], as St. Jerome also teaches in this passage, but the
trust in the works \[of the law\^, that is, he does not say that one
should not do works, but he says that by them no one can be justified.
Therefore, this word of the apostle must be read with emphasis and good
concern (epitasi), since he says: \"Man is not justified by the works of
the law\", as if he wanted to say: I allow works \[of the law\] to be
done, but I say that by them a man is not justified, except in his own
sight and in the sight of men, and that they have their reward in this
life. Works of the law may be done, only one should know that they are
sins before God and already not right works \[of the law\]. And so he
destroys the trust in our righteousness, and says that above all works
of the law a much different righteousness is needed, namely the works of
God and grace.

\(56\) Likewise, you must also notice that he says in general, \"works
of the law,\" not only works that pertain to the ceremonies, but also
all works according to the holy ten commandments, because even these, if
done without faith and the right righteousness of God, are not
sufficient.

and by their shaminess inspire a false confidence in the hypocrites.
Therefore, he who wants to be saved must despair of all powers, works
and laws.

57\) Likewise, you must remember this 1) common expression of the
apostle, that he does not call \"works of the law,\" as others have it
in custom, because by them the law itself is fulfilled. For this
understanding is the cause that very many do not understand the apostle,
who cannot receive the works of the law otherwise than that they
celebrate righteousness and good, since the law itself is good and
righteous, therefore they are forced to understand by the law the
ceremonial laws, that these were then evil and dead; but they err. As
the ceremonial law was good and holy, so it is now, because it is
ordered by God Himself.

\(58\) The apostle constantly says that the law is not fulfilled by
works, but only by faith. Since the fulfillment of the law is
righteousness, but this does not belong to works but to faith, he cannot
understand by \"works of the law\" that by which the law is fulfilled.
What then? The rule of the apostle is this: Not works fulfill the law,
but the fulfillment of the law does works; not he who does righteous
things becomes righteous, but he who has become righteous does righteous
things. The former is righteousness and the fulfillment of the law
before works can take place, since these flow from the latter. Therefore
he calls them \"works of the law\" in contrast to the works of grace or
the works of God, because the works of the law are truly of the law, not
our works, since they do not come about by our will working them, but
the law presses them out by threats or draws them forth by promises. But
what is not done by our will of our own free will, but what is forced by
another, is no longer our work, but rather that of the driver. For the
works belong to him by whose command they are done. But they are done by
the command of the law, not by the pleasure of the will. This is
sufficiently evident if it were up to someone,

1\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger üuio
instead of üuue.

1438 6ai. Ill, 224-227. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, los-108. 1439

to live without the law, he would never voluntarily do works of the law.

59 Therefore in Isaiah, Cap. 9, 4.The law is called a \"driver,\"
saying, \"Thou hast broken the yoke of their burden, and the rod of
their shoulder, and the staff of their driver, as in the days of
Midian,\" for through the child given to us, in whom we believe, we
become free and have pleasure in the law, and we no longer belong to the
law, but the law is ours, and the works are not works of the law, but of
grace, from which they spring forth freely and sweetly, whereas formerly
the law enforced them fcharf and hard.

You will understand this if you divide the works into four classes:
Works of sin, which are done while evil desire reigns, without the
resistance of grace; works of the law, which are done while evil desire
is outwardly subdued, but inwardly glows all the more and hates the law,
that is, which are good in appearance but evil in heart; works of grace,
which are done while evil desire contends, but the spirit of grace
nevertheless retains the victory; works of peace and perfect health,
which, while evil desire is extinguished, are done with complete ease
and sweetness. This will take place in the life to come, here it begins.

**For by the works of the law no flesh is justified.**

61 He makes the same judgment in Rom. 3, 28. and proves it extensively
from Ps. 14, 3: \"There is not he that is righteous, that doeth good\"
2c. \[Therefore the works of the law must necessarily be sins, otherwise
they would certainly make one righteous; and so it is clear that
Christian righteousness and human righteousness are not only different,
but also opposed to each other, because the latter comes from works, but
the works come from the former.

62 Therefore, it is no wonder that Paul\'s theology fell away
completely, nor could it be understood, after those began to teach
Christians who lied that Aristotle\'s moral doctrine was entirely
consistent with the doctrine

Christ and Paul, understanding neither Aristotle nor Christ in the
least. For our righteousness looks down from heaven and descends to us.
But those godless people have presumed to ascend to heaven by their
righteousness, and to bring from there the truth which is applied to us
from the earth. So Paul stands firm: \"By the works of the law no flesh
is justified,\" as also the Psalm \[Ps. 143, 2.\] says: \"Before you no
living man is justified.\" So it only remains that the works of the law
are not works of righteousness, unless it is righteousness that we do.

**V.17. But if we ourselves, who seek to be justified by Christ, should
also be found sinners, Christ would be a minister of sin. Let this be
far off!**

63 That is, we have already said that we believe in Christ so that we
may be justified by faith in Christ. But if we are not justified in this
way, even if we are still sinners and in need of justification (because
you force us to be justified by the works of the law), then
justification by faith is nothing, and Christ has made us sinners by his
faith and in need of the righteousness of the law. This is quite
inconsistent and means to reject Christ altogether, because he should
have given us sin through his ministry in such a way that it first had
to be taken away through the law, and now the righteousness of the law
would be better than that of Christ. For the apostle bases his proof on
the fact that \[if the false teachers were right\] 1) impossible and
inconsistent things would follow, as if he wanted to say: If the law is
necessary for us who seek to be justified by Christ, we who have been
justified by Christ are still found to be sinners 2) and debtors to the
law. But if this is the case, then Christ did not justify us, but only
made us sinners, so that we might be justified by the law, which is
impossible. Therefore this also is impossible, that the law (I say)

1\) Inserted by us.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger
iuvkuiemur instead of inveuiraur.

1440 Vri. Ill, 227-2W. Shorter Interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 2, 17. W. IX, 108 f. 1441

and that we are justified by the works of the law. For as those who have
been justified in Christ, we are not found to be sinners, but righteous,
because Christ is not a minister of sin, but of righteousness. \[This is
the opinion of St. Jerome. St. Augustine explains it somewhat
differently and in a more forced manner\]. 64 But to understand the
apostle, you must notice that he covertly compares Moses with Christ.
For this is Paul\'s way of speaking, that he calls the law the cause of
sin and the power of sin, therefore he dares to call the office of the
law an office of death and sin, 2 Cor. 3, 7. \[according to the
Vulgate\]: \"But so the office of death, which is formed with letters in
the stones\" 2c., and Rom. 5, 10. ff. he explains how sin killed by the
law. Therefore, by Moses, the minister of the law, he understands the
minister of sin and death, because through the law comes sin and through
sin comes death, for he says Rom. 4:15: \"Where the law is not, there is
no transgression.\" To this he contrasts Christ, the minister of
righteousness, who fulfilled what Moses required by the law, which John
also does not entirely conceal, 1) but, Cap. 1, 17. says: \"The law
indeed was given through Moses, but grace and truth came to be through
JEsum Christ,\" as if to say: The law, but not grace and truth, was
given through Moses, so rather sin and transgression came through his
ministry.

Therefore, Christ is not a lawgiver, but the fulfiller of the law. Every
lawgiver is a servant of sin, because he gives cause for sin through the
law. Therefore he did not give the old law by himself but by the angels,
but the new one (that is, grace) he gave by himself, since he sent the
Holy Spirit from heaven. (But here again the misery of the church and
the Christian people confronts us, when I direct my gaze to the forests,
sandy deserts, clouds and seas of the Roman laws, whose titles one could
not even learn in a whole lifetime. Here speaks the

1\) non omnino tacet tackt is missing in the Erlanger.

In the same way, the Apostles confidently state that the laws are the
offices of sins, while our lawgivers boast that they oppose sins and
strife through the great number of laws, and do not realize that even
experience, which comes under their eyes, shows that this is a foolish
thing to do. And to play also once with spiritual interpretation
(allegoriis), so I believe that the ten plagues of Egypt were pictures,
not only of the Jewish law collections (thalmu- dim), but also of the
ecclesiastical. For since we read that they were inflicted by the evil
angels, it cannot be denied that by them the doctrines and statutes of
men are signified, since \"angel\" certainly signifies a preacher of the
Word and a teacher, as also in the Revelation of John those angels
indicate with their plagues and bowls. But the other plagues, that our
water is turned into blood, that the exceedingly talkative 2) frogs,
that is, the glosses, trouble us, that the lice bite and suck out all
our possessions, that the vermin (muscae) also consume us who labor and
make it sour for us, that the cattle, that is, the lonely of heart are
killed, that we are infected with smallpox, that we are estimated and
beaten by hail, that is, tyrannical violence, that we are sucked to the
marrow by locusts, that would be something to suffer for the sake of our
sins. But that the extreme evil is added to this, and we are made blind
by such darkness that one can grasp with one\'s hands, and,
unfortunately, finally also lose our glorious first-born, that is, the
righteousness of Christ and faith in him, that cannot be lamented
enough. But since paternal duty sleeps in the bishops here, I fulfill,
as much as I can, at least the fraternal duty, and exhort and ask that
we also cry out to the Lord, whether he might mercifully come down and
deliver us from this iron furnace and the house of the hardest
servitude.\^

66 But I believe that some are moved by the fact that the apostle here
denies that those who are

2\) Instead of loquacissime, probably loquacissimae should be read.

46

1442 Ari. 6ai. Ill, 229-231. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, I09-II2. 1443

sinners who believe in Christ and are justified, since no man is without
sin, not even he \[Paul\] himself, as he testifies about himself in his
letter to the Romans, chapters 7 and 8. I answer: Everyone who believes
in Christ is righteous, not yet completely in fact, but in hope. For he
has begun to become righteous and healthy, like that half-dead man. In
the meantime, while he is becoming righteous and healthy, whatever sin
remains in his flesh is not imputed to him, for the sake of Christ, who,
because he is without all sin and has now become one thing with his
Christian, intercedes for him with the Father. Thus he says Rom. 8:1,
after he had said that he was in his members under sin through the law:
\"There is therefore nothing condemnable in them which are in Christ
JEsu, who walk not after the flesh.\" He does not say there is no sin
left, but there is much sin left, but it is not counted to condemnation.
In reference to this mystery, Christ seems to have said on the cross,
\"It is finished\" before he died. Therefore, all praise given in this
way to the righteous is to be understood in the same way, that they are
not completely perfect in themselves, but that God does not impute sins
to them, and forgives them because of faith in His Son Jesus Christ, who
is our mercy seat. St. Augustine treats this extensively in his book
\"Of Nature and Grace\".

\(67\) Those who ascribe no sin to those who are baptized and repent,
but only weakness, tinder (to sin) 1) and a disease of nature,
especially when they say that it is not sin in itself, while they should
say that it is not sin only for its own sake, because God does not
impute it and forgives it, err and deceive in a harmful way.

**V. 18 But if I build again that which I have broken, I make myself a
transgressor.**

\(68\) That is, when I have taught by the preaching of faith that
justification is in Christ and that the law has been fulfilled.

1\) Added by us.

and thereby destroyed the sins, but then again taught that one must keep
the law, and it was not fulfilled, what did I do but raise up the sins
again, and said that we must still overcome them with our works? By this
I did nothing else than to show that I had either then or now done evil,
that is, I made myself a transgressor, yes, I separated myself from
Christ, in whom I had been justified, and placed myself anew under the
law and sins, and would be just as much a transgressor as I was before I
had Christ.

Again, Paul uses a way of speaking that is peculiar to him, so the
commentators differ from each other. St. Jerome wants to understand by
what is \"broken\" and \"rebuilt\" the law, namely the ceremonial law.
Although this opinion is correct, it is too narrow to be sufficient to
fit other passages of Scripture. St. Augustine says that what is
destroyed is the works of the law, yes, the arrogance that boasts of the
works of the law and is presumptuous of them. I do not reject this
opinion either.

70 But if you compare the apostle with the previous and other passages,
you see that he (as I said) breaks the sins, not the law, especially
since he says Rom. 3, 31. that he does not abolish the law by faith, but
rather establishes it. But the sins he breaketh, Rom. 6:6, \[Vulg.\]
\"That the body of sin might be broken.\" For by faith the sins are
broken, which were by the law, and became much. For sin is not broken
unless the law is fulfilled. But the law is not fulfilled otherwise than
through the righteousness of faith. Thus it comes about that through
faith the law is also established at the same time, and sins are
destroyed. For since through faith the law is satisfied, sins cease, and
the law remains in force.

\(71\) But to rebuild sins is to preach the law again, and to hold that
it must be observed and fulfilled. But where the law must be fulfilled,

1444 Drl- 6ai. Ill, 231-234. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 2, 18. W. IX, 112-115. 1445

Even righteousness has not yet been established; indeed, there is still
sin left. For sin is when one has not yet fulfilled the law; so the sins
come again, of which it was taught that they were destroyed before by
faith. Therefore, \"to build up sins\" is as much as to weaken, destroy,
and make futile the law. \"But to break sin\" is as much as to
establish, build, and fulfill the law. So anyone who teaches that the
law is fulfilled and that righteousness is established is breaking sins.
But this is what he does who teaches that through faith in Christ men
become righteous, that is, fulfillers of the law. But he who says that
the law must be fulfilled, and that righteousness has not been
established, is in fact setting up sins again and making them alive
again, and is saying that people are debtors to the law and are guilty
of keeping the law. This, I say, is in my opinion the meaning of the
apostle in this passage, who is wont to teach that through sin the law
is broken, as he says Rom. 8:3: \"Which was impossible for the law,
because it was made weak by the flesh,\" that is, was not fulfilled. For
the flesh does not fulfill the law, therefore it weakens the law. But
also in other passages of Scripture the same figurative expression is
found. Thus Jer. 35:16 \[Vulg.\], \"The children of Jonadab strengthened
the commandment of their father, which he commanded them\"; likewise v.
l4, \"The words of Jonadab, which he commanded, were very strong.\"
\[And Ps. 141, 6. (Vulg.): \"They will hear my words because they have
been mighty\" (potuerunt), that is, they have become strong, fortified,
and fulfilled\]. Again Ps. 18, 37. \[Vulg.): \"My steps (vestigia) have
not become weak,\" that is, my ways are fortified and fulfilled. \[But
Ps. 11, 3. (Vulg.): \"For what thou hast accomplished they have
broken,\" that is, thy law, as it is in the Hebrew, they have scattered
2c.\]

\(72\) But also from the foregoing it can be clearly seen that this is
the right understanding, since it says that those are not found sinners
who have been justified by Christ; therefore it is proved that for them
sins are broken. If

But if they were found to be sinners, then the sins that were destroyed
before would be restored, which would be blasphemy against Christ, who
has made sin and death void for us if we believe in him, and, as John
says \[1 Ep. 3:9\], \"He that is born of God doth not sin.\"

\(73\) But I think it is quite evident that the apostle is not speaking
of the ceremonial laws only, but of the whole law. For Christ would have
accomplished very little if he had only nullified the sins against the
ceremonial law. But since he also took away the sins against the holy
ten commandments, it is already clear by the conclusion from the greater
to the lesser (a fortiori) that also the ceremonial laws were taken away
and all laws became free.

\(74\) Again, I am compelled to admonish the reader, who is accustomed
to ordinary theology, because he may take offense when he hears that the
law is fulfilled for all who believe in Christ. For he will say, Why
then is it taught that the holy ten commandments and so many
commandments of the Gospel and the apostles must be fulfilled, and why
are we daily exhorted to the works which they prescribe? The answer to
this is as stated above: How are those who are justified by Christ not
sinners, and yet sinners? For the Scripture says both things of him who
is righteous. John says in his first epistle (canonica), Cap. 1, 8: \"If
we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in
us.\" And there, Cap. 5, 18. \[Vulg.), he says: \"We know that he who is
born of GOD does not sin, but the begetting of GOD\" (generatio Dei),
that is, being born of GOD, \"preserves him, and the wicked will not
touch him.\" The same says Cap. 3, 9. \"He that is born of GOD doth not
sin, for his seed abideth with him, and cannot sin.\" Behold, he also
cannot sin (he says), and yet, if he would say that he has no sin, he is
lying.

75 We can see a similar contradiction in Job. God, who cannot lie, says
of him, Cap. 1, 8. that he is a righteous and innocent man, and yet he
confesses

1446 Lri. OLi. Ill, 234-236. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W.IL, II5-II8. 1447

this afterwards in different places that he was a sinner, especially
Cap. 9, 2. and 7, 21.: \"Why do you not take away my sin?\" 2c. But he
must necessarily speak the truth, for if he were to lie before God, God
would not say of him that he is righteous. He is therefore both a
righteous man and a sinner. Who can reconcile these 1) different
statements (facies), which are contrary to each other, or in what do
they agree? Certainly in the mercy seat, from which the faces of the
cherubim are directed in unison, which otherwise are opposed to each
other. Therefore, since righteousness and the fulfillment of the law
began through faith, what is left of sin and what is still lacking in
the fulfillment of the law is not counted for the sake of Christ in whom
they believe.

For faith also, after it has come into being, has this as its task, that
it may cast out of the flesh what is left of sin through various
tribulations, labor and the destruction of the flesh, so that in this
way the law of God may please and be fulfilled not only in the spirit
and heart, but also in the flesh, which still resists faith and the
spirit, which delights in the law and fulfills it, as it is beautifully
described in Romans 7:22, 23. Therefore, if you look at faith, the law
is fulfilled, sin is destroyed, and there is no law left; but if you
look at the flesh, in which there is nothing good, you must confess that
those who are justified in spirit by faith are still sinners.

\(77\) For this reason the apostle is zealous that no one should presume
to bring righteousness into the heart by the works of the law, as if the
righteousness of faith did not already reign there, from which the works
and fulfillment of the law flow into the flesh. And for this take this
likeness: Just as Christ, who is without all sin, the head of the
righteous, owes nothing at all to the law, neither is he to be
instructed as to what he should do, since he has already done
everything.

1\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: üaee
instead of Uas.

does, and much more abundantly than the law can teach, yet governs and
exercises his body and flesh, the church, so that he may instill his
righteousness into it, so that, just as he is obedient to the Father in
all things, so also he may make his body obedient, yet not so obedient
and without sin: so the spirit of the righteous through faith is without
sin, owes nothing to the law, but still has the body, which is still
unlike it and rebellious, on which it works and exercises itself, that
it may also make it like itself without sin, righteous and holy.

Therefore, the commandments are necessary only for sinners. But even the
righteous are sinners for the sake of their flesh, but this is not
imputed to them because of the faith of the inner man, who, conformed to
God, persecutes, hates, and crucifies sin in his flesh until he owes
nothing to any law in the life to come, perfected in the flesh and in
the spirit. So in part the law is fulfilled, in part we owe nothing to
the law, in part sins are destroyed. But those who seek to attain
righteousness by the works of the law even rebuild the sin of unbelief
against faith in the spirit, yes, these exceedingly perverse people
raise up sin in the flesh by the works of the law, which faith casts out
all their lives, so that it is as it were not there, and thereby they
raise up the fulfillment of the law as righteousness, not faith. For
they think they are righteous when they have done the works of the law,
although they have neither faith in Christ, which is inherent
righteousness, nor purity of the flesh, but pretend to it. And 2) they
are neither inwardly nor outwardly righteous, but deceive themselves and
men by mere appearances.

\(79\) Therefore the commandments are necessary, not that we may be
justified by works according to them, but that we, being already just
men, may know in what manner our spirit should crucify the flesh, and
guide us in the things of this life, that the flesh may be justified.

2\) The editions of the first redaction, the Weimar and the Erlangen: ut
instead of ac.

1448 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 236-238. shorter interpretation of Galatians 2, 18.
19. w. IX, 118-121. 1449

not become horny, break the reins and throw off the rider, the spirit of
faith. The bridle must be put on the horse, not the rider.

**V. 19. But I died to the law through the law, that I might live to
God.**

80 He also continues this figurative speech in Rom. 7, 2. ff. where he
describes that a woman who survives the man is free from the law that
affects the man after he has died. All this will be incomprehensible
(barbara) to you if you do not keep bodily (metaphysicas) death and
bodily changes away from the mind. Just as one death cancels another,
one sin cancels another, one imprisonment cancels another, one freedom
cancels another, one bondage cancels another, one life cancels another,
one good cancels another, one evil cancels another, one curse cancels
another, one light cancels another, one darkness cancels another, one
day cancels another, one night cancels another, so one law cancels
another. There are many examples of this in Scripture, especially in
Paul.

Therefore he obviously has a twofold law in mind. One is the law of the
spirit and of faith, by which one lives GOtte, after the sins are
overcome and the law is fulfilled, as is sufficiently said. The other
law is the law of the letter and of works, by which one lives to sin, in
that the law has never been fulfilled, but the fulfillment is feigned.
For by the law hatred against the law is awakened, but by faith love
against the law is infused. Therefore, he who deals with the works of
the law (operator legis) keeps the law with hatred against the law, that
is, he makes it stand most shamefully; while inwardly he desires
something else, outwardly he pretends to something else. But the spirit
of faith keeps the law with love against the law, that is, he fulfills
it in the best way, and yet, struggling with his sins by heart, he shows
that he is a sinner.

82\) These two are therefore contrary to each other; the one who deals
with the law (legalis) sins inwardly, and outwardly he applies
righteousness; the believer does good inwardly, and outwardly he bears
his sin,

and persecutes them. Therefore Paul lives by the law of faith inwardly,
and there he died to the law. But in the flesh he is not yet alive to
the law, but is made alive to the law; he has not yet died to the law,
but is being killed to the law, while diligently striving to transfer
the same purity of heart that he has by faith to the flesh by heart. By
this endeavor he deserves to be regarded as living wholly GOtte and
having died to the law, entirely according to the same figurative speech
in which he is called above a sinner and not a sinner, a fulfiller and
not a fulfiller. For this is in the life to come, that we GOtte be fully
alive and dead to the law. Living and dying here cannot be taken bodily
or naturally, as already the expression of the apostle shows, because he
does not say par excellence that he died, but: he died to the law and
was alive before GOtte.

83\. but it is \"to live unto the law\" to be under the law and its
dominion, as it is said in Rom. 7\" 1. \"The law ruleth over a man as
long as he liveth.\" Just as a servant, as long as he is not ransomed,
lives to his master by the law of servitude and the law of the Gentiles,
so also we, as long as we are out of faith, in that evil desire reigns,
serve the law, do its works compulsorily, and thereby do not fulfill the
law, which is fulfilled only by the love of faith. But \"to die to the
law\" means to become free from the law. Just as a debtor, when he has
died, is free from his admonisher (exactore), so we also die, while the
old man begins to be killed by the grace of faith, and sin, which was
increased by the law, begins to be taken away by this holy death, that
is, we are made alive to righteousness, as he explains in detail in Rom.
6:2 ff. and 8:10, and uses the same figurative speech by calling those
who have died to sin. Living in righteousness.

Therefore, to live by the law is not to fulfill the law. \"To die to the
law is to fulfill the law. This happens through faith in Christ, the
other through works.

1450 Oai. Ill, 238-240. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
\' W. IX, 121-123. 1451

of the law. Rom. 3, 28: \"Therefore we hold that a man is justified by
faith\", which he also calls \[v. 27\] \"the law of faith\". Likewise
Rom. 8:2: \"The law of the Spirit that quickeneth,\" that is, of faith,
\"hath made me free from the law of sin and death,\" that is, from the
law that worketh and increaseth death and sin, as every law doeth,
whether it be given of God or of men. Therefore, as we have begun, let
us interpret these two laws more clearly.

The law of the Spirit is that which is not written in letters, is not
presented in words, is not thought of in thoughts, but is the living
will and the experimental life, also the thing itself, which is written
in the heart by the finger of God alone, Rom. 5:5: \"The love of God is
poured out in our heart by the Holy Spirit.\" This is also spoken of by
Jeremiah Cap. 31, 33. as the apostle cites Hebr. 8, 10. and 10,^1^ ) 16:
\"I will give my laws into their mind, and into their heart I will write
them.\" I say: this spiritual (intellectualis) light of the mind and the
flame of the heart is the law of faith, the new law, the law of Christ,
the law of the Spirit, the law of grace, which justifies, fulfills all
things, and crucifies the evil lusts of the flesh. So also St. Augustine
says beautifully in this passage: He lives, so to speak, the law itself,
who lives righteously with love for righteousness. Notice these words:
\"with love for righteousness\", because nature knows nothing of this,
only faith attains it. Thus it is said in 2 Cor. 3:3: \"Ye are an
epistle of Christ, prepared by our preaching ministry, yet written not
with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone,
but in fleshy tables of the heart.\"

86\. the law of the letter is all that is

1\) In the editions of the first redaction, the reading given by us is
found: \"ut Hsd. VIIIL X\"\'ste. In contrast, in the Jenaer, lom III:
\"ut sx Hsd. 8. aäüuoit\" 6to.; in the Wittenberger: \"ut L sx Hsd. 8.
aääruüt\" them. It seems to us that the \"L X\" of the first edition has
been moved, and then made sx out of it.

is written with letters, said with words, thought with thoughts, whether
it is a figurative (tropologia) or a figurative speech (allegoria), or a
higher mind (anagogia), or even the teaching of some mystery. This is
the law of works, the old law, the law of Moses \[the law of the
flesh\], the law of sin, the law of wrath, the law of death, which
condemns all, makes all 2) guilty, increases evil lusts, and kills, and
so much the more spiritual it is, like that \[Ex. 20:17.\], \"Thou shalt
not covet.\" This makes many more people guilty than that \[v. 13\],
\"Thou shalt not kill,\" or than that \[Gen. 17:11\], \"Ye shall
circumcise the foreskin of your flesh,\" or the like ceremonies, because
without the law of the Spirit no work is done in a good way, but is
always pretended.

It follows that the law of the Spirit is that which the law of the
letter requires, the will, I say, Psalm 1:2: \"But in the law of the
Lord is his will,\" that is, his love. Rom. 13, 10.: \"Love is the
fulfillment of the law,\" and 1 Tim. 1, 5. \[Vulg.\]: \"The end of the
law is love,\" and, to speak quite plainly and comprehensibly
(vulgariter): The law of the letter and the law of the Spirit differ, as
the sign and the thing signified, as word and thing. Therefore the sign
is now no longer necessary after the thing has been obtained, therefore
no law is given to the righteous. But when we have only the sign, we are
taught to seek the thing. Thus Moses and the prophets and finally John
the Baptist point us to Christ. The law teaches what you owe and what
you lack. Christ gives what you should do and have. Therefore, those who
use the law other than as a sign to lead them to Christ, so that they
may recognize their misery and seek mercy, misuse it most grievously.
For such people trust in their own powers, and as soon as they have
heard the law, they set about fulfilling its works, seeking and
presuming.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger ornnia
instead of omnss.

1452 Lri. Oai. Ill, 240-242. shorter interpretation of Galatians 2, 19.
w.ix,i23f. 1453

themselves that the matter of the law is in themselves, while they see
that they have not found the sign, the law itself, I say, in themselves
either.

It follows that every law of the letter is spiritual, as it can also be
called spiritual, just as Romans 7:14 says: \"We know that the law is
spiritual,\" and we never read in Scripture that it is called a carnal
law, which is written with letters, although Origen tries much and often
to show this, moved by his preconceived opinions. Paul does speak of the
\"law of the members\" \[Rom. 7, 23.\] and of the evil desire of the
flesh, but this is not the letter, but is signified and forbidden by the
letter of the law. Therefore it is spiritual because it requires the
spirit of faith, that is, it is spiritual, not because of the sign, but
because of the thing, since no good work is done unless it is done out
of a cheerful, willing, merry heart, that is, in the spirit of freedom.
Otherwise, if only the law were to be called spiritual, which promotes
nothing but spiritual works, then no law would be spiritual but that
which, as our theologians say, gives commandments in regard to actions
elicited from the heart (de actibus cordis elicitis); and even the works
of love would not be spiritual. Are these not bodily things, that one
washes the feet of guests, helps the poor, admonishes the erring, prays
for the sinner, suffers injustice? Yes, no less than any ceremonial
works of the Old and New Testaments. But only the spirit of faith makes
a difference among the works, otherwise there is absolutely no
difference among the works, neither between those that can be done with
the mind and those that can be done with the body. Then all works are
carnal or according to the letter (literalia), if they are done out of
compulsion of the letter, and the law of the spirit is not present. Then
they are spiritual when they are done because the law of the Spirit is
with them, as we shall see below. \[And here, I think, you see the root
from which this comes, that I am unwilling about so many decrees,
statutes, and decrees of the

Popes, through whose tyranny the church now lies oppressed and is being
devastated more and more every day. For since love is growing cold, and
God is gradually taking away the law of the spirit for the sake of our
sins, the laws that cannot possibly be fulfilled without this spirit
must also be taken away. Rather, they are multiplied daily, about which
God is very angry, and it happens that they impose unbearable burdens on
people (especially if you do not have the money to redeem yourself),
which they themselves do not want to or cannot even touch with a finger,
while in the meantime the so vigilant shepherds of Christ\'s sheep do
not even think about feeding the sheep with the word of faith and the
Spirit. This is what I am sighing at, that through so many useless and
harmful laws nothing happens, but that the innumerable offenses against
God are only increased, while the commandments should also be fulfilled
by the spirit, and yet we cannot have the spirit from ourselves. But in
the meantime I will give some advice. First, if you have the spirit to
bear all these things willingly, do it as if you were oppressed under
the Turk or some other tyrant according to the will of God, since the
tyranny of laws, because it oppresses the conscience, is much greater,
than the tyranny of the Turks, which oppresses only the bodies or minor
bodily things, although the Turk does not precede us in this respect
either, which you will see when you look at the robbery with the
pallies, 1) with the annatas and the other intolerable haggling with the
cops. But if you are not willing, well, give money and good words, buy
what should be given to you for free, because it cannot be otherwise,
and pull your neck out of this yoke by purchased redemption (indulta).
But this I understand of the commandments, whose work is not against
necessity or against love. For through such things, as I said above, one
should break through confidently, even without paying for them, but one
should seek the counsel of a good man. But I am speaking here of the

1\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, Introduction, p. 5a. - On
\"Annaten\" see Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. X, 285, Amn.

1454 Ari- Oai. Ill, 242-245. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 125-127. 1455

Things you do unwillingly, even though necessity or love is not the
reason for not doing them. For here it is better that you lose a little
money than that you torment your conscience with the snares of the law.
Neither shalt thou fear to make a bargain (simoniam) of spiritual
things, since thou dost not buy them assiduously and willingly (for thou
wouldst rather that they should be given thee for nothing), but thou
dost not reluctantly yield to the impetuous urging that I say so. If you
are poor, or are hindered by the great distance of the place, at least
obey publicly to avoid annoyance; secretly, where you are alone, seek
the opinion of a good man, and be sure that where your pastor does not
take care of you, Christ will act all the more kindly toward you, if
only you are heartily obedient to his commandments\].

**V. 19. 20. I am crucified with Christ. But I live; yet now not I, but
Christ liveth in me.**

He had said that he died to the law, now he shows the way of this death,
namely the cross of Christ. This includes what he says in Gal. 5, 24:
\"Those who belong to Christ crucify their flesh along with their lusts
and desires,\" and Peter, 1. Ep. 4, 1: \"Therefore, since Christ
suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves with the same mind, for he
who suffers in the flesh ceases from sin,\" and Cap. 2, 24: \"Who
himself offered up our sins in his body on the wood, that we, having
died to sin, might live unto righteousness.\"

90 For this reason, St. Augustine teaches in the third book, Of the
Trinity, Cap. 4, that the passion of Christ is a sacrament and an
example; a sacrament because it signifies the death of sin in us and
gives it to the faithful; an example because we too must follow it
through suffering and bodily death. The sacrament is Rom. 4:25: \"Who
died for our sins, and rose again for our righteousness.\" The example
is 1 Peter 2:21: \"Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that
ye should follow in his footsteps.\" He treats the Sacrament quite
extensively Rom. 6 and 8, Col. 3 and

in many other places. So also here he says that he was crucified with
Christ after the sacrament, because he put to death sin and evil
desires. But what the apostle says is this: Those who seek to be
justified by the works of the law not only do not crucify their flesh,
but also increase the lusts of it; so much is lacking in it that they
could be justified. For the law is the power of sin, stirring up the
evil desire that sets its will against it, while it forbids it. But
since faith in Christ loves the law, which forbids evil desire, it
already does just what the law commands; it attacks evil desire and
crucifies it.

\(91\) Therefore, sin is not removed by the law, but only recognized and
increased, and in vain one seeks to be justified by it. Then the
righteous man does not live by himself, but Christ lives in him, because
Christ dwells in him through faith and instills grace in him, by which
it happens that man is not ruled by his own spirit, but by Christ\'s
spirit. For if we are ruled by our spirit, we follow evil lusts, but do
not crucify them. So all things must be imputed to Christ, not to us,
that we believe, that we are righteous, that we have died to the law,
that we put to death the evil lusts.

**For what I now live in the flesh I live in the faith of the Son of
God, who loved me and gave Himself for me.**

92 \[Very well Erasmus says: \"For what I now live\"\], that is, the
life which I now live 2c. \[as he also interprets it in the Epistle to
the Romans, Cap. 6\], or: the time which I live, as it is also said in 1
Petr. 4, 2: \"that he may live to the will of GOD, which is yet behind
time in the flesh.\" \[St. Jerome thinks that \"being in the flesh\" is
something different from \"living in the flesh\", because Paul says
elsewhere, Rom. 8, 9: \"You are not in the flesh\" (in carne ==
fleshly), and v. 8: \"Those who are in the flesh may not please God.\"
This I see that he 2 Cor. 10, 3.: \"For though we walk in the flesh, we
do not contend according to the flesh\" (secundum carnem - carnal way),
it always ver-

1456 Lri. \"Li. Ill, 24S-247. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 2, 20. 21. W. IX, 127-12S. 1457

if one walks according to (secundum) the flesh. But in the letter to the
Philippians (Cap. 1, 22. 24.) he writes that it is necessary to remain
\"in the flesh\". Therefore, I do not know if this distinction holds\].
But it is the opinion of the apostle: I have said that I now live not,
but Christ in me. But lest ye think (or it seem as if a cause were given
to future heretics) that the Christian life is apart from the flesh, in
spirituality of angels \[Col. 2, 18.\], in a walk in great things too
high 2) for him (Ps. 131, 1.), then Christ lives in me in such a way
that I nevertheless bring my life in the flesh, but do not live in the
flesh in such a way that my life is of the flesh, in the flesh or after
the flesh, but in faith in the Son of God. The works saints, however,
also live in the flesh, that is, they are in the present life, but they
do not lead this life in faith in Christ, but in the works of the law,
therefore they lead a life that is dead in sins.

When Paul says that 3) the life of righteousness is living, he includes
both the bodily and the spiritual life. The bodily life is only a life
if it is lived in Christ and the spirit of faith. For as the law kills
by spiritual death those who place their worship in it (suos cultores),
since it makes sin strong and abundant, so it also makes the life of the
body dead, that is, sinful.

94 Where are our people, who are neither cold nor warm (neutrals), who
have invented a middle state between sin and the righteousness of faith,
namely the morally good, while the apostle calls the righteousness of
the law a dead one? But dead is called with the apostle only that which
is sin before, as he says \[1 Cor. 15, 56.\]: \"The sting of death is
sin\", and Rom. 5, 12.: \"Death through

1\) To the question of the Weimar edition: \"So sreli8iori6\] indeed all
editions, but whether not in roZione?\" must be answered in the
negative. Col. 2, 18: in reli\^ione.

2\) In the editions \[nnru instead of super, what the Vulgate offers.

3\) The editions of the first redaction and the Erlanger: äueit instead
of äieit.

the sin\". Therefore, not any work is dead and not a mortal sin
(mortale) (as they say), or not meritorious, but what is dead is also
sin.

**V. 21. I do not throw away the grace of God. For if righteousness
comes through the law, Christ died in vain.**

It is such a great injustice to want to become righteous by one\'s own
works through the law that the apostle calls this a throwing away of
God\'s grace, not only an ingratitude (which in itself is already
exceedingly evil), but also a contempt, since the grace of God should
have been sought with the greatest zeal, but those push away the grace
they have received in vain \[, this is certainly a severe rebuke\].

It is worth the effort to consider this final speech (syllogismum) of
the apostle: \"If righteousness comes through the law,\" 2c. He
confidently states that either Christ died in vain (which is the highest
blasphemy), or one can have nothing but sin through the law. For let
those people be driven away from the holy Scriptures who, by
distinctions which they have spun out of their heads, bring different
righteousnesses into theology, and say that one righteousness is moral
righteousness, another is the righteousness of faith, and, I know not
what other righteousnesses.

The civil being may have its own righteousness, the philosophers theirs,
and each one his own. We must here take \"righteousness\" as the holy
Scriptures understand it, of which the apostle clearly states that it is
none other than through faith in JESUS Christ; all other works, even
those according to the most holy laws of GOD, are so completely
incapable of giving righteousness that they are even sins and make man
worse before GOD; indeed, they are such great sins and so far removed
from righteousness that it was necessary for the Son of GOD to die so
that righteousness could be given to us. In theology, therefore, do not
call this \"righteousness\".

4\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger civile
jus instead of eivilis res.

1458 Li-I. 6ai. Ill, 247-249. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 129-132. 1459

righteousness, which is outside of faith in Christ. But if it is certain
that it is not righteousness, it is equally certain that it is sin, and
damnable sin at that.

See, then, the new justice and the new definition of justice. For in
ordinary life (usitate) it is said: Righteousness is the virtue that
gives to each one what is his. But here it is said: Righteousness is
faith in Jesus Christ, or the virtue by which one believes in Jesus
Christ, as it is said in Romans 10:10: \"With the heart one believes for
righteousness,\" that is, if someone wants to be righteous, he must
necessarily believe in Jesus Christ from the heart. And St. Jerome says
Cap. 3: It is a fine saying of the wise man: The believer does not live
by his righteousness, but the righteous lives by faith \[Hab. 2, 4.\],
that is, he is not believer by his righteousness, but by faith he is
righteous. This is certainly a beautiful saying.

99\. It follows further that he who is justified by faith gives to no
one by himself what is his, but through another, namely Jesus Christ,
who alone is so just that he gives to all what must be given, even that
all things are due to him (debent). But if someone believes in Christ
and has become one with him through the spirit of faith, he then not
only satisfies all, but also brings it about that everything is owed to
him, since he has everything in common with Christ. His sins are now no
longer his, but Christ\'s. But in Christ, sins cannot overcome
righteousness, but are overcome, therefore they are swallowed up in Him.
Again, the righteousness of Christ does not belong to Christ alone, but
to his Christians. Therefore, the latter cannot be indebted to anyone or
be oppressed by sins, since he relies on such a great righteousness.

This is the immeasurable glory of the Christians, this is the
inexpressible condescension (dignatio) of divine love toward us, through
which so great, so delicious things are given to us, for which Paul with

Right so eifert, so that they are not thrown away.

Therefore, this righteousness is also called righteousness before God,
as 1 Cor. 1:30: \"Who is made unto us of God unto wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Rom. 1,^1^ , 16, 17:
\"I am not ashamed of the gospel, because in it is revealed the
righteousness that is before God, which comes by faith in faith, as it
is written, \'The righteous shall live by faith,\'\" and Rom. 10, 3:
\"They do not know the righteousness that is before God, and seek to
establish their own righteousness, and so are not subject to the
righteousness that is before God.\" This is the word in the Psalms, Ps.
31, 1.: \"Save me by your righteousness, yes, not by mine, which is of
the law and sin\"; and again in the 143rd Psalm, v. 1.: \"Hear me for
the sake of your righteousness\", and Ps. 72, 1. 7.: 2) \"God, give your
judgment to the king, and your righteousness to the king\'s son. In his
days there will be righteousness and great peace,\" and Ps. 96, 13: \"He
will judge the earth with righteousness.\" And what need of many words?
Righteousness of God is almost always used in the Scriptures for faith.

1\) Weimar edition: Rom. 7, 16. f.

2\) We have repeatedly pointed out that in the case of the writings
originally written by Luther in German, the biblical passages from Walch
were taken over into the Erlangen edition without looking them up
ourselves. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII, 885, note 2; vol. XIX,
240, note 2; Col. 617, note; Col. 676, note 2; Col. 768, note; Col. 820,
note I; vol. XXII, Introduction, pp. 38f. Even in the second edition of
the Erlangen edition, there are several incorrect biblical citations
that originate from Walch, and may not have come directly from Walch,
but indirectly through the first edition. Cf. the notes in our edition,
Vol. VII, 831. 834. 838. 1467 and Vol. VIII, 1021, Note II. The same is
repeated in the writings that are contained only in Latin in the
Erlangen edition. At this point, Walch, instead of the citation we have
given, has \"Ps. 72, 17.\" which the Erlangen edition, Oal. Ill, 249,
has reprinted. All other passages that are incorrectly cited by Walch
are also found in the Erlanger. In the first two chapters of this
writing, they are as follows: Cap. 1, s 21: Ps. 36, 5. instead of: Ps.
37, 7.; §35: Isa. 2, 8. 9. instead of: Isa. 2, 8.; s 45: 1 Cor. 3, 3.
instead of: 1 Cor. 3, 4.; z 47: Ps. 109, 4. 5. instead of: Ps. 109, 4.;
§67: 2 Cor. 12, 12 instead of: 2Cor. 12, 11.; Cap. 2, 2 7: Ezek. 1, 9.
instead of: Ezek. 1, 7. 14.; §72: i Joh, I, 9, instead of: 1 Joh. 3,
9. - The Weimar edition also has here in the margin: \"Ps. 72, 17.\"

1460 Ari. 6ai. Ill, 249-251. shorter interpretation of Galatians 2, 21.
W. IX, 132-137. 1461

The Lord\'s grace and mercy are rarely taken for the severity with which
he condemns the wicked and delivers the righteous, as is now the custom
everywhere.

\(102\) But if this is called the righteousness of faith, that we give
to each one what is his out of our own strength, it must rather be
understood that we do this by cession of all goods, as the Lord teaches
in Luke 14:28 ff. of the one who builds a tower, and v. 31 ff. of the
one who wants to go into battle against another who is stronger than he.
For they build a tower (after the example of those who started the tower
of Babylon) who, trusting in their own strength, seek to make themselves
righteous and blessed by works of the law.

and meet Christ, the exceedingly strong future judge, with a very small
army of works. To them he gives the advice that they should first
estimate the costs, then they will find that they are not able to do it.
Therefore they should abandon all their presumption of wisdom, virtue
and justice and, while he is still far away, ask for peace, despairing
of themselves and throwing themselves with full confidence on the mercy
of the coming king. For thus he concludes this parable \[Luc. 14, 33.\]:
\"So also every one of you who does not cut off all that he has cannot
be my disciple,\" that is, you cannot be a Christian unless you rely on
faith alone, and cast your righteousness entirely from you.

**The third chapter.**

**V. 1. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you not to obey the
truth?**

1 Now he returns to the Galatians. For St. Jerome thinks that up to this
point he has spoken against Peter. But I do not know whether he spoke
all this in the presence of Peter. I would like to assume that he
stopped talking to Peter from the passage \[Cap. 2, 16\]: \"For by the
works of the law no flesh is justified,\" because he repeats what he
said to Peter shortly before \[v. 16\]: \"For we know that man is not
justified by the works of the law,\" 2c., and that from this point on he
again deals with the Galatians and refutes the works of the law with the
other reasons of proof. But in this each one may have his own judgment.

2 Paul now glows with a godly zeal. Although he has filled almost the
entire letter with proofs and refutations, he still intersperses
exhortations and punishment a few times; at times he also repeats the
same and inculcates it by saying with

apostolic concern tries everything. He calls them unwise \[v. 1.),
foolish \[v. 3. Vulg.), nonsensical people; as Jerome says, either
because he reproaches them with their country\'s way, as he calls the
Cretans liars in the letter to Titus (Tit. 1, 12.) and reproaches other
peoples with other vices, or because they had turned from great things
to small ones and, as it were, had begun to become children again by
returning to the disciplinarian of the law. And I like this one better,
because in the following he deals with the initial reasons (elementis
\[Cap. 4, 3.)), with the disciplinarian, with the heir who is a child,
with which he clearly punishes their foolishness and childish nature.

3 This is also shown by the word \"enchanted\". For it is said, as
Jerome also notes, that children and those who are in infancy are
particularly harmed by the spell. But it means \"to charm\" by an evil
(malefico magical) look a harm anthun, as Virgil 1) says: I do not know
which eye bewitches me the tender lambs. Whether this true

1\) Lueoliea, Del. Ill, v. 103.

[1462 Lri. \"Li. Ill, 251-253. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W.IX, I37f. 1463]{.underline}

or not, God knows, says Jerome, because it is possible that the devils
are at work in this sin. I believe that this is the disease of small
children, which our wives usually call \"the Elbe\" or \"the
heart-ache\", in which we see that the children shrink, become skinny
and squirm miserably, sometimes screaming and crying incessantly. This
disease they try to counteract, again I don\'t know, with what kind of
letters and superstitions. For it is believed that such things are done
by envious and sorcerous old cads when they envy a mother her beautiful
little child. That is why the Greek word *(βασκαίνω)* means not only to
charm, but also to envy, as Jerome testifies.

4\) So also the Galatians, when they were as it were just born children
in Christ and had good prosperity, were damaged by the false apostles
who charmed them, and brought back to the leanness, even to the misery
of the law, so that they are now fading away. And this is a very
beautiful likeness. For just as a sorcerer sets his mischievous eyes on
a child until he has done him harm, so a pernicious teacher sets his
evil eye, that is, his ungodly wisdom, on simple souls until he has
corrupted right knowledge. For the eye, as Luc. 11, 34, means in
Scripture the teaching, the knowledge, yes, also the teacher himself, as
Job 29, 15: \"I was the eye of the blind man,\" and \[Matth. 18,^2^ ) 9:
\"If thine eye offend thee,\" 2c. These are the ones whom Scripture
calls treacherous men, scoffers, deceivers of the soul. Ps. 1, 1.
\[Vulg.\]: \"Still sits on the seat of destruction\", Hebrew: \"on the
chair of the scoffers\". Proverbs 3:32 \[Vulg.\]: \"Every scoffer is an
abomination to the LORD, and to the simple he addresses his speech.\"

But here the question arises whether one should believe that the apostle
in this passage approves the opinion that the magic is something. St.
Jerome thinks that he has used a trivial way of speaking and has taken
an example from the delusion of the mob,

1\) Here we have with the Jena edition, lom. Ill, suut adopted instead
are in the other editions.

2\) Weimar edition: Matth. 19, 9.

not that he knew the magic was something, as one sees that also some
other things from the fables of the pagans were included in the
Scriptures, as in Job \[Cap. 9, 9. 38, 31. 32.\] the chariot, Orion, the
Pleiades, and in Isaiah \[Cap. 13, 21. f. 3) 34, 14.\] the sirens, the
Ohim (onocentauri), the field devils (pilosi).

\(6\) I believe (as I have said) that those sorceresses by the help of
devils, under God\'s permission, can in truth do harm to little
children, for the punishment of unbelievers and for the probation of
believers, since many other things also, as experience is clear, do harm
to both men and cattle in their bodies, and to all things, and that the
apostle knew this very well.

**To whom Christ Jesus was painted before the eyes, and is now crucified
among you.**

7 I see that this passage is interpreted in different ways. St. Jerome
understands \"proscriptus\" to mean that the Galatians knew Christ
crucified not only by the word of the apostles, but also from the
writings of the prophets, and since they had come to know him in this
way beforehand and rather by scripture (scriptum) than by speech
(dictum) or sermon, and since they had been strengthened by this twofold
instruction by means of scripture and the oral word, they should not
have fallen away from Christ. St. Ambrose, whom Lyra follows, thinks
that among the Galatians, because they trusted in the works of the law,
Christ was banished (proscriptum), as the jurists speak of proscriptio,
that is, he was cast out, condemned, and became an exile. St. Augustine
reads praescriptus, and just as one possession is lost by the objection
(praescriptionem) of another, so Christ lost the Galatians because
objection was raised against him (praescriptus), namely by the false
apostles. I cannot agree with any of these opinions. Erasmus, but also
Stapulensis 5) almost likewise, take it in such a way that.

3\) Weimar edition incorrect: \"Isa. 13, 23.\" and: \"OnO66LtUUri
PÜO8I.\"

4\) Erlanger und die Weimarsche Ausgabe: ei, while the other editions
offer seü.

5\) Ktapulensis is Jakob Faber (le Mvr\" ä\'DtApIesy who rendered great
service to biblical literature.

1464 Lri. \"Li. Ill, 2S3-236. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 3, 1. 2. W. IX, 138-141. 1465

Christ was, as it were, drawn and painted in a picture for the
Galatians, so that they would have recognized him most clearly, and yet
they did not recognize him because they were bewitched and deceived. For
in this way, those who are captivated by sorcery and dazzle are used not
to see even what is clearly before their eyes, and to see what is
nowhere. And for this mind the Greek word προεγράφη seems to speak. The

but moves me that\] \"Christ is crucified in someone,\" is never taken
in Scripture in a good sense, as Heb. 6:6. \"Who again crucify in
themselves the Son of GOD,\" and above \[Cap. 2:20.\] he does not say,
Christ is crucified in me, but, \"Christ liveth in me.\" But here he
says, \"crucified among (*in*) you,\" no doubt sighing and raging over
the fact that Christ is not alive in them, but is dead, that is, that
faith in him is extinguished in them by the righteousness of the law.

Therefore (, if I may dare to set up my assumption, so it would be this:
Firstly, may the word \"pre-painted\" now be understood by writing or
picture, so I pay attention that \"pre-painted\" (praescriptus) is that
what has been made present (coram positus) and shown before eyes,
because therefore he adds \"before the eyes\" to express this sense.
Second, the connective \"and\" is to be deleted (as in Greek), then the
text would read thus: To whom JEsus Christ was painted under the eyes,
or before the eyes, crucified among you, that is, Behold, ye yourselves
see, and by the foregoing evidences it is set forth by me, so that it is
clearly painted and written before your eyes, that JEsus Christ is
crucified among you. That this is the meaning, if one pays attention to
the preceding, yes, to what the whole epistle is about, I believe,
cannot be denied. For he had sent before \[Cap. 2, 21.\], \"I do not
cast away the grace of GOD.\" \[v. 20.:\] \"But I live; yet now not
I\"; 1) likewise \[v. 21.\], \"If by the law righteousness come, Christ
died in vain.\"

1\) The Weimar edition has merged this citation with the previous one
into one.

All this points to the fact that Christ is crucified among all those (as
among the Jews) who do not trust in him but in themselves and the law.
For if 2) the grace of God is cast away, then Christ does not live in
them. So what is left but that he is dead and crucified among them?

\(9\) But the apostle, in his great zeal, uses very emphatic, ardent
and, as it were, impetuous words. He says: \"Painted before your eyes\",
as if he wanted to say: I do not know how I could show it to you more
clearly. Then he does not mention the name of Christ alone, but says,
\"JEsus Christ,\" calling both names to them very emphatically; at last
he says, \"Who is crucified among you.\" It would have been lighter if
it had not happened \"among you,\" who were such great people, and it
would have been lesser if he had died, or suffered, or been sick, but he
was cruelly (he says) \"crucified among you,\" that is, treated most
ignominiously by you.

\(10\) Dear, what would he do if even now he saw that Christ is
crucified in the church even more than by the laws of men? He would
certainly say the same thing that is written in Apost. 20, 29, with
tears: \"After my departure, there shall come among you grievous wolves,
which shall not spare the host\" 2c.

**V. 2. I will learn this from you: Did you receive the Spirit by the
works of the law or by the preaching of faith?**

11 See how effectively he treats this object (locum) from experience.
For what can they plead here? The other reasons for proof (he says),
which I have used, may be weak, but what do you want to say here? That
alone teaches me! Well, I will be your student here. You who have gone
about with the works of the law, say whether you ever received the
Spirit before you came to believe when I preached Christ? So he
confidently mocks them, and says to those who are already entangled, as
it were, with unbreakable bonds:

2\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Weimarschen and in
the Erlanger dune instead of euin.

1466 6ai. Ill, 256-258. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, I4I-I43. 1467

**V. 3. Are you so foolish? You began in the spirit, will you now
complete it in the flesh?**

\(12\) But it seems as if the apostle wrote this for those who had
believed out of Judaism, and had previously dealt with the works of the
law, and had then visibly received the Holy Spirit as a sign, as he was
given at that time; otherwise this passage would not sufficiently corner
them (urgeret), or at least he writes for both Jews and Gentiles with
one another, but for such Gentiles as had previously been drawn under
the law by the Jews. Unless you want to say that the apostle is talking
about the works of the law into which they had fallen back after they
had left the faith in Christ, I think this is more likely. For this was
quite certain, that they had not received the Spirit from the false
apostles, as they had received it before through Paul.

But that St. Jerome makes a distinction between the works of the law and
good works in this passage, and means that Cornelius received the Spirit
through the works, Apost. 10, 44. ff., I certainly do not believe this,
since it is clear that during Peter\'s preaching, that is, during the
\"preaching of faith\" (as he says here) the Holy Spirit fell upon them.
For even Abraham, Moses and other saints were not (as one dares to
claim) justified by the works of the natural law, but by faith, as is
written here and Rom. 4, 3. The apostle rejects (notat) not only the
ceremonial law, but every law, for since faith alone justifies and does
good works, it follows that no works of any law can justify, nor can the
works of any law be good, but only the works of faith. I have mentioned
this in order to remind those who read Jerome\'s writings of what he
himself demands, both in his preface and in his letter to St. Augustine,
namely, that he wrote the interpretations in which he used to cite the
opinions of others, but did not give the truth of the matter to the
reader.

The church is not to be considered as a church. For since not a few
theologians and jurists disregard this, they sometimes follow strange
(monstra) opinions instead of the right known (domestica) teaching of
the church.

14 But the word \"by the hearing of faith\" (as everything) so Erasmus
interprets it beautifully (as everything),\] stands for that which can
be heard, \[as he says,\] for the sermon itself which is heard, so that
\"the hearing of faith\" is the same as the word of faith which one has
heard. Apost. 10, 44.: \"While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy
Ghost fell upon all them that heard the word.\" So Is. 53, 1.: \"Lord,
who believes our preaching?\" (auditui) and Habakkuk 4, 2.: \"O Lord, I
have heard thy rumor (auditionem), that I am astonished.\" Similarly,
this expression is also frequent in Scripture, Jer. 49, 14. Obadiah 1,
1: \"We have heard from the LORD a heard thing\" (auditum audivimus) 2c.
But here Jerome again tries to explain how deaf people can become
Christians, especially since Rom. 10, 14 says: \"How can they hear
without a preacher? How shall they believe, of whom they have heard
nothing?\" and how there the sequence of steps of the apostle is, first
that they be sent, then that they be preached, then hear, then believe,
then call, and so attain to blessedness. \[I will add: How are infants
blessed, and how are they baptized, since they do not hear either? He
(Jerome) answers first of all: that faith comes from hearing, which can
be taken in such a way that it happens in part (in parte) and that it
happens completely (in toto). But Paul overturns (evincit) this, saying,
\"How shall they believe, of whom they have heard nothing?\" Second,
that even deaf people can learn the gospel through giving and
intercourse with other people. But how can this be done with children?
Therefore, I follow the opinion he expresses last, namely: that nothing
is deaf before the word of God, and that it speaks to the ears, of which
it is said (Matth. 11, 15.): \"He who has ears to hear, let him hear!\"
This answer is very dear to me because even by adults and by those who
can hear, the word of God is not heard, if the spirit does not give it
to flourish inwardly. Therefore it is a word of power

1468 Lri. Ill, 258-260. shorter interpretation of Galatians 3, 3. W. IX,
143-145. 1469

and grace, because it hits the ears at the same time and pours the
spirit inside. But if the spirit is not poured in, the hearer is not at
all different from a deaf person. Therefore, even the sound of the word,
which is pronounced through the ministry of the church over a child,
works all the more easily through the spirit, the more capable
(capacior) the little child is of receiving it, that is, the more he is
only suffering against it (quo patientior), since he is not occupied by
any other things.

\(15\) So Paul most powerfully puts down the works of the law here, then
also the dreams of our theologians who have invented the merit that must
be given in equity (meritum congrui) in order to obtain grace. But the
apostle says: \"Not by works, but by the preaching of faith\", that is,
if you suffer the word (patiaris), you can rest from your works and
celebrate the Sabbath of the Lord, so that you may hear what the Lord
your God speaks to you.

16 Therefore, remember this remarkable testimony (documentum) of Paul.
If you want to obtain grace, make it your business both to hear the word
of God attentively and to consider it diligently; the word, I say, and
the word alone is that by which the grace of God is brought to us
(vehiculum). For what you call works that are meritorious in equity
(opera congrui) are either evil, or grace must necessarily have already
come to work them. The saying stands firm that one receives the Spirit
through the preaching of faith. In this way all those have received the
Spirit who have received it. \[Therefore, do not forge your own clever
suggestions and do not despise the counsel of God.\]

17 Note that he says, \"to finish in the flesh,\" that is, to come to an
end, to cease, to fall away. From this passage it is clear that
\"flesh\" is taken not only for the sensuality or the lusts of the
flesh, but also for all that is apart from the grace and the Spirit of
Christ. For it is certain that the Galatians are not \"made perfect in
the flesh\" because they lived in indulgence and pleasure, or otherwise.

In any way they followed the flesh in their conduct (moribus), but
because they sought to obtain the works of the law and righteousness,
but abandoned faith. But righteousness and the works of the law are not
only sensual things, since delusion and trust, which are in the heart,
also belong to them. Therefore everything that is not of faith is flesh.
Hebr. 9, 10. \[Vulg.\]: \"With divers baptisms and righteousnesses of
the flesh.\" 1) So it is said in Gen. 6:3 \[Vulg.\], \"My Spirit shall
not abide in man, because he is flesh.\" It is not said, For he hath
flesh, but, \"For he is flesh.\" And Rom. 7:18 \[Vulg.\], \"I find in
myself, that is in my flesh, no good thing.\" So he himself and his
flesh are one and the same, as much as is born of Adam. So again it is
said \[1 Cor. 15, 50.\], \"Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
GOD,\" and Matt. 16, 17. \"Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto
thee.\" But also 1 Cor. 3, 3. He \[Vulg.\] says: \"Ye are yet carnal, ye
are men,\" since they were only arguing about the names of the apostles.

\(18\) Hence all doctrine and righteousness of all men, philosophers,
orators, even of the popes, is carnal, since they do not teach faith;
and you will see, when you hear the apostle here, that the laws are very
wrongly called holy rules (canones), which are given for the sake of
dignities and riches. Again, nothing is so carnal and external that it
should not also be spiritual, if it is done by the action of the Spirit
of faith. Thus the Galatians accomplish it in the flesh, since they take
the mind and the delusion to base themselves on any works of the law
\[especially\], while they abandon faith. \[But that Origen and St.
Jerome conclude from the apostle\'s words that there is a threefold man:
a spiritual, a natural (animalem) (of which they have the opinion that
he is neither good nor evil \[neutralem\] and stands in the middle
between the two \[medium\]), and a carnal, about this we shall perhaps
see later what is to be thought of it.

1\) In the text, this saying is inaccurately stated.

[1470 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 260-262. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, I4S-I48. 1471]{.underline}

**V. 4. Have you suffered so much for nothing? Is it otherwise in
vain.**

19 St. Jerome interprets this passage in various ways, but to be brief,
I follow one opinion, namely, that the Galatians, when they were running
fine in the faith of Christ, had suffered many things, especially from
the Jews, who left no Christian unpersecuted, as is evident from the
Acts of the Apostles and many of Paul\'s letters. But all this they
suffered in vain, if, having fallen back under the law, they should
remain apart from the faith; nevertheless, because he hopes that they
will return, he says, \"Is it otherwise in vain?\" as if to say: If ye
return, 1) ye have not suffered in vain. For he makes a conclusion, in
which he points out to them their harm and their vain labor, in order to
move them, because through the law they are forfeiting not only the
righteousness of Christ, but at the same time all his merits and
rewards.

**V. 5. He then that giveth you the Spirit, and doeth such works among
you, doth he it by the works of the law, or by the preaching of faith?**

But he repeats and reinforces what he had already said above. For he
consults experience, by which he binds them most strongly, but at the
same time also to add the following and to connect it with it.
Previously he had only held against them that they had received the
Spirit \[v. 2\], but now also \"the doing of deeds,\" that is, the
miraculous works of which they could not deny that they had not done
them before by the works of the law.

**V. 6. Just as Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness.**

21\. this example and this reason for proof he deals with extensively
Rom. 4, 9. where he proves that Abraham was circumcised before the
circumcision.

1\) Jenaer, Dorn. Ill, has oreüiäeritis instead of reäieritis in the
other editions. A single edition offers roä6i66ritis, from which the
reading of Jenaer may have sprung.

2\) In the \'first redaction it says here: \"Add: .gibt\' or .thut\'.\"
We have omitted this because Luther already added this addition in his
translation.

and this faith was counted to him as righteousness. It is probable that
he had also treated the same doctrine orally with the Galatians and now
reminded them of it and tried to bring them back to the former
understanding.

**V. 7. Now therefore ye know that they which are of faith are the
children of Abraham.**

\(22\) You see from the scripture just quoted that those who come from
the seed of Abraham or from circumcision 3) are not Abraham\'s children.
Rom. 4, 11: \"He received the sign of circumcision as a seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he still had in the foreskin, that he
might be a father to all who believe in the foreskin, that it might be
counted to them also for righteousness\", and Rom. 9, 7. 8: \"In Isaac
the seed shall be called unto thee, that is, they are not the children
of God according to the flesh, but the children of promise are counted
for seed.\"

23 From this passage you see how carefully and thoughtfully he wants the
Scriptures to be read. For who would have drawn these reasons of proof
from the text of the first book of Moses, that Abraham believed before
the circumcision, that he received Isaac only by the promise, and by
this is meant: Just as Isaac was conceived (acceptus) by the faith of
Abraham, who believed the promise of God, and he was given (vocatus) to
him for a seed, so no other 4) should be Abraham\'s son or seed but the
one promised and conceived in faith, and that so long before the glory
of the Jews should be dashed to the ground, by which they boast of the
fathers according to the flesh? I believe that this expression \"being
of faith\", \"being of works\" is already sufficiently known. \"They are
of faith\" (sunt ex fide) those who believe, and afterwards \[v. 10.\],
\"they are of the works of the law\" (sunt ex operibus legis) those who
handle the works. Such are the expressions \"from the law

3\) Inserted by us.

4\) Here, in the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger, an
\<iuanr is inserted.

1472 Lri. \"Äi. Ill, 262-265. Shorter interpretation of Galatians 3, 7.
8. W.IX, I48f. 1473

To be,\" \"to be of the circumcision,\" and similar in Paul.

\(24\) But the apostle does not remain (non servat) with the rules of
the dialectical conclusion. For he says that the Spirit was given and
deeds done through the preaching of faith, and proves this by saying
that faith was counted for righteousness to Abraham in this way. Is not,
then, faith being counted for righteousness the same as receiving the
Spirit? Either he proves nothing, or \"receiving the Spirit\" and
\"being counted for righteousness\" must be one and the same thing,
which is also true \[and therefore is stated, lest one think that divine
imputation is nothing apart from (extra) GOD, as those do who think that
the apostle\'s word \"grace\" designates 1) more a gracious disposition
(favorem) than a gift. For if GOD is gracious and imputes, then in truth
the spirit, the gift and the grace are received. For otherwise the grace
would be from eternity and would remain in (intra) GOtte, if it meant
only a gracious disposition, therefore that it would be only a gracious
disposition toward men. For just as God loves by deed, not merely by
words, so also He is gracious by the present gift (*re*), not merely by
words\]. This also does not seem to be a correct way of concluding that
he says: Abraham believed God, therefore those are Abraham\'s children
who are of faith. According to the same dialectics, you could say:
Abraham begot a son with his wife, or he ate, or did something else, so
he is his son who does the same. Finally, the Jews would also like to
have their opinion confirmed: Abraham was circumcised, therefore the
circumcised must be his children.

25 But the apostle looks at Abraham, because he received Isaac (who
alone was promised to him as a seed) by means (merito) of faith. For he
was not praised because of his faith when he begat Ishmael, but only
then was he appointed father of the faith and of many nations when

1\) Instead of siZniüeari in the editions, we have adopted siZviLeare,
because otherwise it should read: verbo \"iZniüoari; not to stray\".

he received his right son and the legitimate (legitimum) seed.
Therefore, Isaac is not both a son of the flesh and of faith; Abraham\'s
flesh could not produce him, but Abraham\'s faith produced him, but from
his flesh. Therefore, he is not both Abraham\'s son and the son of him
who believed in the promise of God. That is why so many words are used
in the first book of Moses to describe the promise of the seed, and
Abraham\'s faith in it, and the naming of the seed in Isaac, who was
thus promised and believed, so that it may be shown that these are not
Abraham\'s children who are born of the flesh, but those who are born to
him by faith. Therefore, he continues what he said very briefly, how the
children of Abraham are those who are of faith, because of the promise
that was not made to Ishmael; therefore, he was not counted as his seed.

**V. 8. But the Scriptures have seen before that God justifies the
Gentiles through faith. It proclaims to Abraham: \"In you all the
Gentiles will be blessed.**

26 \"Foreseen,\" that is, seen long before. \[\"The Scripture,\" that
is, the Spirit in the Scripture. If we take what is said here, \"In thee
shall all the Gentiles be blessed,\" for what is written in Gen. 12:3,
the apostle does not alone make us understand the difficulty with which
St. Jerome struggles with, that the apostles express the meaning more
than the words, but rather the difficulty that Abraham at that time had
not yet received the promise concerning the son, nor had he been
commended because of his faith, which did not happen until the 15th
chapter. Therefore Jerome takes the passage Gen. 22, 18. where after the
temptation of Abraham it is said: \"Through your seed all nations on
earth shall be blessed, because you have obeyed my voice.\" But the
apostle does not say in this place, \"In thy seed,\" but, \"In thee,\"
as it is said in Gen. 12. And I follow Jerome\] I believe that the
apostle, for the sake of brevity.

1474 Oai. Ill, 265-267. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 149-152. 1475

The words \"in your seed\" were left out, because he wanted to put both
soon after. He says \[v. 16\], \"Now the promise is ever made to Abraham
and to his seed,\" and so both are true, that in Abraham and in his seed
the promise is fulfilled. But it does not matter which of the two he
said here.

27\. Since this is said to Abraham, not to any man of the flesh, but to
him who already believed, who was obedient, who was a spiritual man and
a completely different man, who also had the promise, it follows that
the Scripture intended to teach us that only those were Abraham\'s
children, who were of such a nature, that is, who were Abraham\'s
children and seed, to the extent that those who were not of his flesh,
namely the Gentiles, would also become children, as he says here that
God also justifies the Gentiles through faith, as the Scriptures had
previously seen and proclaimed to Abraham.

So we are blessed in Abraham. But in which Abraham? Without doubt in the
believing one. Now if we are apart from Abraham, we shall rather be
under the curse, though we belong to Abraham\'s flesh, for the Scripture
does not deal with Abraham\'s flesh. So there are those in Abraham who
believe God, just as Abraham did.

**V. 9. So now those who are of faith will be blessed with the believing
Abraham.**

\(29\) Note the epithet added to the name Abraham, \"the believer\";
they will be blessed with the believing Abraham, not with the flesh that
begets or does other things. For the Scripture ascribes children or seed
only to the believer. So those who are without faith do not obtain their
father\'s image (imaginem), nor his inheritance. Therefore they are not
children, but bastards.

30 But here a Klügling would still like to raise the objection: even so
the way of the conclusion is not yet valid: Abraham believes, therefore
the believers are his children; because by faith Abraham indeed obtained
the son and the seed, but from this it does not follow that his sons
must believe.

Otherwise, all the things he obtained by faith would necessarily have to
believe, or they would not belong to Abraham. But it would be necessary
for the land of Canaan to believe. So it is enough that Abraham believed
and obtained children, but therefore his children do not have to
believe.

First, the apostle believes that it is enough for the Galatians, as
simple-minded people, to know that they cannot be Abraham\'s children if
they are not like him. The deeper reason (rationem) of this mystery,
which he elaborates on in Rom. 9, 6. ff. 1), he intentionally ignores
here. For in fact only the children of Abraham\'s promise are children.
But since the divine promise and provision (praedestinatio) cannot be
lacking, it follows without difficulty and with infallible conclusion
that all those who have been promised are also believers, so that the
faith of those who have been promised is fixed, not because works and
their faith compel this (necessitate), but because the divine election
(electionis) is fixed. At this point it was enough to recommend the
succession of Abraham, but not to inculcate the sublimity of the promise
and the provision.

32 Although therefore this conclusion does not exist: Abraham believes,
therefore his children will also believe, unless you consider the
children of the promise (who cannot stand firm either in their own
righteousness or in the righteousness of Abraham, but in the choice of
God; nor do they believe because they are children of Abraham, but
become children of Abraham because they most certainly believe, since
they are given to Abraham by God, who cannot lie in his promise), yet
this conclusion stands: Abraham believed, so his children must also
believe if they want to be children. This was enough, I say, for the
unintelligent Galatians; for the wise Romans something else had to be
said. Therefore, those who believe are Abraham\'s children, others are
not.

**V. 10 For those who do the works of the law are under the curse. For
it is written**

1\) In all editions: \"Rom. 10.\"

1476 Lri. Kai. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians 3,
10. W. IX, 152-155. 1477

**written: Cursed be every man that continueth not in all things which
are written in the book of the law to do them.**

\(33\) He had said that those who have faith are blessed. Now he says in
another argument, which is taken from the opposite, that those who deal
in works are under the curse. But see the wonderful conclusion of the
apostle. He takes from Deut. 27:26 that those who do not do what is
written in the book of the law are cursed. From this negative sentence
(negativa) he concludes this affirmative sentence (affirmativam): Cursed
are those who do the works of the law. Does he not affirm what Moses
denies? And to make the inconsistency even greater, he proves his
affirmative sentence by the negative sentence of Moses. Here a Festus
Portius would like to say \[Apost. 26, 24.\], \"Paule, you are raving,
the great art makes you raving.\" What shall we say now? Are then they
blessed who do not do the works of the law, even according to the
teaching of so great an apostle? But Moses says that those who do not do
them are cursed.

34 Therefore it remains, as we said above, that all those who are
without faith do the works of the law, but do not keep the law. For the
works of the law are pretended works, as he also says later, Cap. 6, 13:
\"For even they themselves, who are circumcised, do not keep the law,\"
and Cap. 5, 3: \"But I testify to every one who is circumcised that he
still owes to keep the whole law. Behold, he fulfills nothing of the
whole law who allows himself to be circumcised, so not even if he does
any other work of the law. From this it follows that by this word Moses
forced all men under the curse, and that when he said, \"Cursed be every
man,\" 2c. he meant to express the same thing as if he had said, \"No
man shall do these things which are written, therefore all shall be
under the curse, and have need of the Savior of Christ.

35 Therefore it is established by the apostle and by the truth itself,
that those who do the works of the law do not fulfill the law, and in
doing it, do not do it,

Just as Christ said \[Matth. 13, 13.\] that they do not hear if they
already hear, and do not see if they already see. For they make
themselves believe that they are fulfilling the law and doing the works
of the law, but rather they are pretending, since without grace they can
neither purify their hearts nor their bodies. Therefore it is necessary
that nothing be pure for the unclean.

\(36\) I now consider that my neutral opponents (neutralenses) are
sufficiently defeated by this passage, who have invented certain neutral
works and those that are good as far as the moral life is concerned (in
genere morum). Here the apostle curses the works of the law, of the law
of God, I say, which have undoubtedly been better than the works that
are done according to the input of reason (dictaminis naturalis), which
still make the snorers safe. But they say that the apostle speaks of
ceremonial laws, which are now fatal. On the other hand, ceremonial
things are not evil, nor have they ever been evil, but when trust is
placed in them, as St. Augustine teaches. Then it is evident that the
apostle speaks of all the laws, that he also (to which Jerome objects)
added to Mosiah\'s words \"every man\" and \"all that\" by saying,
\"That which is written in the book of the law\"; but this is most
evident from the fact that he immediately \[v. 13\] says that Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the law; but the Gentiles were never under
the curse of the ceremonial law. So all the redeemed have been under the
curse of the law.

For, as I said before, Christ would have done very little if he had
freed us from circumcision, from Sabbaths, from clothing, from food and
washing, and not much more from the more serious sins against the law,
from evil desire, from lust, from anger, from ungodliness. Then, in
truth, he would not have been a savior of souls, but of bodies, because
these were all bodily things. Therefore, in truth, the work of any law
is sin and a curse if it is done apart from faith, that is, without
purity of heart, innocence and righteousness.

I will leave this to the reader\'s judgment.

1478 \"I-I. Orn. m, 269-272. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 155-157. 1479

Whether it is the same or different what Paul says: \"Those who do the
works of the law\", and what Moses says: \"He who does not abide in all
things\", or (as it is written in Hebrew): He who will not confirm all
things 2c., \"that he may do them\". Perhaps \"doing the works of the
law\" is different from \"doing what is written,\" so that \"doing what
is written\" may be the same as \"fulfilling,\" and \"doing the works of
the law\" may be the same as \"standing with some outward works, as if
fulfilling,\" as Christ says \[Luc. 6:46\], \"Why call ye me Sir, Sir,
and do not those things which I say unto you?\" and Rom. 2:13, \"They
that hear the law are not righteous, but they that do the law shall be
righteous.\" For it is certain that the curse remains on both, both on
those who do not do it, as Moses says, and on those who deal with the
works of the law, as the apostle says. Therefore, as I have said,
Paul\'s way of speaking contains in itself that those who do the works
of the law do not do what is written in the law, in which faith is
undoubtedly written. This alone does everything that the law requires.

**V. 11. But that by the law no one is justified before God is evident,
for the just shall live by faith.**

This is a reason of proof (subsumtio) by which he wants to explain the
word quoted from Moses, as if he said: You hear from Moses that he is
accursed who has not done what is written, and I have likewise assumed
that such people are those who deal with the works of the law. That both
are true is proven from the fact that no one is justified before God by
the Law; if he is not justified before God, then he does not do what is
written. If this is so, then he is in truth accursed. For those who do
what is written will be justified.

40 But that the perpetrators of the law do not do so is proven by the
fact that the righteous lives by his faith, Habak. 2, 4. If this 1)
Scripture passage is true, as it is

1\) The editions of the first Redaction, the Weimar and the Erlangen:
Nie: statt Uns\".

must be true, and the works of the law, since 2) they are without faith,
are undoubtedly dead, then he who does them is also unrighteous. But if
he is unrighteous, it follows that he does not do what is written. Here
I would also like to note that in lege is said for \"by the law\" (per
legem seu lege), so that the meaning is: By the law no one can become
righteous before God, so that it also includes the works of the law at
the same time.

**V. 12. But the law is not of faith.**

\(41\) This is what I said, that therefore by the law no one is
justified, because the justified is justified by faith alone. But law
and faith are not the same. Neither the law itself nor its works are of
faith nor with faith. Therefore, they are righteous only before men, but
not before God, as follows:

**But the person who does it will live through it.**

This word from the third book of Moses, Cap. 18, 5, is also used in Rom.
10, 5. But this is the opinion of the apostle: The law does not make
alive, nor does it justify before God. But whoever does what the law
contains will live as a man by it, that is, he will escape the
punishment of the law and gain the reward of the law, but he will not
live in God, not even as a child of Abraham. Therefore, consider the
meaning of the words, Man shall live by the works of the law, who yet is
dead in the sight of God. \"Man,\" I say, not: the righteous; and in
those works, I say, in his own, he shall live, that is, he shall
preserve his life, that he be not slain by the judgment of the law, but
he shall not thereby live as a righteous man, but by faith.

43\) Remember, then, that in this passage you learned from the apostle
that works of the law are those by which we appear righteous before men
and as people who keep the law, but inwardly, because faith is lacking,
we are nothing less than righteous; therefore, by the law only
hypocrites can be righteous.

2\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger euna is
missing.

1480 Lri. 6Äi. m, 272-274. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 3, 12-14. W. IX, 157-160. 1481

The graves that are beautifully decorated on the outside are full of
filth on the inside.

44 For the fact that St. Jerome did not understand Paul in this and
similar passages was due to the fact that he did not correctly recognize
the works of the law and the excessive allegorizing of Origen. For he
says in this passage that Moses and the prophets were under the works of
the law and under the curse, which is quite false. For they lived
justified by faith and sanctified before God, even before the law and
the works of the law were commanded, of which he himself expresses the
opinion that they concern only the ceremonies. \[But afterwards he comes
back on the right track by the power of truth, saying that they were
sinners according to the saying of Ecclesiastes, 7, 21. 1) (Vulg.):
\"There is not a righteous man on earth who does good and does not
sin\", which must be understood in a bad way from the moral law\].

45 He also understands \"the righteous lives by his faith\" in such a
way that if faith is added to the righteous, his righteousness comes to
life, so that he claims that even without faith there are virtues, but
deficient ones (vitiosas). But this and other things should be read by
the sensible reader in such a way that he remembers that this is quoted
by St. Jerome from others. There is none righteous before faith, but he
is made righteous in vain, and receives good for evil. For the apostle
wants the man to live by the law with men, but the righteous man by
faith with God, that is, that the righteousness, life and blessedness of
man with God is faith; not righteousness earlier than faith, but by
faith righteousness and life.

**V. 13. 14. But Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, being a
curse for us (for it is written, Cursed be every man that hangeth on the
tree), that the blessing of Abraham might come among the Gentiles in
Christ Jesus, and that we might receive the promised Spirit through
faith.**

1\) Weimarsche: 7, 20,

\(46\) First, I argue against those who are neither under the curse of
the law nor in need of the Savior Christ. These are they who say that it
is another thing for a thing to be contrary to the law, and another
thing for it to be contrary to the intention of the law. He who acts
against the law sins, but he who acts against the intention of the law
does not sin, but only has infirmities of good. Who can suffer such
poisonous speeches? But listen to how they prove it (\"the intention\"
they call it, that God demands that the works of the law be done in
love): If a man (they say) should be held to the intention of the law,
it would follow that he who is apart from grace sins without ceasing, in
that he does not kill, does not break marriage, does not steal 2c. I
answer: He does not sin by not killing, 2c. but sins inwardly, by
hating, having evil desires, being secretly full of covetousness, and
evidently provoked to anger. For this hidden uncleanness of heart and
flesh is not removed except by faith through the grace of Christ.

\(47\) So it is not the intention of the law that it should be kept in
grace, as if grace were a kind of compulsion, but the law has the
intention (intendit) that it should be kept. But it cannot be kept
without grace, so it compels one to seek grace. Therefore we are all
under the curse of the law, who are without the grace of faith, as has
already been sufficiently said. For since the righteous lives by faith
alone, the curse of the law against unbelievers is manifest, lest we
make the redemption of Christ vain, or refer it only to ceremonial
things, from which a man also could have redeemed us. Finally, the works
of the law could also have been done out of our ability (ex nobis).

\(48\) It only remains, then, that he redeemed us from wrath,
ungodliness, evil desire, and other evils in the heart and flesh, which
were planted by Adam and Eve, since we all, being defiled by them,
\[brought about stained righteousness and so\] fulfilled nothing of the
law. Therefore

1482 Ali- m\> 274-276. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 160-163. 1483

we were rightly consigned to curse and damnation. Thus we have through
the law not a help, but a reminder and a reminder of our evil. Just as
he says in the second letter to the Corinthians \[Cap. 5, 21\] that
Christ was made sin for us, so that we might become in him the
righteousness that is valid before God, so he says here, speaking in
exactly the same way (tropo), that he became a curse, so that the
blessing of Abraham might come to the Gentiles in the same Christ. 1)

\(49\) So he died that we might be life in him, so he was put to shame
that we might be glory in him; he became all things to us that we might
become all things in him. That is, if we believe in him, we fulfill the
law and are free from the curse of the law. For what we deserved, to be
cursed and condemned, he suffered and paid for.

Jerome agonizes so that he does not allow Christ to be cursed by God.
First, he complains that the apostle does not accurately reproduce the
words of the Law, which read thus, Deut. 21:23: \"A hanged man is
accursed by God.\" But the apostle followed the seventy interpreters and
says: \"Cursed be every man that hangeth on the tree,\" omitting the
little word \"by God\" which they put. In short, although the Hebrew
does not say \"on the wood\" and \"everyone\", what precedes in the text
forces that Moses must be understood by anyone who has been hanged on a
wood. Therefore the apostle did not change anything, in which something
could have been attached. But the fact that he omitted \"by God\" is not
the reason either; the apostle was sure that this would be understood as
having been done by God.

St. Augustine tells us that some unlearned men would have understood it
of Judas the betrayer, who arose. \[But the clear text of the apostle,
that Christ therefore became a curse, does not stand there,

1\) Here we have not followed the punctuation of the Weimar edition,
which puts a punctum before 8imili ornnino tropo, and draws it to the
following. The Wittenberg, like us, has drawn it to the preceding.

that he had committed something worthy of cursing, but because it is a
very general judgment of Scripture that everyone who hangs on the wood
is cursed by God. Perhaps the apostle, because it was terrible that
Christ should be called accursed, softened this by immediately quoting
the saying of Scripture.

52 It is therefore nothing that St. Jerome does not want this word to be
understood of Christ, since the apostle considers it a general saying,
and wanted to prove of Christ what he had said. For since Christ himself
\[Luc. 22, 37.\] from Isaiah, Cap. 53, 12., says that he is counted
equal with the wicked, what is it then monstrous that he should be
called an accursed man with the accursed? If he was counted among the
wicked, he must also be called what the wicked are called, and suffer
what they suffer.

\(53\) Now man is twofold, one within and one without; so also there is
a twofold blessing and a twofold curse. The inward blessing is grace and
righteousness in the Holy Spirit. This was actually promised to Abraham
in Christ. The inward curse is sin, ungodliness, as the 119th Psalm, v.
21, says: \"Cursed are they that do not keep thy commandments,\" and
Matth. 25, 41: \"Depart from me, ye cursed,\" 2c., and Jer. 48, 10:
\"Cursed be he that doeth the work of the Lord unadvisedly,\" and there
\[Cap. 17, 5.\]: \"Cursed is the man that trusteth in man.\" The outward
blessing is the abundance of bodily things. This is peculiar to the old
law. The curse is poverty, as Mal. 3:9: \"Ye are cursed, that all things
should melt away from under your hands.\" Thus Christ cursed the fig
tree and it withered \[Matth. 21, 19.). This is also what Elisha did \[2
Kings 2:24\] to the children of Bethel. So it should not cause any
offence that Christ with all his saints is cursed with an outward curse,
and at the same time blessed with an inward blessing, as it is said in
Ps. 109, 28: \"If they curse, thou blessest them.\" So also it is no
abomination that Christ died, suffered, was crucified, rather he says
\[Matth. 5, 11. Vulg.\], \"Blessed are ye when men curse you.\"

54\. but you will say: you are still proving

1484 Lii. \" Li. in, 276-279. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 3, 13-15. W. ix, iW-i65. 1485

not that he was cursed by God, because that moved St. Jerome. I answer:
The curse of men undoubtedly befalls a man when God has commanded it, as
2 Sam. 16, 10: \"The LORD hath commanded him, Curse David,\" and there,
v. 11: \"Let him be restrained to curse, for the LORD hath commanded
him.\" The Lord did not command Shimei to curse, but since he was full
of curses, he wanted him to pour out his curses against David in order
to use the evil in him.

55\) But that St. Jerome boldly says that it is not found in Scripture
that anyone was cursed by God, and that the name of God is never
connected with a curse, I wonder how he could have understood that Gen.
3, 14. the serpent is cursed by God, and, v. 17. the field at the work
of Adam. But also Cain is cursed by God, Cap. 4, 11.; likewise Elisha
cursed, 2 Kings 2, 24., the children of Bethel in the name of the LORD;
and Habakkuk 4, 14., \"Thou wouldest curse the scepter of the head,\"
and Malachi 2, 2., \"I will curse your blessing, and will bless where ye
curse.\" \[Perhaps the holy man will understand it in such a way that
more the curse is announced than that a cursing takes place, because
according to the usual way of speaking \"curse\" is almost as if all
things, especially the spiritual and eternal, should perish, and it is
certain that in this way Cain and the earth were not cursed, because it
is said (Gen. 4, 11.): \"Cursed be you on earth.\" For it is also said
in Matth. 25, 41: \"Depart from me, you cursed.\"\] 1)

But let us return to the apostle. \"That the blessing of Abraham might
come among the Gentiles in Christ JEsu,\" that is, that the blessing
might be fulfilled which was promised to Abraham, that he should be a
father of many\' Gentiles in faith. This faith, I say, has been promised
in the blessing.

57\. therefore touches here again briefly and

1\) What is enclosed here in square brackets is so badly interpung in
the editions that there is no suitable sense.

dark that the Gentiles would be Abraham\'s children, not because they
followed him, but because the promise had been made to them, and
therefore they would follow because they were to be children by God\'s
promise and fulfillment, not by the Gentiles doing it and following. It
was not discipleship that made children, but filiation that made
followers. But he adds, \"in Christ,\" so as not to go off track,
because the Gentiles did not become children of Abraham by their merit,
but also not by any other way than through Christ, who earned this for
them and was received by them through faith, as follows, \"so that we
might receive the promised Spirit,\" that is, the promise that the Holy
Spirit should be given to us, \"through faith.\" For the Holy Spirit is
promised to Abraham when \[he\] was promised the blessing of faith. Also
faith is given by the Holy Spirit through Christ\'s merit in the word
and preaching of the Gospel.

**V. 15 Dear brethren, I will speak in a human way: Do not despise a
man\'s testament when it is confirmed, and do nothing about it.**

58 Here the apostle leaves out the last part of the speech (apocopen
facit), because it must be added: So much less must one despise God\'s
testament and do something about it after it has been confirmed. He
says: \"In a human way\", as Jerome thinks, in order to teach the
unlearned Galatians divine things through a human similitude. But, as I
judge from this, no one is so learned that he should not need such
parables to learn Christ rightly; yes, this example of the parable was
extremely necessary, otherwise it would have been even more difficult to
understand than Rom. 4, where he does the same without such a parable,
and I have not yet seen anyone who would have interpreted this passage
correctly (digne).

\(59\) Let us therefore set both before our eyes, the likeness and the
thing itself, and we shall see with how mighty a reason of proof he
again thrusts the justice of the law to the ground. He be-

1486 Lri. Ski. Ill, 27S-281. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 165-168. 1487

but intends to make this conclusion: If we can have righteousness of
ourselves by the law and its works, then the promise of blessing given
to Abraham is already in vain, because without it we can be righteous by
the law, or at least it is not sufficient to make us righteous, if the
righteousness of the law must still be added, and so the testament and
promise of God is either superfluous or lacking, so that it is necessary
to add something else to it. But both are quite abominable; so the
opposite is true, that the righteousness of the law is neither necessary
nor sufficient. Behold, this is certainly an exceedingly strong ground
of proof.

60 So let us see: In every will there is a testator; there is one for
whom the will is made; there is the will itself; there is a thing that
is promised or bequeathed. So here GOD is the testator, for he promises
and bequeaths. Abraham and his seed are the ones for whom the will is
made as heirs of GOD, the Testator. The testament is the promise Gen.
12,^1^ ) 2. 3. and 17, 7. The bequeathed thing is the inheritance, that
is, the grace and righteousness of faith, namely the blessing of the
Gentiles in the seed of Abraham. If, then, the grace of the promise and
the righteousness of God, which is given through Christ (and so the
testament of God is confirmed by his death, even already executed and
given out), is not sufficient, unless you also have the righteousness of
the law: will not the testament of God, which is not only made, but also
confirmed and fulfilled, also be in vain, and something added to it,
which even in a man\'s testament may not be done? But if grace is
sufficient, and the testament of God is firm, it is evident that one
should not seek the righteousness of the law. The same is said in Rom.
4:14: \"For where they that are of the law are heirs, faith is nothing,
and the promise is abolished\"; for if the righteousness of the law were
sufficient, faith and the promise of the law would not be sufficient.

1\) Weimar wrong: Gen. 21, 2. ff.

The grace promised to Abraham would not have been necessary.

61 You see how correctly the apostle treats the Scriptures, so that it
is impossible for those to understand him who think he is speaking only
of the ceremonial law. For with the same reason of proof he concludes
against righteousness from the holy ten commandments: If we can be
justified by the works of them, faith and the blessing promised to
Abraham, which is to be spread among the Gentiles, is in vain, since
without faith and \[that\] blessing we are justified.

**V. 16. Now the promise is ever made to Abraham and his seed.**

62 That is, the testament of God, which has been decreed with reference
to him, which he calls here \"the promise\", immediately afterwards \[v.
17\] \"the testament\". Now notice how he applies the simile given by
the testament. He says, \"The promise is promised,\" that is, the things
bequeathed, the testament. But what things? The blessing of the Gentiles
in his seed, that is, the grace of faith in Christ. Therefore it
follows:

**He does not speak: through the seeds, as (**quasi**) through many, but
as (**quasi**) through One, through your seed, which is Christ.**

This quasi is badly chosen, it would be better to say \"as (*ut*)
through many\", \"as (*[ut]{.underline}*) through one\", which is
obvious from the grammatical sense. See how he teaches that through the
seed of Abraham Christ is signified, lest the Jews should boast that it
is they in whom the Gentiles should be blessed, since they are so many
that it could never be certain in whom enough of the promise would
happen, and again the promise would be put in jeopardy, and the
testament of God would fall to the ground. Therefore, one seed had to be
named to whom this blessing was to be given, not only for the sake of
certainty, but also because of the unity of the One People of God, in
order to prevent sects.

So you have the testator, the will, the thing the will is about, and
those for whom it is made. Now all that remains is that it be confirmed
that

1488 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 281-284. shorter interpretation of Galatians 3,
16-18. W. IX, I68-I7I. 1489

that which has been confirmed is made manifest and distributed, that is,
that the Gentiles receive this blessing in Christ.

**V. 17. But I say of it.**

65 That is, what I had in mind, I now say, now I explain myself and make
the application.

**The testament, which is confirmed by God beforehand on Christ.**

That is, it came into effect through the death of Christ (ratum factum).
But \"confirmed in Christ\" means that it was laid down in Christ and
distributed to the Gentiles. For through Christ the testament of God to
Christ was fulfilled. For Christ did not die in such a way that the
grace of faith was poured out, by which we are to believe in someone
other than Christ, but only in this Christ.

**It is not abolished, that the promise should cease by the law, which
is given four hundred and thirty years after.**

In his great zeal, the apostle speaks in a very dark and veiled way. He
says that the testament of God, which is confirmed in Christ, does not
have to be annulled by the law and its righteousness. But it would be
annulled, and the promise would be completely destroyed, if works of the
law were necessary for righteousness, as if the grace of the promise
were insufficient or ineffective for our justification.

67 But that he adds: \"The law, which was given four hundred and thirty
years afterward,\" seems to be a way of diminishing the law, as if to
say, \"If the promise had been given according to the law, it might have
seemed that it was rightly obtained through the righteousness of the
law: If the promise had been given according to the law, it might have
seemed as if it had been rightly obtained through the righteousness of
the law. But now grace and righteousness are given so completely 1)
without the works of the law, that it was promised even so many years
before the law, much more before the righteousness of the law, since no
one deserved it,

1\) In the Wittenberg, the Weimar, and the first single edition of the
second redaction udeo; in the other editions: a veo.

no one asked for it, but in that God\'s mercy gave this promise by grace
alone. Why, then, should the law nullify this promise of mercy, and now
the showing of mercy, since the law did nothing to either? And Rom. 3:21
says: \"Without the law the righteousness that is before God is
revealed\"; indeed, Rom. 4:14-16 says that the law has done the
opposite, since it rather causes wrath and increases sins. Far be it,
then, that righteousness should be based on the law and our works;
rather, it should be based on the completely reliable promise of God,
who does not lie, even though we become worse and more unworthy through
the law.

**V. 18 For if the inheritance were acquired by law, it would not be
given by promise.**

68 That is, if the righteousness promised to Abraham in the blessing is
of the works of the law and of us, then the promise is off and
superfluous. It cannot be one and the same from us and from God, since
he is true, but we are liars. He proves by this word what he has already
said, that the promise by the law does not cease, for, he says, if by
the law \[righteousness comes\], 2) the promise by the law is taken
away, as he also says Rom. 4:14, \"Where we are heirs of the law, the
promise is taken away.\"

\(69\) I have sufficiently discussed the apostle\'s way of speaking
above, that he considers the law and the works of the law and the
righteousness of the law to be one and the same, that such righteousness
does not come from us willingly, but only by compulsion of the law. Our
theologians call this: from us, or from our powers, or from purely
natural ability (ex puris naturalibus). Therefore, they cannot
understand Paul, who seems to accuse the law.

**But God gave it freely to Abraham by promise.**

70\. he did not give it by the law, but gave it freely by the promise,

2\) Added by us.

1490 L\--1. 6ai. Ill, 284-286. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, I7I-I73. 1491

when the law was not yet there, much less did he fulfill it by the law
coming. So you have all the evidence of the apostle.

71 Now we must consider that he says the law was given four hundred and
thirty years later. For these years are counted from the departure of
Abraham from his land, when he first received the promise, Genesis
12:1-3, until the departure of the children of Israel in this way:
Abraham was seventy-five years old when he went out of his land, Gen.
12:4, but when he was a hundred years old, Isaac was born to him \[Gen.
21:5\]; so you have twenty-five years. Isaac being sixty years old,
Jacob and Esau were born unto him, Gen. 25, 26.; mark sixty years. Jacob
was ninety years old when Joseph was born to him; mark ninety years; as
may be inferred from many chapters of the first book of Moses. Joseph
lived one hundred and ten years, Gen. 50:26, after which the bondage in
Egypt lasted sixty-five years, as seen in Philo. 1) Then Moses was born,
in whose eightieth year the children of Israel went out. So from the
seventy-fifth year of Abraham to the eightieth year of Moses there are
four hundred and thirty years. \[Whether this is so, let others see. I
am of the opinion of St. Jerome, who says: \"This thing has been sought
by many, and I do not know whether it has been found\"\].

For I believe that the apostle did not say this according to a
calculation he made, but from the 12th chapter of the 2nd book of Moses
\[v. 40.\], where it says: \"Now the time that the children of Israel
dwelt in Egypt is four hundred and thirty years.\" So also Stephen,
Apost. 7, 6, when he tells the story from the first book of Moses, where
God, in the 15th chapter, v. 13, foretold to Abraham that his seed would
serve four hundred years. He (Paul) 2) summarizes both passages
(miscens) and counts four hundred and thirty years.

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, the Weimar and the Erlangen:
ut 3o. Junius ex I\'Uiloue ckicüt.

2\) ip86 me to Paul. For if one wanted to refer it to Stephen, as
Heidnecker did, then what is said here would be in contradiction to
Apost. 7, 6.

73 Note also that the apostle calls the promises of God a testament, as
they are also called in other passages of Scripture, by which he \[God\]
secretly indicated that it would happen that God would die, and so that
in the promise of God, as it were in a made testament, the incarnation
and the suffering of God would be recognized at the same time, for, as
it is said in Heb. 9, 17: \"A testament becomes firm through death.
Therefore also God\'s testament was not to become firm, unless God died,
as it is said there, v. 15, of Christ: \"Therefore he is a mediator of
the new testament, that they might receive the promise by means of
death.\" And this is \[as Christ says John 8:56\] 3) the day of Christ,
which Abraham recognized from the promise of God and rejoiced.

74 By this can be brought at the same time into agreement that St.
Jerome says that in Hebrew rather \"covenant\" (pactum) than
\"testament\" stands. The one who remains alive makes a covenant, the
one who will die makes a testament. Thus Jesus Christ, the immortal God,
made a blind, but at the same time also a testament, because he should
be mortal; just as he is God and man at the same time, so he also makes
a covenant and a testament.

**V. 19. What is the law for?**

\(75\) Since he has said that righteousness cannot be attained by the
law, and supports this with very strong reasons, he sees that it can be
rightly argued against him what the law is good for, since it is seen
that every law is given for the sake of righteousness and good conduct
(mores). And you see sufficiently that he speaks of every law, also of
the holy ten commandments, in all things, as in the fourth and fifth
chapters of the letter to the Romans. But he answers:

**V. 19. 20. It came about because of sins, until the seed came to whom
the promise was made, and was provided by the angels through the hand of
the mediator. But a mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one.**

3\) Added by us.

1492 Oai. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians 3, 19.
20. W. IX, 173-176. 1493

Who would ever have expected such an answer, which is certainly contrary
to all those who understand and talk about the benefits of the law? He
says that the law was given, or added, and set for the purpose, that
sins might abound, in the same sense that he says Rom. 5:20: \"The law
came in beside, that sin might be made more powerful.\"

But that St. Jerome understands it in a negative way, namely that sins
should be kept in check by the law, is contrary to this: First, that
then it should rather have been said that it was given for the sake of
justification, because the law is given for the reason that one should
keep it.

Secondly, that this is a common expression of the apostle: The law is
the power of sin \[1 Cor. 15:56\], the cause of sin \[Rom. 7:11\], a law
of death \[Rom. 7:10\], a law of wrath. Thus it is said in Rom. 4:15,
\"The law worketh wrath: for where the law is not, there is no
transgression.\" It is also certain that where there is no
transgression, there is no forgiveness; where there is no forgiveness,
there is no salvation. Therefore, as forgiveness is for the sake of
blessedness, so transgression is for the sake of forgiveness, so the law
is for the sake of sin. The law is the cause of sin (lex ponit
peccatum), sin causes forgiveness, forgiveness is the cause of
blessedness: all this because without the law sin is dead and not
recognized, Rom. 5 and 7. Sin was in the world, but it was not imputed
until Moses. So the meaning is: The law was given for the sake of sin,
so that it would be sin and become powerful, and man, brought to
self-knowledge by the law, would seek the hand of the merciful God,
while without the law he would not recognize sin and consider himself
healthy.

79 Thirdly, the following is not right either: \"until the seed comes.
For it is inconsistent to say that sin is held in check until Christ
comes, as if it should then no longer be held in check, whereas the
apostle wants the opposite, that sin should not be held in check by the
law alone.

The sin of Adam was not limited, but became even more powerful, until
Christ came and put an end to sin by fulfilling the law and giving
grace, as Gabriel says in the prophet Daniel, Cap. 9, 24: \"That sin
might be ended and everlasting righteousness be brought\", as if he
wanted to say: Sin took its beginning from 1) Adam, also increased
through the law, but will take its end through Christ alone, who brings
eternal righteousness after sin has died, as it is said in Ps. 111, 3.
and 112, 3. \"His righteousness endures forever.\"

Fourthly, it does not agree with this \[v. 21\]: \"Is then the law
against God\'s promises?\" This would not be introduced if the apostle
wanted it to be understood that the law was given to keep sins in check,
because then it would not be against the promises, but for the promises.
But now, since it increases sin and provokes anger, it is evident that
it does not move God to fulfill His promises, but rather to provoke Him
to anger and to prevent \[it\]. If it is understood in this way,
everything in the text hangs together quite nicely; otherwise, however,
it becomes necessary that you invent as many opinions as there are
sentences (constructiones). \[Fifth, that he says, \"By the hand of the
Mediator,\" he says this, as I hold, because the law is not put into our
hand to fulfill it, but into the hand of the future Christ, who will
fulfill it. Therefore it was not given to make righteous, but rather to
accuse sinners and to require the hand of the Mediator. For it was
necessary to resist human hope, so that man would not believe that the
Son of God became man because of his merits, and he would become
ungrateful against such great mercy. Now that we have fallen into debt
2) through the law, we love God as a God all the more faithful and
merciful, the more unworthy we are, to whom He has shown such great
love. For we

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger: in
instead of: ab.

2\) Erlanger: indninnrita instead of: in dornorita.

1494 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 288-290. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 176-178. 1495

have only knowledge through the law, but Christ alone fulfills and does
it\].

Until the seed should come to whom the promise was made,\" that is, in
which the blessing, the righteousness, and the fulfillment of the law
should be given, and the sins which were by the law should no longer be
conquered, but should be blotted out, which is by faith in Christ.
\[What now follows I do not find properly interpreted by any teacher.
Jerome, Augustine and Ambrose pass over it, and say nothing more than
that Christ is the mediator between God and men, but do not show what
the connection is, or how the words are to be understood. Furthermore,
the newer exegetes also bring up quite strange things here. Therefore, I
present to the godly reader what I think about it\].

He says, \"Made by angels through the hand of the Mediator,\" and St.
Stephen also says, Acts 7:53: \"You received the law through the
business of angels and did not keep it. 7:53: \"Ye have received the law
by the ministrations of angels, and have not kept it,\" and Heb. 2:2:
\"For if the word which was spoken by angels be established,\" 2c. It is
evident, then, that the apostle intended the law to be a letter, and
therefore it is nothing but the power of sin, and, as he says 2 Cor.
3:6, \"The letter killeth, but the Spirit quickeneth.\" It is indeed
something great that it is provided by the angels, but that does nothing
for righteousness, because the angels can neither fulfill it for us, nor
give that by which it can be fulfilled; only the one thing they can do,
that they have delivered it to us as God has ordained. But because it is
given by GOD\'s decree, it is undoubtedly given to be understood at the
same time that it must be completely fulfilled, for the angels were not
the authors of the law, but the servants of it. \[Through the angels it
was to come to us in order. So this order is to be broken, and now
between GOD and man not an angel is to be the mediator, but he himself,
who through the angels gives (ordinates) his decrees and keeps us far
from him, he himself, I say, is to come and teach us the law, whose
words will be spirit and life. For it is of no use that he sends any
messengers, if

he himself does not come. The law may be set by the angels, but it is
not set by the hand of the angels, but rather by the hand of a mediator
who acquits and justifies those accused by the law\].

83\) \"By the hand of the mediator. This is Moses, who as a mediator
(sequester) between God and the people received the law from the angels
and delivered it to the people. Therefore he is a servant of sin and a
mediator of death. But Christ is the mediator of a better testament,
says the letter to the Hebrews \[Cap. 8, 6.\]. From this Paul concludes
that the people could not be justified by the law at all, that they
could not even suffer and hear the law, but accepted Moses as a
mediator, which would not have been necessary if they had been able to
hear the law through themselves. How, then, could they do so or be
justified by it? 1)

84\. \"A mediator is not a mediator of one, but God is one. That is, God
had no need of a mediator for Himself, neither in giving the law nor in
bestowing grace. But for us both have been necessary, that we might
suffer the law and receive grace, because a mediator necessarily
mediates between the two. But God is one and does not need a mediator
with another God or with Himself. But we need a mediator with him, who
does not need a mediator. 2)

1\) Instead of this paragraph the following is found in the first
redaction: For this \"by the hand of the mediator\" I understand in such
a way that he alone had the law, which was provided by the angels, in
his power, as he alone was not subject to the law, since he owed nothing
to it and could free from it whom he wanted. But the law has us in its
hand, and we are subject to it through sin. With all this he wants to
say that it is impossible for us to be saved by ourselves, but that this
is easy through the hand of another, namely the mediator. If someone
should think that \"provided by the angels through the hand of the
mediator\" must be understood in this way: through the power and by the
command of the mediator, then I have nothing against it, if someone only
does not think that Moses, who is the mediator of the Old Testament,
must be understood by the mediator, just as he calls Christ, Hebr. 8, 6,
the mediator of a better and of the New Testament.

2\) Instead of this paragraph, the following is found in the first
redaction: Now concerning the word, \"But a mediator is not a mediator
of one,\" he concludes from the name \"mediator\" that we are sinners so
even that

1496 Nri. \"\"I. Ill, N0-2S3. Shorter interpretation d) Galatians 3,
19-21. W. IX, 178-180. 1497

**V. 21. Is the law against God\'s promises? Let that be far off.**

For now that one question is answered in this way, he raises another.
For if the law increases sins, it is seen to make the goodness of the
Promised One vain. This would be true if the promise of blessing was
based on the law or on our righteousness in the law. But now it is based
only on the truthfulness (veritati) of the Promiser; therefore, the law
is not against the promises of God, but rather for the promises of God.

How does this happen? While it shows the sins and proves that no one can
be justified by it, yes, because it also happens that sin is increased
by it, it forces that now the fulfillment of the promise is sought,
requested and expected all the more, since it now seems much more
necessary than when the law was not there. So much is lacking in the
fact that it is against the promises, that it rather puts them very much
to the heart (commends) and makes them exceedingly desirable to those
whom it has humbled by the recognition of their sins.

**But if there were a law that could give life, then righteousness would
truly come from the law.**

That is, it is not contrary to the promises, because it is given to kill
and increase sin, that is, so that man may know through the law how much
he needs the grace of the promise, since he is in need of it.

the works of the law cannot be sufficient. He says: If you are justified
by the law, then you no longer need a mediator; but also God does not
need one, since he is one and agrees with himself in the best way. So a
mediator is sought between two, between God and man; as if he wanted to
say: This would be the most ungodly ingratitude, if you reject the
mediator and turn him back to God, who is one. But you reject him if you
can be justified by the law, and so it will happen that he can neither
be a mediator for you, since you do not want him, nor for God, who has
no need of him. Therefore, the law will also be in your hand and will
not be set by the angels in such a way that it should be fulfilled
through the mediator, but it is completely fulfilled through yourselves.
But what lies hidden deeper may be sought by others; I retract my sails.

by the good, righteous, holy law, so that he does not lean on the law
and become secure by trusting in the works of the law, but seeks
something far different and better through the law, that is, the
promise. For if the law could have made alive) we would be righteous,
and it would work against the promise, even annul it in truth. 2) But
now it rather kills and makes sinners exceedingly sinful (amplius
facit), and just by this it works for the promises by urging (cogit)
that one should desire them all the more, and destroys all righteousness
of works from the ground up. For if it did not destroy them, the grace
of the promise would not be sought, it would be received with
ingratitude, even rejected, as happens by those who do not rightly
understand the law. But it would not destroy them, unless it not only
did not justify or make alive, but also became the cause of more sins
and more death.

For evil desire, when it is forbidden, is always provoked and increases.
Therefore, even though the law seems to be contrary to the promises,
since it increases sin in those who do not recognize sin through the
law, 3) this is not because of the law, because it is not even a law
where it is not rightly understood. But then it is rightly understood
when sin is recognized by it. But where it is understood and sin is
recognized, it certainly works for the promises, because it serves to
make one also sigh for the grace of the promise, by showing at the same
time how grace is due to man through no merit, so that through the
understanding of the law the sincere condescension of the promisor and
the completely sincere gratitude for the granted grace is established
and strengthened.

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Erlanger and the
Weimarschen u leZe instead of per ledern.

2\) The last part of this sentence: \"und es\... aufheben\" is missing
in the editions of the first redaction and in the text of the Erlangen
and Weimar editions.

3\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Erlanger and in the
Weimarschen nZnoseunt instead of aZnoseunt.

[1498 6ai. Ill, 293-292. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 180-183. 1499]{.underline}

**V. 22. But the Scripture has decreed it all under sin, that the
promise might come through faith in Jesus Christ, given to those who
believe.**

By this word he answers both, that the law was given to increase sin,
but that by increasing sin it is not contrary to the promises of God. He
says: \"God has decreed all men to sin through the Scriptures, that is,
He has shown through the Law and the letter that we were sinners and
unable to bring about righteousness or the fulfillment of the Law. By
revealing sin through the law in such a way, and convincing people that
they were unable to fulfill it, God wanted to drive the humble, who
despaired of themselves and were in terror, to run to the mercy of God,
which was given to them by grace and held out to them in Christ, and so
they would be given (as he says here) - \"would be given\", I say, not
\"would be paid for\" - but would be given to those who are not worthy
of it and who, according to the law (per legem), would by far have
deserved the opposite, the promise that happened to Abraham, that is,
the grace and blessing of justification by faith in Christ to all those
who would believe in him.

90\. likewise he says, Rom. 11, 32: \"God has decreed all men to sin,
that he might have mercy on all,\" and \[Rom. 3, 19. 20.\] \"that every
mouth should be stopped up, and that all the world should be guilty of
God, so that no flesh should be justified before him by the works of the
law.\" How did he \[God\] decide? By the Scriptures, by the Law, by the
letter; this is that He confidently declared above \[v. 10.\] of the
works of the Law, that Moses had written, \"Cursed be every man that
abideth not in all these things,\" this is that He Rom. 3, 9. says that
he confidently charges that all, Jews and Greeks, are under sin, and he
pronounces without wavering (constanter) the word of the 14th Psalm \[v.
3\] over all \[Rom. 3, 10-12\]: \"There is not he that is righteous,
there is not he that is understanding; they are all gone astray.

and all of them have become incompetent\", that is why he also declares
the Jews guilty in the second chapter of the letter to the Romans, who
trust in the appearance of their works, while he does not consider this
beautiful appearance to be anything. He says \[Rom. 2, 21.\]: The same
thing that you judge others, you do yourself. \"You preach that one
should steal, and you steal,\" namely, through your evil desire 2c.

He was so certain, as it is indeed certain, that everything that happens
outside of grace is only sin and mere hypocrisy. St. Augustine also says
this very beautifully, since he treats in his book \"Of the Letter and
the Spirit\", Cap. 9, 1) Proverbs 31, 26: \"The law and the hold 2) is
on their tongue\": Therefore, it is written of wisdom that she carries
the law and happiness on her tongue; the law to make the arrogant
guilty; happiness to make the humble righteous.

92\) So the judgment is certain \[Rom. 3, 4. Ps. 116, 11.\]: \"All men
are liars\"; the judgment is certain \[Ps. 143, 2.\]: \"Before you no
living man is righteous\", so that at the same time the honor of God,
the praise of His grace and the glory of His mercy are certain. In the
prophet Daniel, Cap. 9, 7, it says: \"You, Lord, are righteous, but we
must be ashamed\" 2c.

You see what it is to be justified by faith in Christ, namely, that
after you have recognized your ungodliness and your inability through
the law, you despair of yourself, of your powers, of your knowledge, of
the law, of works, and of everything in general, and that with fear and
confidence in humility you implore the right hand of Christ alone, or
the hand of the mediator, in the firm belief that you will obtain grace,
as it is said in Romans 10:13 from the prophet Joel: \"For whoever calls
on the name of the Lord shall be saved. 10:13 from the prophet Joel
\[Cap. 3:5\], \"For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall
be saved.\"

94\. and at the same time you see that the whole human race, by whatever
great wisdom or righteousness it may have before the

1\) In the Jena, lom. I, and in the Erlangen: \"10.\"

2\) Instead of: lex elernentiae in the Vulgate is in Augustine: lex et
6l6rn6ntiu.

1500 Oai. in, 295-297. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 3, 22. 23. w. 183-186. 1501

The people who shine are nothing but a lost and cursed multitude. This
can also be seen from the words of the promise: \"In your seed all
nations shall be blessed.\" But what is this, that all nations shall be
blessed, but that all nations are accursed? Thus it means that they
shall be made righteous and blessed, and all that is signified by the
word \"blessing,\" nothing else but that they are sinful and lost, and
all that is signified by the word \"curse.\"

95 Thus the law was given to increase sin. But not only the increase of
sin was intended, but that the hopeful man would also recognize this and
would be frightened by the law, and that he, forced to despair of
himself, would thirst for mercy like the author of the 42nd Psalm \[v.
2\]: \"As the deer cries for fresh water, so my soul cries to you, O
God.\" Likewise \[v. 4.\], \"My tears are my food day and night, because
they say to me daily, Where is now thy GOD?\" Hence comes all the
crying, groaning, and longing of the fathers and the prophets, and the
anxious waiting for Christ, and the question of the exceedingly heavy
burden of the law. So the law is good, just and holy, but it does not
make righteous. It shows me who I am, while I am irritated by it and
hate righteousness more than before, since I am deterred from evil works
only by the terror of the threatening law. The law alone keeps me from
evil works, but never from evil desire.

96 And to present the matter to you in a parable: Water is good, but
when it is poured on lime, it ignites it. Is it the fault of the water
that the lime becomes hot? Rather, the lime, which was thought to be
cold, has been overpowered by the water of what it had in it. Thus the
law stirs up evil lusts and spitefulness and brings them to light, but
does not cure them. But when oil is poured on lime, it does not become
hot, but its hidden heat is quenched. So also the grace poured out in
our hearts through the Holy Spirit quenches hatred and evil desire. I
have said this in so many words because this matter in our time.

cannot be sufficiently inculcated, where the tyranny of legal justice is
again so badly torn down.

97\. But you notice: If the exceedingly holy law of God has not been
able to justify us, but has only made us more sinners, then what should
these inexhaustible masses (maria) of our laws, statutes and ceremonies
do in the church, especially since they are held in the opinion that one
is justified by them, and they also do not want to admit that one knows
what Christ is, or why one must believe in him? For they do not use
these laws to recognize sin by them, nor to practice faith in Christ in
willing (gratuita) love, but they trust that they are righteous when
they have kept them, and do not believe that they need anything else in
addition. Or when they invoke the grace of Christ, they invoke it so
that they may do such works, not so that they may be free from the
inward corruption and uncleanness of the flesh. Therefore, as I have
often said, through so many unwise and unfortunate laws, the Church must
perish from the bottom up, if God has not prepared a remedy for us.

**V.23. But before faith came, we were kept under the law, and shut up
unto the faith that should be revealed.**

For all, he says, who are under the law before they are justified by
faith, the law is as it were a prison, in which they are shut up and
kept, because they are kept from sinning freely by the power and terror
of the law, since the evil air does not give its will to it and resists
it. For the evil desire rages and hates the law, its prison, but is
nevertheless forced to abstain from the works of sin.

\(99\) But those who have known this misery groan for mercy, utterly
humiliated, and cannot trust in the righteousness of the law, because
they feel that the law makes them unwilling to obey it and inclined to
sin. For they want-

1502 dri. Ill, 297-300. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 186-188. 1503

would rather that there were no law, so that they might be free to
fulfill their lusts with impunity. But this \"preferring\" is hating the
law; hating the law means hating truth, justice, holiness. This is then
no longer sin alone, but also love of sin; not being righteous alone,
but also hating righteousness; that is, in truth, sin being increased by
the law. Therefore St. Augustine says in this passage: \"That they have
been found by the law to have transgressed the law is not to the
destruction but to the profit of them that believe, because by the
knowledge of the greater disease it hath caused them to desire the
physician the more, and to love him the more fervently. For he who is
forgiven most loves most \[Luc. 7, 47.\]; and this is also expressed in
Rom. 5, 20. \"Where sin has become mighty, grace has become much
mightier.\"

\(100\) The law, then, was not given for the sole purpose of revealing
and increasing sin, or it would have been better to postpone it until
the last judgment, lest we be consumed by double trouble (contritione),
but to humble and drive us to Christ through revealed sin.

\(101\) The word, \"Before faith came,\" is not only to be understood of
the faith that was revealed after Christ, but of all the faith of all
the righteous. For even to the fathers the same faith came in time past,
because the law of God, which was also first revealed to them, urged
them to seek grace. Although it was not preached in the whole world at
that time, it was preached especially (privately) in the families of the
fathers. 1) Likewise, see that you do not connect the words, \"shut up
in faith\" (in fidem), as if he meant that we were shut up in faith (in
fide) as in a prison, since he says this of the law, but we were shut up
in the prison of the law, and that in faith (in fidem), that is, to the
faith to come (ad fidem), or to be set free by the faith to come, since
the

1\) From here to the end of the paragraph is missing in the old
translations.

Law, by its imprisonment, caused us to desire to be set free by faith,
as he said above \[v. 17\]: \"The testament, which God confirmed
beforehand in Christ,\" that is, that it would be confirmed in the
future Christ, and now immediately following: \"The law has been our
disciplinarian in Christ,\" that is, to Christ.

**V. 24, 25: So the law was our disciplinarian unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith. But now that faith has come, we are no
longer under the disciplinarian.**

This is certainly a beautiful simile. Paedagogus (child leader) is his
name from puer and ago, because he is to lead and train the children. He
says: \"Just as young children (parvulis) are assigned a disciplinarian
to keep the youth in check, so the law is given to us to limit sins. But
just as children are kept in check only by fear of chastisement, and
also usually hate their disciplinarian and prefer to be free, and do
everything either out of compulsion or induced by words of flattery, but
never out of love for the thing itself or out of free will: so those who
are under the law are kept from the works of sin by fear of the threats
of the law, hate the law, and prefer to have their lusts free. But they
do everything forced by the terror of punishment, or moved by the love
of the temporal promise, but never of happy (gratuita) and free will.

Afterwards, when the children have attained the inheritance and realize
how useful the disciplinarian has been to them, they also begin to love
him and to praise the disciplinarian\'s service, and to condemn
themselves for not having obeyed him gladly and willingly. But now,
without the disciplinarian, they freely and cheerfully do what they did
unwillingly and unwillingly under the disciplinarian. After we have thus
attained faith 2),

2\) The editions of the first Redaction, the Weimar and the Erlangen:
ueHuisita instead of oktentu. Luther changed ULHuisiM to ovtentu because
üäss ae\^uisita was a

1504 Lri. Sai. Ill, 300-302. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 3, 24-27. W. IX, 188-1S1. 1505

which is our rightful inheritance promised to Abraham and his seed, and
recognize how holy and wholesome the law is, but how shameful the evil
lust, we love, praise and approve the law to the highest. Again, the
more we like the law itself, the more we condemn and reprove our evil
lusts, and now we cheerfully and gladly do that, which at that time,
when we did not recognize it, the wholesome law forced from us by heart
with violence and terror, and yet this could not dissuade us inwardly.
This is it that he says we are now no longer under the disciplinarian
after faith has come, but the disciplinarian has become our friend and
is more honored than feared by us. Again (as I have said), beware lest
you read the text thus: The law has been our disciplinarian in Christ
(in Christo), as if for us who already live in Christ the law were our
disciplinarian, as our translation has and seems to mean (sapere). But
this completely overturns the meaning of the apostle.

104\. But as the children are under the disciplinarian for the
inheritance, that is, to be instructed by him, that they may attain to
the inheritance, so the law is our disciplinarian from Christ, that is,
that we, being driven and exercised by the law, may be prepared to seek
Christ, the faith, the inheritance, and to groan after it. For the law
(as I have said) prepares for grace by revealing and increasing sin,
humbling the proud so that they desire help from Christ. And this mind
the apostle strengthens by the following little word: \"Upon Christ,\" I
say, namely, \"that we might be justified by faith,\" who became sinners
by the law, as the 69th Psalm, v. 17. \[Vulg.\], says: \"For thy mercy
is sweet, O Lord.\" Why? Because thy law is bitter, O LORD. So let not
the child remain under the disciplinarian, but.

scholastic expression by which is designated the faith that we ourselves
produce through many acts of faith. Cf. Walch, old edition, vol. VIII,
2145, § 290.

1\) The Vulgate reads v. 24: in OUristo, which Luther changed to: in
OUristurn, according to the Greek: X/\"\<77-0v.

The law is to be instructed so that it receives the inheritance as an
all the more sweet gift (dulcius). So also the law makes the grace of
God all the more sweet and pleasant (commendat).

\(105\) Therefore, he explained the purpose (finem) of the law in an
excellent way, namely, that it is not our righteousness and fulfillment,
but that we should groan for Christ, so that through faith in him we may
seek to attain to fulfillment. But our works saints have for the purpose
of their laws the laws themselves and the works of these laws; neither
do they ordain them for Christ, but only for the works, so that they are
eternally lost with the Jews whom they follow, understanding neither the
law nor its works.

**V. 26. For you are all children of God through faith in Jesus
Christ.**

Since faith is the blessing itself, the inheritance of Abraham himself,
which is promised in his seed, Christ, therefore he who has faith in
Christ has the inheritance of God. If he has the inheritance, he is no
longer under the disciplinarian, but free, and a lord and heir. But the
inheritance is given to no one but the children. From this it follows
that he who believes in Christ is God\'s child, as John 1:12 says: \"He
gave them power to become the children of God, to those who believe in
His name.\"

**For as many of you as have been baptized have put on Christ.**

He declares that they are children of God through faith in Christ.
Baptism (he says) makes you put on Christ. But to put on Christ is to
put on righteousness, truth, and all grace, and the fulfillment of the
whole law. Therefore, through Christ you have the blessing and
inheritance of Abraham. But if you have put on Christ, then Christ is
the Son of God, and you are children of God through this very garment.
This is the apostle\'s way of speaking, which he also uses in Rom. 13,
14: \"But put on the Lord Jesus Christ.\" Eph. 4, 24: \"Put on the new
man who is after God.

48

1506 \^ri. Oai. Ill, 302-305. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 191-193. 1507

is created in righteous justice and holiness.\" He says: \"righteous\",
because if the law alone is there, it only attracts a feigned holiness
and righteousness.

**V. 28. Here is neither Jew nor Greek, here is neither bond nor free,
here is neither male nor female.**

He says, \"You are not righteous because you are a Jew and keep the law,
but because you have put on Christ as a believer in Christ. Why then do
you allow yourselves to be drawn to Judaism by the false apostles? As
with Christ the reputation (persona) of the Jewish observance of the law
does not apply, neither does any other. This is the nature of human and
legal righteousnesses, that they are divided into sects and
distinguished according to their works, in that one confesses and does
this, the other that, and follows that. But in Christ all things are
common, all things are one, and one is all. Thus he says below, Cap. 5,
6: \"In Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor foreskin counts for
anything, but faith\" and \[2 Cor. 5, 17\] \"a new creature\".

Therefore the Christian or the believer is a man without name, without
outward appearance, without outward distinction, without reputation. Ps.
133:1: \"Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in one accord.\" Where there is unity, there is neither outward
appearance nor difference, nor even a name. Thus the famous martyr
Attolus answered very well when asked about the name of GOD: Where there
are several, they are distinguished by names; He who is One needs no
name.

110 And for this reason the church is called in the Scriptures a hidden
and secret one, and it is very well observed that as often as the
righteous are described, they are described without any sect or personal
name, as Ps. 1, 6: \"For the LORD knoweth the way of the righteous\"; he
does not say: of the Jews, of men, of old men, of children; and Ps.
15, 1. 2: \"LORD, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle?\" He answers, \"He
who walks without change\"; he does not say: a Jew, or who belongs to
this and that order (professionis); and Ps. 111, 1: \"In the

He does not say: the priests, the monks, the bishops.

The same judgment is to be made about every other outward appearance
(persona), because God does not look at the person \[Apost. 10, 34\]. So
neither rich nor poor, neither beautiful nor ugly, neither citizen nor
peasant, neither Benedictine nor Carthusian, neither Minorite nor
Augustinian. All this is of such a nature that it does not make a
Christian if it is there, nor an unbeliever if it is not there, and is
absolutely begun and done for the purpose of training the Christian and
making him better.

Therefore St. Augustine says in this passage: \"This difference of Jew
and Gentile, or of class, or of sex, remains in this mortal life for the
sake of the body, but is abolished by the unity of faith in the spirit,
because about this not only the apostles, but also the Lord himself has
given the most salutary teachings. For Christ commands that what is
Caesar\'s is to be given to Caesar, and the apostles command that
servants are to obey their masters, wives are to be subjects of their
husbands, but that everyone is to be obedient to the authorities, giving
the womb to whom the womb is due, honor to whom honor is due. But these
are all things that concern the person (personalia).

Only this is required, that we serve these persons not against the unity
of the faith, but for the unity of the faith, that the inequality of the
outward estate be not stronger than the equality of the inward faith, as
we see, alas! see that now, under the pretense (titulos) of orders,
dignities, spiritual ranks, churches, arts, peoples, countries,
families, friendships, alliances, fights and disputes of the most
manifold kind take place, that already by this one reason of proof it
can be considered proven that the faith in the church is (almost)
extinct, and only larvae and (as Isaiah \[Cap. 13, 21. 22.) says of
Babylon) field spirits, owls and dragons dwell in it.

**For you are all one in Christ Jesus.**

\(114\) That is, you are one in the faith of Christ, though it is
necessary that you be one in the faith of Christ.

1508 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 305-307. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 3, 28. 29. w. IX, 193-198. 1509

you must be divided into different persons according to the need of this
body and life, like many members, yet you are one body under one head.

**V. 29. But if ye be Christ\'s, then are ye Abraham\'s seed, and heirs
according to the promise.**

\(115\) Since he said that we have put on Christ and have become one in
Christ, it is certain that what was said of Christ must be understood as
being said of us for Christ\'s sake. For Christ cannot be separated from
us, nor we from him, being one with him and in him, as the

Members are one in the head and with one head. Therefore, just as the
promise of God cannot be understood by anyone other than Christ, it must
also be understood by us, because we are nothing other than Christ.

We are therefore in truth Abraham\'s seed and heirs, not according to
the flesh, but according to the promise, because we are those who are
remembered in the promise, namely the peoples who are to be blessed
through the seed of Abraham. So it says in Rom. 9, 8. that the children
of the promise are counted for seed, not those who are children
according to the flesh are God\'s children 2c.

**The fourth chapter.**

**V. 1. 2. But I say, as long as the heir is a child, there is no
difference between him and a servant, though he be lord of all the
goods; but he is among the guardians and custodians, until the appointed
time of the father.**

Paul makes another hard push against righteousness and the works of the
law, in that he now already takes the third simile of men, which is
related to the previous simile of the disciplinarian, since it deals
with the same young child, but also this one of the testament refers to
the young child or at least to the heir. This is how rich the apostle
proves to be in explaining the promise of God.

First, there is no difference between an heir who is a child and a
servant; he has no more power over the paternal goods than a servant.
Secondly, he is nevertheless a lord over all goods in the hope and by
the disposition (nuncupatione) of the father. Third, he is under the
guardians and custodians except for the time appointed by the father.
Whether the apostle here follows the Roman laws or others, there is
nothing in it. For, as Jerome says, according to the Roman laws the
legal time for an heir ends with the twenty-fifth year. We will use this
example as much as it is necessary.

**V. 3. So also we, being children, were captives under the outward
statutes.**

He carries it out in detail. The heir who is a child is us. The
guardians are the outward statutes. There is no difference between us
and the servants, because we served, and yet we were masters, namely
according to the providence of the heavenly Father. Of the heirs and the
inheritance it has been sufficiently said that the heirs are Abraham\'s
seed, that is, Christ and the Christians; but the inheritance is the
grace and blessing of the Christian faith among the Gentiles. But the
servitude of the heirs has been spoken of in other words above \[Cap. 3,
§ 102 ff\]. For servants are those who do not serve for the inheritance
of the father of the house, but do works for wages, or also forced by
the fear of punishment; therefore, as Christ says \[John 8:35\], the
servant does not remain in the house forever, but the son remains in the
house forever. This is beautifully illustrated in the first book of
Moses Cap. 21, 14. where the son of the maidservant, Ishmael, is cast
out and given food, and Cap. 25, 5. 6.: \"Abraham gave all his goods to
Isaac. And unto the children which he had of the concubines he gave
gifts, and caused them to go by his son Isaac.\"

**4.** this is also what we do when we are without the

1510 Dri. 6ai. Ill, 307-ä09. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 198-201. \' 1511

grace in the law, the works of the law are in bondage, that is, either
forced by the fear of punishment, or induced by temporal reward. But
through all this we are so instructed that we groan for the inheritance,
that is, faith and grace, by which, having been snatched from this
bondage, we can fulfill the law in freedom of spirit, no longer fearing
punishment or desiring reward, that is, no longer being servants.
Meanwhile, we are masters of all goods, since God has provided and
prepared this inheritance for us, and instructs us through the servile
fear of punishment and love of the goods that are in the law, that we
may desire the inheritance, but by no means remain in servitude with the
Jews and the hypocrites, which we would do if we felt that the fear of
punishment and the desire (per amorem) for reward would not increase our
love for the law, but rather our hatred of it, because (as I said) we
would rather there were no law. Thus the law drives us to the
inheritance by which we become masters of all goods, that is, possessors
of the blessing in Christ through faith.

5 Of the external statutes (elementis mundi), the guardians and
custodians, one has had different thoughts. In short, \"elements\" is
not taken here in a philosophical way for fire, air, water and earth,
but according to the apostle\'s own way of speaking and according to the
grammar for the letters of the law itself, of which the law consists, as
he also calls it 2 Cor. 3, 6. and elsewhere \[Rom. 2, 27. 29.\] \"the
letter\", so that \"elements\" in the plural is the same 1) as writing
or the written law. And no other proof is needed than the reputation of
the apostle, who says, \"We were among the elements of the world\"; and
immediately after \[v. 5.)\] follows: \"That he might redeem them which
were under the law,\" to show that he understands the same thing by
\"law\" and \"elements\"; otherwise even the redeemed in the time of
fulfillment are among the natural elements. And below \[v. 9.\] it is
said: \"How do ye apply

1\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: sint
instead of: sit.

Do you then return to the weak and meager elements of this world, which
you want to serve anew?\" and, explaining himself, follows \[v. 10.):
\"You keep days and seasons\" 2c. So keeping days and seasons, that is,
returning to the elements, that is, to the letter of the law.

\(6\) But also reason does not allow that by \"elements\" one
understands idols or the natural elements, as some have meant, partly
because one does not read anywhere that the Jews ever worshipped the
elements, partly because then he would rather have had to say: We were
under the power of idols or of darkness, as he expresses it against the
Romans \[Cap. 1, 23.\] and against others \[Eph. 5, 8.\]; finally,
because he speaks in a very general way, that all men, as many as there
are of them, have been servile under the elements apart from the faith
of Christ; if this is not understood of the law, it cannot be understood
in any way. For the law has put all things under sin, as he said above
\[Cap. 3, 22\], especially since he does nothing else here than compare
the law and grace with each other, in order to lift the latter up, but
to put the latter down. But especially because this is a very familiar
way of speaking to the apostle, as Col. 2:8: \"See to it that no one
deprives you through philosophy and loose seduction according to the
doctrine of men, and according to the elements of the world, and not
according to Christ.\" \[For one must not believe St. Jerome either, who
speaks things that do not belong here, and says that \"elements\" in
that passage are not the same as in this epistle; for they are
absolutely the same. For he calls \"elements\" the writings and
teachings of the world, that is, of men, or rather the teachings that
deal with the affairs of the world. There it says a little later (Col.
2, 20.): \"If then ye are dead with Christ unto the elements of the
world, why are ye entangled with statutes, as though ye lived yet in the
world?\" \"That this is the apostle\'s opinion is immediately proven by
the following, where he teaches about the Jewish superstition, as he
also does here. But also Hebr. 5, 12. he speaks in the same way: \"You
need (he says) to be taught the first letters (elementa) of the divine
words.\")

1512 Lri. 6L). Ill, 310-312. shorter interpretation of Galatians 4, 3-5.
W. IX, 201-204. 1513

But he calls the law \"elements of the world,\" using these two words to
diminish (tapinosin), that is, to belittle and condemn, to diminish the
glory and delusion of the righteousness and works of the law, as if to
say above: What have we from the law but letters, and those in which
there is no spirit, since they do not give that by which they would be
fulfilled, nor can we fulfill them? But he calls them \"of the world,\"
because they have to do with the things that are in the world, as with
external works, just as one calls the science of God (scientia Dei) what
one knows about God. For the law has never brought anyone to the spirit,
but it has only been kept in the flesh, while inwardly the evil desire
rebelled against it and hated it.

8 Now see how people can understand the apostle, who call plates,
clothes, places, time, churches, altars, ornaments and all the splendor
of the ceremonies spiritual things, since they must deny that these are
worldly things, if they do not want to be called worldly themselves
(which they abhor most). But since they deny that all these things are
worldly, they at the same time cut off from themselves the understanding
of the apostle, who understands all these things under the name of
\"world,\" calling the statutes (decreta) and doctrines, which are set
forth in these outward things, even the outward works according to the
holy ten commandments, contemptuously \"elements of the world.

9 Therefore, in our time, spiritual things are: wealth, tyranny, court,
liberty, or in the highest degree the prayers, 1) which are babbled with
the mouth without understanding, and garments and places which have been
raised by the teachings of men. The works of mercy and any other works
and places of men are bodily, though they are supremely holy when they
come from the full spirit of faith.

But we want to return to the apostle. So the elements are 2) the
pre-muni-

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger omnes
statt oration\"\".

2\) In the editions of the first Redaction, the Weimar and the Erlangen
ista instead of itaqu\".

The law is the disciplinarian, because the letter of the law, since it
compels the unwilling to its works through the fear of punishment,
drives them at the same time to acknowledge this unwilling will and to
run to Christ, who gives the spirit of freedom.

\(11\) Therefore, the law does not destroy you, but is of the best use
if you only realize that through it, as through a faithful nurse, you
are led to Christ, to the inheritance, yes, driven. If you do not
recognize it in this way, it will become your driver and adversary,
handing you over to the tormentors; it will become your judge and
persecutor, because it will never leave you a quiet conscience, since
you can never find in yourself and in your works that by which it would
be satisfied. But this is how those understand it who do not let
themselves be led to Christ by it, but assume that they must fulfill it
out of their own strength.

**V. 4. 5. When the time was fulfilled, God sent His Son, born of a
woman and made subject to the law, to redeem those who were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption.**

12\) Here 3) he reproduces by the words: \"When the time was fulfilled\"
4) what he had called above \"the time determined by the Father\". For
God had also determined the time in which the blessing promised to
Abraham was to be fulfilled in his seed Christ, 5) not as if the holy
fathers had not received the same blessing in the meantime, but because
it was to be revealed in Christ over the whole world, and he himself was
also to be made manifest, in which both they and we are blessed, and
this he calls \"the fullness of time\", that is, the fulfillment of the
determined time. (Others call \"the fullness of time\" the time of
fulfillment, that is, of grace. That writer, whom Jerome cites, who
calls himself the in

3\) In the Wittenberg, the Basel and the Erlangen edition \"Uni\"
instead of Nie.

4\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and in the
Erlangen plknitncUnkrn instead of xlenitu6o in the first redaction and
in the text.

5\) Here we have followed the reading of the first redaction imxleretur,
instead of jinpwtnr in the second.

1514 Kai. in, 312-314. interpretations on the epistle.to the Galatians.
W. ix, 204-206. 1515

If it was necessary for him (Christ) to be under the law in order to
redeem those who were under the law, it would also have been necessary
for him to be without the law in order to redeem those (namely, the
Gentiles) who were without the law, or if this is not necessary, then
this is also superfluous: I say that the apostle understood the
ceremonial law alone, whereas the apostle speaks of the whole law. For
Christ has not redeemed us from ceremonies alone, but rather from evil
lusts, or from the law which forbids evil lust, for he was indebted to
no one, and yet made himself a debtor, walking as a sinner\].

\(13\) Therefore the apostle\'s way of speaking must be observed. For
\"to be under the law\" is not the same as to live at the time and under
the decreto of the law; in this way neither Job, nor Naaman the Syrian,
was under the law, nor the woman of Sarepta in Sidon \[Luc. 4:26J.\],
but it means to be a debtor to the law, not to have the means to fulfill
it, and to be guilty of all the punishments imposed by the law. But
Christ, not being able to be under the law, was nevertheless put under
the law as a sin and a sinner, not acting contrary to the law as we do,
but taking upon himself the punishments of sins ordained by the law for
us as an innocent man. Therefore, all Gentiles have been under the law,
at least under the natural law and the holy ten commandments. So Christ
was not under the law in the same way as we are under the law, just as
he was not a curse and sin in the same way as we are; he was only under
it in body, we are both under it in body and soul, and as St. Augustine
says in the 4th Book of the Trinity, 1) Cap. 3, says: He agrees with our
double by his single and brings about a beautiful harmony.

14\. does this word seem: \"Born of

1\) In the Jena, lom. I and \^om. Ill, and in the Erlangen: \"Irip.\"
i.e. tripartita instead of \"tri\". For the matter, compare Tischreden,
cap. 7, l 44. Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XXll, 299.

a woman\" not to the 2) dishonor of the virgin mother? For he could just
as easily say: Born of a virgin. St. Jerome thinks 3) that this was said
for the sake of Manichaeus, who says that Christ was born through (per)
a woman, not from (ex) a woman, pretending that he had not true but only
putative flesh.

15 It can also be said that the apostle praises the divine
condescension, which descended so low that he wanted to be born not only
from human nature, but also from the weaker sex of the same, therefore
the name that indicates the sex was more appropriate than the name that
indicates the status. At the same time, he reminds us that Adam was not
born of woman, but Eve came from man, not from woman, so that just as
the woman, who was made from man, was the cause of sin and destruction,
so the man, who was born of woman, would be the cause of righteousness
and blessedness, since the opposite sexes work in opposite ways, which
could not be indicated without the name indicating the sex; but in this
he also did not leave the virginity of Mary unindicated. For since all
others come from man and woman, this one alone comes from a woman; thus
he sufficiently praises the miracle that the mother is a virgin woman,
and he the son of a virgin.

Finally, because he had to be a natural man and a son, it was also
necessary that he be born. But to give birth, the female sex is also
necessary. For he would not be a son as a man if he were not born of a
woman, just as neither Adam 4) was a son as a man, nor Eve a daughter as
a man.

17\. \"filiation\" (adoptio filiorum) is more appropriately called in
Greek υιοθεσία,

from ponere and filius, as the word legispositio arose by the same
composition.

2\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen
propo instead of pro.

3\) putat is missing in the editions of the first Redaction and in the
Erlanger.

4\) In the first redaction: in

1516 Lri. Kai. in, 3i4-3ig. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 4, 4-6. \' W. ix, 206-208. 1517

that is. But this childship happens, as he taught above \[Cap. 3, 9.\],
through faith in Christ, which God promised Abraham that he would be in
him \[Christ\]. For to believe in Christ is to put on Him, to become one
with Him. \[But Christ is the Son; therefore they also that believe on
him are children with him.

For the sake of those who are not yet sufficiently instructed in Christ,
I repeat what I have often said above, namely, that these words,
\"redeemed,\" \"that we might receive the adoption,\" \"ye are
children,\" \"he hath sent the Spirit,\" \"it is not a servant, but a
child and an heir,\" and the like, are not to be understood in such a
way that these things are accomplished in us, but that Christ
accomplished them so that they might also be accomplished in us. For all
things were begun in such a way that they should be accomplished more
and more from day to day; therefore it is also called the Passover of
the Lord (that is, Passage \[Ex. 12:11, 12\]), and we are called
Galileans, that is, wanderers, because we go on and on out of Egypt
through the wilderness, that is, through the way of the cross and
suffering, to the land of promise. We are redeemed and are redeemed
again and again, we have received the adoption and are still receiving
it, we have become, are and will become children of God, the Spirit is
sent, is sent and will be sent, we recognize and will recognize.

19 And so you must not imagine that the life of a Christian is a
standstill (statum) and a rest, but a passage and a journey from vices
to virtue, from one clarity to another, from one virtue to another, and
whoever is not in the passage, you must not believe that he is a
Christian either, but people of peace and rest, over whom the prophet
\[Jer. 8:11, 12.) brings their enemies.

20 Therefore, do not believe those seductive theologians who tell you
that if you have one love, and that is the first stage of love, you have
enough for salvation, while in their foolish delusion they invent an
idle love in the heart, which is like wine in a cup. Love is not idle,
but continually crucifies the flesh, and cannot be

The first stage will not remain complacent on its own level, but will
spread over the whole person in order to purify him. But those \"nit of
their one stage will have neither the first nor the second stage at the
time of temptation and death.

**V. 6. Because you are children, God has sent the Spirit of His Son
into your hearts, crying: Abba, dear Father!**

21\. St. Jerome has \"our hearts\", which also the Greek text 1) has;
yes, so he agrees with Rom. 8, 15. \"You have received a childlike
spirit, by which we cry: Abba, dear Father!\" He does not say, By whom
ye call, though he did speak to them in the second person; so he does
here also. One asks why in \"Abba, dear Father!\" he put the word Father
(in two different languages, and so) 2) twice? Since there is no
grammatical reason for this, I like the usual solution of this mystery:
that Jews and Gentiles have the same spirit of faith, that both peoples
belong to the One God, as the apostle Rom. 1, 16. and 2, 10. says: \"The
Jews first and also the Greeks.\"

\(22\) Take heed: Because the apostle spoke of the children of God, he
calls the Holy Spirit the Spirit of the Son of God, to show that the
same Spirit is sent to believers who is in Christ, the Son of God. But
he clearly indicates that the holy Trinity is One God. For since the Son
is true God, He lives in His Spirit, in whom without doubt the Father
also lives, and this, which he elsewhere (Rom. 8, 9.) calls the Spirit
of God, he here calls the Spirit of the Son. Thus we also are in God,
live and weave in Him (Apost. 17, 28.). \"We are\" because of (propter)
the Father, who is the essence (substantia) of the Godhead. \"We weave\"
(movemur \-\-\-\-- move us) by the image of the Son, who is born of the
Father, being moved, as it were, by a divine and eternal movement. \"We
live\" according to (secundum) the Holy Spirit, in whom the Father and
the Son rest and

1\) namely in several manuscripts.

2\) Added by us.

1518 Ari. 6ai. Ill, 316-319. Interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IL, 208-211. 1519

live, as it were. But this is too high for it to be suitable here.

\(23\) It is more important to note that the apostle testifies that the
spirit of children is given to the believers immediately. He says:
\"Because you are children (not otherwise than by faith, as has often
been said), God has sent the Spirit of His Son into our hearts.\" Hereby
the question is easily answered which those people raise: how can one
teach that man is justified and saved by faith alone? You should not be
challenged by this. If your faith is right and you are a child in truth,
you will not lack the Spirit. But if the Spirit is there, he will pour
out love and bring with him the whole chorus (concentum) of virtues,
which he ascribes to love in 1 Cor. 13:4 ff: \"Love is longsuffering and
kind\" 2c. Therefore, when he speaks of justifying faith, he speaks of
the faith that is active through love, as he says elsewhere (Gal. 5:6).
For faith deserves that the Spirit be given, as it is also said above
(Cap. 3, 2.): \"Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or
by the preaching of faith?\" (By the way, the faith in which the devils
tremble and the ungodly perform miracles is not the right faith, since
they are not yet children nor heirs of the blessing).

**V. 7. So now there is no longer a servant, but only children. But if
they are children, they are also heirs of God through Christ.**

24 \"Through Christ\" 1) reads St. Jerome, and so it is also written in
the Greek. For he adds this so that no one may hope to obtain this
inheritance either through the law or otherwise than through Christ, for
in the seed of Abraham (which is Christ) the blessing is promised and
imparted. Thus it is also said in Rom. 8:17: \"If we are children, we
are also heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ.\" What a
servant and bondage is has been sufficiently said, namely one who keeps
the law and does not keep it. He keeps it with works either out of fear
of punishment or out of

1\) xsr Oüristurn is missing in the Vulgate.

Request of the benefit. He does not keep it willingly, because he has
such a will that he would rather there were no law, and so he inwardly
hates the righteousness of the law, which he pretends by heart before
men. But a child, supported by grace, keeps it of his own free will; he
would not that there were no law, yea, he rejoices that the law is
there; the former has the hand \[in the law of the Lord\], the latter
the will in the law of the Lord.

**V. 8. But at the time when you did not know God, you served those who
are not gods by nature.**

25\. he clearly indicates that \"God\" is said in a twofold way; namely,
\"God by nature,\" that is, the true, one, living and eternal; the
others being many, false, dead, that is, men, animals, birds, as it is
said in Rom. 1:23: \"And have changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into an image, like corruptible man, and birds, and four-footed, and
creeping beasts.\"

\(26\) Thus they are not gods by nature, but by the delusion and error
of men, to whom they have attached the name and honor of the true God
uselessly, contrary to the second commandment, just as the name of God
is now used for countless superstitions. For since it is holy and
terrible, it cannot but be used to the greatest harm for any ungodliness
and deceit, because men are most powerfully carried away by the terror
that is aroused in them by this name. 2) By nature, reverence for the
divine name is implanted, but it is very difficult to know when it is
being invoked in truth. For this ignorance deceitfully draws away from
the true God, and he says that the Galatians also were deceived by it
with the other Gentiles.

Newer teachers distinguish \[three kinds of\] 3) ignorance: the
insurmountable, the gross, and the wanton (affectatam) ignorance. The
insurmountable (they say) excuses from

2\) In the editions of the first Redaction, the Erlanger and the
Weimarschen tratiantur instead of traUuntur.

3\) Added by us.

1520 Lri. Ill, 319-321. Shorter interpretation of Galatians 4, 8. 9. W.
IX, 211-214. 1521

of all sin; the gross not entirely, but in part, but the wanton only
accuses more.

\(28\) This seems to me to have been invented for the sake of breaking
off (injuriam) the grace of God and to exalt free will, then also to
make men safe in their destruction. For if a man does as much as is in
him, he is safe, because the insurmountable ignorance does not harm him.
In short, ignorance is called insurmountable, either in relation to us
and our powers, then it is certain that there is no insurmountable
ignorance, at least in the things that concern God. Joh. 3, 27: \"A man
can take nothing, except it be given him from heaven\", and Joh. 6, 44:
\"No man can come to me, except the Father draw him.\" For we can do no
good of ourselves, but can only err, increase ignorance, and sin.

\(29\) Therefore, he who attempts to escape any ignorance by his own
efforts blinds himself through twofold sin and ignorance, first, because
he is ignorant, second, because he does not know that he is ignorant and
fails to dispel ignorance through ignorance and to accomplish the work
that is God\'s alone. While he thus strives to become better without God
through himself, he commits one sin upon another, and lies that he has
found in himself what he should have sought from God. Christ alone is
the light and life of all men, not our reason. Or 1) ignorance is called
insurmountable in relation to the grace of GOD against us. In this way,
none is insurmountable because \"all things are possible to him who
believes\" \[Marc. 9, 23.\].

\(30\) Therefore, it is not necessary to teach people not to fear
insurmountable ignorance, lest they trust in themselves and their own
and abandon the fear of God. Rather, whether they have done as much as
is in them, or whether they have not done it, they must in themselves

1\) This \"or\" corresponds to the \"either\" in the middle of the
previous paragraph.

despair and trust in God alone, fear His judgment even in good works,
hope in His mercy even in evil works, so that they never do anything in
which they are certain, never commit such a sin in which they despair.
Thus ignorance is always insurmountable, but in that they fear and hope,
they are without all ignorance. Therefore, the insurmountable ignorance
does not excuse, but the confession and sighing acknowledgement of the
insurmountable ignorance excuses, or rather it obtains grace.

**V. 9. But now that you have known God, or rather are known by God, how
do you turn back to the weak and meager statutes that you want to serve
anew?**

I do not know whether the apostle uses here the reason of ingratitude or
the conclusion from the lesser to the greater (a minori); we will try
both. From the lesser to the greater: If at that time, when you did not
know God and served false gods, you did not turn to the weak statutes,
how do you turn to them now that you have known God, since at that time
you seemed to need them more, because Judaism was significantly higher
than Gentileism? But now you have also become incomparably higher than
Judaism and do not need them at all. From ingratitude in this way: You
are mindful in how shameful idolatry you served the unclean gods, and
are now called by the mercy of God to the service of the true God. Are
you not ashamed of such great ingratitude that you again depart from
God, who called you from such great evil to such great goods? Perhaps
Paul included both reasons at the same time, as he usually does.

32 St. Augustine thinks that these words, \"Yea, rather, are known of
God,\" are said in order to give a more detailed explanation to the
weak, because the unintelligent would like to understand it as if the
knowledge of God, of which he says that they have known God with it,
were face to face.

1522 6ai. Ill, 321-323. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 211-216. 1523

The apostle said that they had not understood the apostle, so he
explained to himself that they had known more than they had recognized.

But under these simple words is nevertheless hidden the high
understanding that our doing is that we suffer, that God works in us, as
we see that the tool of a master is more suffering than active. This
also says Isaiah, Cap. 26, 12: \"Everything that we do, you, O Lord,
have given us.\" Thus our recognition is that we are recognized by God,
who also worked in us this recognition (for he speaks of faith); thus he
first recognized us.

34 And very appropriately he uses this way of speaking against those who
now began to base themselves on their righteousness, as if they wanted
to precede God with their works and prepare for God the righteousness
that they should confess to have received from Him. This furor is found
in all works saints who want to derive their righteousness from laws and
ceremonies.

\(35\) But at the same time he touches with this word the mistake in a
hidden way, as he also only indicates it above in one place and then
passes over it. For they are not recognized because they recognize, but
vice versa: Because they are recognized, therefore they recognize, so
that all good and all glory of the good does not lie in someone\'s will
or running, but in God\'s mercy \[Rom. 9, 16.fi\].

36 But see 1) the emphasis on the words and the wonderful way of the
diminishing speech (tapinosis). \"To the statutes\" (elementa), that is,
to the letter and to the sign of things, since they were approaching for
it, that they had turned to the thing itself. Then: \"weak\", because
the law could not help at all to righteousness, yes, rather made sin
greater. And: \"scanty,\" empty, because the law not only could not
further, but could not even sustain you in that and

1\) autem is missing in the editions of the first redaction, in the
Erlanger and in the Weimarschen.

You cannot maintain what you are, but it is necessary that you become
worse through it. But the grace of faith in Christ is powerful not only
to preserve, but also to bring to perfection. \[It has been said above
(Cap. 4, § 5 ff.) what \"elements\" are, and why they are. You see,
then, how contemptuously he speaks of the law, against the boastful
false apostles\].

Here St. Jerome asks whether Moses and the prophets knew God and thus
did not keep the law, or whether they kept the law and thus did not know
God, because the apostle sets these two things as contradictory, and it
would be dangerous to assert either of them about the prophets. But the
apostle removes this difficulty with one word. He says, \"Whom ye will
serve anew.\"

\(38\) To keep lawful things is not evil, but to serve lawful things is
evil. But he (as has often been said) who does them, compelled by the
fear of threats, serves as if they were necessary, and by them one
deserves to be justified. But if they are done freely, they do no harm.
This is how the prophets kept them, not to attain righteousness, but to
practice love toward God and neighbor; but through faith they became
righteous.

**V. 10. You keep days, and moons, and feasts, and seasons.**

39 St. Augustine interprets this passage in a doubtful way, but more of
the worship customs (ritu) of the Gentiles than of the Jews. For he
says, \"It is a common error among the Gentiles that they observe, both
in their undertakings and in expected events in their lives and
businesses, the days, months, times, and years designated by the
astrologers and Chaldeans. And in this sense the decrees everywhere cite
the apostle after their manner, in which they have also cited many other
things for the sake that they are said by the holy fathers, not from
what cause they are said. But immediately St. Augustine says that this
is to be understood also of the Jews\]. St. Jerome takes it

1524 Nri. Kai. Ill, 323-326. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 4, 10. W. IX, 2i6-2is. 1525

simply and correctly only from the Jews. \"Days\" (he says), as Sabbaths
and new moons. But \"months\" as the first and the seventh month.
\"Lines\" on which they came to Jerusalem three times a year. \"Years,\"
however, the seventh year of remission and the fiftieth, which they call
the year of jubilee.

40 He also asks if we are not in the same sin because we keep Wednesday
(quartum sabbati), Friday (parasceuen), Sunday, the forty-day fast,
Easter and Pentecost, and, according to the custom of different
countries, different times appointed in honor of the martyrs. He
answers, first, that we do not keep the days of the Jews, but other
days; secondly, these days are appointed, not that the day on which we
meet may have any preference (celebrior sit), but that an untidy
gathering of the people may not detract from faith in Christ; Thirdly,
daring to give a sharper answer, he asserts that all days are the same;
the day of resurrection is always holy, it is always free to fast, one
can eat the body of the Lord at any time, always pray. Therefore,
fasting and meetings on certain days (inter this) are ordered by prudent
men 1) for the sake of those who devote more time to betting than GOtte
2c.

41 This is true. For Isaiah also foretold that it would be so, Cap.
66:23: \"There shall be one Sabbath after another, and one moon after
another.\" For indeed, in the new law, every day is a feast day, except
that by the commandment of the Church, special days are appointed to
hear God\'s Word, and to receive the Sacrament, and to pray with common
prayer.

42.\] But now the feast days have been turned into far greater
superstition than among the Jews, so that they now think they are doing
God a service by making much of these days, not to pray, not to hear
God\'s word, not to receive the sacrament, but only to celebrate; and
indeed they celebrate more perfectly than the Jews.

1\) Here we have adopted the reading of the Weimar edition: viris
pruäentidus instead of: juris prucientidus.

For these at least read Moses and the prophets, but we serve neither God
nor man, and abstain entirely from all things, except that we serve the
belly and idleness and other abominations (portentis).

\(43\) Even though this is the case, the bishops do not have mercy on
the people and cancel and reduce some festivals, perhaps fearing the
prestige of the Roman Pontiff who has decreed this, as if it were not
ungodly to think that the Roman Pontiff had this intention or could have
instituted or tolerated such days in which the devil is served with so
many abominations to the greatest dishonor of the Christian name and to
the blasphemy of the divine majesty. Or if they think that he intended
and would tolerate this, it is quite ungodly to obey and not to tear
down and abolish from the ground up and quite confidently a human order
that is to such great dishonor of the Creator.

44 No bishop or priest is excused if he sees that the feast days in his
congregation are spent in drinking, gambling, fornication, death,
idleness, useless talk, plays, as almost all of them are, with the
exception of a few high feasts (celeberrimos), and he does not stop
them. I say that he is not excused by the fact that he may not do this
without the consent of the pope, because, even if an angel from heaven
would have ordered it so, we owe more to the glory and honor of God.
Anything that is instituted for his dishonor (injuriam) or tolerated by
anyone should be confidently rejected, unless someone would rather
become guilty of all evil deeds by allowing it. \"The commandment of the
Roman Church does not bind unless it can be kept with God\'s honor and
glory. But if it cannot be kept in such a way, then I boldly pronounce
that those are ungodly people who force that one should observe such
commandment. How then the exceedingly godless people mock us, who esteem
the fear of a man higher than the fear of God, and crown the devil in
the church under the name of the pope and St. Peter.

1526 Lri. 6 \"I. Ill, 326-328. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 219-221. 1527

Christ, yes, worship him. We think of war against the Turks, but in this
matter and in other troubles of the church, which are far worse than the
tyranny of the Turks, we are safe and asleep on both ears, as if it were
not better that the Turk should come, which in truth is a ruth of God,
and make us well by our misfortune or by the death of the body, than
that by so great licentiousness of the people, by so great sleepiness of
the shepherds of the church, the people should become worse than the
Turks. The Turk, of course, will kill the body and deprive us of the
earth; but we kill the souls and deprive them of heaven, if otherwise
the decision of the last Concilii 1) is true, namely that the souls are
immortal, especially those of Christians\].

But let us return to the apostle. Just like circumcision, the feast days
did not contribute to righteousness, nor did other things, which he
describes in more detail in Col. 2:16. So they were not to be kept as if
they were necessary; certainly no more than our feast days, if we keep
them, give us righteousness, or any other burdens of the statutes, but
our righteousness is from faith in Christ, which is not brought about by
the ceremonies,\' but of the ceremonies freely used for the showing of
love toward God and toward the neighbor. But this gain may have brought
you the many feast days, that you have abandoned the work of your hands,
and have reduced your wealth, and thus gradually come to the suffering
of lack, as it says in the Gospel \[Matth. 5, 3.Blessed are the poor,\"
so that the feast days are good, not for the service of God, but to
bring about poverty, or to nullify the exceedingly wholesome commandment
of God, which is laid upon the old man \[Gen. 3:19\]: \"In the sweat of
thy face shalt thou eat thy bread.\" \[But this and other things have
been spoken of elsewhere. Misery is upon the church of Christ, in that
heaven and earth are angry at our sins\].

1\) According to the Table Talks, Cap. 27, H119, Walch, St. Louis
Edition, Vol. XXII, 908, it was already decided at the Council of Basel
that one should not dispute whether the soul is mortal or immortal. Here
the Lateran Council of 1512-1517 is meant.

**V. 11. I fear you, lest perhaps I have labored with you in vain.**

Jerome thinks that \"I fear you\" (timeo vos) is said instead of \"I
stand in fear because of you\" (de vobis), and it seems to me that
something is left out of the speech, as if the apostle wanted to
frighten them by the danger in which they stood and say: I fear that you
will be lost forever, and thus all my work on you has been in vain. But
he turns the words and suppresses this, which would have sounded harsh,
and speaks only of the harm he suffers. For this befits apostolic
gentleness, that he should not attack too harshly those whom he wishes
to recover, since, as the human heart is constituted, a man, especially
when he is caught in a fault, is more easily moved and guided by
gentleness than forced by threats and terror. And it makes a great
impression when you make the misfortune of others your own and complain
about it, so that you can finally bring it about that they also 2) at
least complain about their misfortune with you.

47 So Paul wants to say: O Galatians, although your misfortune does not
move you very much, at least have pity on me, bear with me, who fears
that I have lost with you not money and goods, not good reputation, not
honor, not even one word or one work, but all my work. It would have
been easier if he had only said: 3) Now I have labored for you, prayed,
suffered many things, stood in many dangers, as he relates in more
detail in the second epistle to the Corinthians \[Cap. 11, 23. ff.\],
and all this I have now turned to you in vain. These words of Paul show
that he spoke with tears.

**V. 12. Be like me, for I am like you.**

Here, too, the obscurity of the speech gives rise to different
interpretations. St. Jerome brings two of them. The first is: \"Be like

2\) 6t is missing in the editions of the first Redaction, in the
Weimarsche and in the Erlanger.

3\) Jenaer, Lom. Ill: lnisset with the marginal gloss: \^lii luissem.
The other editions available to us offer luisssm.

1528 Lri. Kai. Ill, 328-330. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 4, 12. W. IX, 221 s. 1529

I\", that is, be strong and men in the faith of Christ, as I am now, so
that it is an exhortation to become more perfect. \"For I am like you,\"
that is, I was like you, that is, when I gave you the milk of the
gospel. For I made myself a young child and a weak man, withholding from
you that which is more perfect, and giving you the lesser doctrines of
faith (infirmiora fidei), proving myself to be such a teacher as you can
understand in your weakness. So I was like you at that time. Therefore,
give me this in return, that you may be like me, that is, strong enough
to understand, since I present you with stronger food. The other is: I
too was once caught up in ceremonies, as you are now, but I considered
them filth, that I might win Christ. Do ye also so, and be as I am now.
St. Augustine interprets it like this: \"Be like me\", who despises
legal things, even though I am a Jew. \"For I am like you,\" that is, I
am a man like you. If, since I am like you as a man, I am free to set
aside the statutes, this will also be permitted to you. But one can also
have these thoughts of it Because he had scolded them harshly, he comes
before them and asks them that they should show themselves against him
as he shows himself against them, so that they would not be upset and
would not feel hurt, so that the meaning would be: Of course I have not
been hurt by you; you have not angered me. So also you again do not let
yourselves be hurt by me and do not become bitter against me, but we
both want to lament 1) the common evil. My evil is that you have fallen
back again; therefore I am not offended by you, but by the evil which is
now mine; so do not be offended by my reproaching, but rather by your
evil. The following text also seems to speak for this sense. He says,
\"Ye have done me no hurt.\" \[Not very unlike this sense is the sense
when it is so connected with what has already been said before: Since I
am not otherwise touched by this evil of yours than if it were mine, so
that in truth I become weak with

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Weimar and in the
Erlangerstatt Milans.

I ask again that you also become like me, who fear that I may have
worked in vain, and fear with the one who fears, and mourn with the one
who mourns because his work is lost, so that if you are not moved by
your evil, you may be moved by mine, so that in this way you may also
come to mourn your evil. For so also Christ, as St. Bernard testifies,
when our sins did not torment us, bore and suffered sorrow for us, that
by his sorrow for our sins he might much more move us to sorrow, even as
he said to the women who followed him (Luc. 23:28.), \"Weep not for me,
but weep for yourselves.\" In these matters I leave the reader free to
judge\].

**Dear brothers, I beg you, you have done me no harm.**

St. Jerome connects this with the previous sentence and reads thus: Dear
brothers, I beg you, be like me, because I am like you, you have done me
no harm. But since the apostle is in the habit of beginning a new
sentence when he says: \"Dear brethren, I beseech you,\" I do not know
whether this order can be kept. The apostle might have omitted something
(per eclipsin), by which he might have wanted to say this or something
similar: I beg you, forgive me. I have been a little harsh, but it was
necessary; bear with my zeal for a little while. St. Jerome interprets
it thus: Since you did me no harm so long as I taught you weak things
(infirma), having become weak for you young children and weak, why then
am I now injured by you by provoking you to greater things (majora)? And
this mind he strengthens by what follows, where Paul says that he
preached to them in weakness and yet was received as an angel of GOD 2c.
So\] it is certain that by this text the apostle, out of fatherly
concern, soothes and mitigates his harshness in all the preceding
discourse. He had scolded them as unwise, as people who soon let
themselves be turned away, who turn to the outward statutes, who
accomplish in the flesh, who

1530 Art. 6 \"I. Ill, 330-332. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 222-225. 1531

are bewitched, among whom Christ is crucified, grace is despised, the
testament of God is nullified, who have become servants from children,
and to whom he had now indicated in a short epitome (*in summa*) that he
had done everything in vain and had lost all his work, and thus now
almost everything stands with them in the worst and most desperate way,
and all this with very fierce and burning zeal, in order to take the
grace of God in protection. Therefore, he now moderates this and soothes
the punishment with the oil of gentleness, asking them to be patient and
to credit something to the zeal of God with which he is zealous for
them, just as he himself has been patient and has credited them with
many things, including this present evil. I beg you (he says), dear
brothers, I have not said this out of hatred against you; I tell you the
truth, but therefore do not take me for your enemy.

50 For that he feared that they felt hurt too much is sufficiently
indicated by the fact that he says afterwards \[v. 16\]: \"Have I then
become your enemy, that I reproach you with the truth?\" and again \[v.
20\]: \"But I would that I were with you now, and could change my
voice\", as if he wanted to say: I fear that my writing offends you too
much, as we shall see. And in order to persuade them in the most
effective way that he does not have a bitter heart against them, that he
did not speak out of hatred, he begins to praise them very highly. I am
not hostile to you, dear brothers, because you have never done me any
harm, yes, you have not hurt me at all, that you have also received me
wonderfully like an angel of God.

**V. 13, 14: For ye know that in weakness according to the flesh I
preached the gospel unto you the first time: and my temptations which I
suffer according to the flesh ye despised not, but as an angel of God ye
receive me, even Christ Jesus.**

51\. \"Weakness of the flesh\" \[refers St. Jerome to the Galatians,
since he could not have preached spiritual things to them as weak and
still carnal people, which I do not like, but it\] is a speech

This is Paul\'s way of indicating the poor condition (vilitatem) of the
external situation. For weakness is an inability (imbecillitas),
according to which the apostles, being poor, despised, were also
subjected to many persecutions, and, as he says in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians \[Cap. 4, 9.\], the very least according to the flesh
and before men, were considered utterly powerless and nothing.
Nevertheless, under this weakness the powers proved themselves, and they
were mightier in words and works than the whole world. Therefore the
genitive \"of the flesh\" must neither be referred to the apostle nor to
the Galatians, but without closer relation (absolute), as it is put by
the apostle, \"to the Spirit\" must be contrasted, as Rom. 1, 3. f.:
\"Who was born of the seed of David, according to the flesh, and
powerfully proved a son of God, according to the Spirit, who
sanctifies\" 2c., and 1 Pet. 3, 18: \"And is slain according to the
flesh, but made alive according to the Spirit.\" So also here is
\"weakness of the flesh,\" that is, the inability that is according to
the flesh, when you do not see the power that is in the Spirit.

52\] But that \"weakness\" signifies what I have said is evident from 2
Cor. 11:18 ff. and 12:9, 10, where, enumerating all that he had done and
suffered, he says, \"Therefore I will most gladly boast of my weakness,
that the power of Christ may dwell with me,\" and, \"My power is mighty
in the weak,\" and, \"When I am weak, then am I strong.\" It is,
therefore, an excellent praise of the Galatians that they were not vexed
by those offences at which the whole world was vexed and laughed the
apostles to scorn, both because of the weakness of the flesh, and
because of the foolishness of the cross, according to which they taught
the life to come, and that all things of this life (praesentia) ought to
be despised, in which men boast of their power, yea, that they received
him as an angel, as Christ himself, no doubt with the greatest reverence
and humility.

53\. but the contestation of the Galatians 1) has

1\) In order to understand this and the following paragraphs, it must be
noted that Luther interprets the text of the Vulgate, which here reads:
Idututiovern vs-.

1532 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 332-33p. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 4, 13-15. W. lx, 225-227. 1533

St. Jerome interprets it in many ways, but in the end I think he says
correctly: The reproach, persecutions and such things, which they saw
that he suffered especially from the Jews and also from the Gentiles for
the sake of the word of Christ, and still suffers according to his
flesh, that is, before men (for in the spirit God always triumphed
over 1) him through Christ, as he says elsewhere), they did not despise
nor disdain, although they were nevertheless most strongly challenged by
them, that they should leave the word of faith for fear of them.

54\) For even today this temptation quickly brings down many who look
upon those who suffer and have tribulation because of the truth of God.
This did not move the Galatians at all at that time, that they saw that
the apostle had tribulation in all things. He praises this in them as a
truly apostolic virtue, that they despised everything and as victors
over this challenge received the apostle as Christ. Do you not think
that they did this at the risk of their lives and all their goods? Did
they not, for Paul\'s sake, bring upon themselves the power and wrath of
all Paul\'s enemies? They could not receive Paul without hurting Paul\'s
persecutors; indeed, they provoked them all the more, because they not
only received him, but received him as an angel, as Christ, that is,
with the highest reverence, whom the adversaries, burdened with the
highest ignominy, sought to put to death as the very worst.

55 Here St. Jerome exhorts the bishops, saying: \"Let them learn from
the apostle that the Galatians, who do not understand, are called
brethren; let them learn that, after scolding, he uses kind words: \"I
beseech you.\" What he asks is this, that they should be his followers,
even as he is Christ\'s follower. This meets the hope of the bishops,
who, as it were on a

stram in carno inen non sprsvistis nv\^no respnistis, that is, Your
temptation in my flesh you have not despised nor spurned.

1\) per is missing in the editions of the first Redaction and in the
Erlanger.

2\) Wittenberger: movedant instead of rnovedat.

The bishops, placed in a high position, can hardly bring themselves to
see the mortals and speak to their fellow servants. I have mentioned
this because in our time it is considered a miraculous presumption
(miraculum), even more than impiety, to tell the sins of the bishops. He
would have spoken quite differently if he had seen that in our time the
bishops for the most part display greater splendor than kings and
princes, but that in Christian life and knowledge they are not equal
even to unlearned men and women.

But the apostle is well aware of this, that he wrote to Timothy \[2 Tim.
4, 2\]: Punish, ask, rebuke, stop, whether in season or out of season,
with all patience 2c. The same he teaches in this epistle by his
example; he does not put them under ban, he does not cry, \"Into the
fire with them! he does not immediately declare them heretics, nor does
he lay on them one burden after another, but praises the fire of his
love and the flames of his heart, because he is not eager to kill men,
but to take away their sins and errors. He knows nothing of the
lightning of a judgement (latae sententiae), but only of the lightning
of the Word of God and the thunder of the Gospel, by which alone sinners
are killed and made alive again.

**V. 15: How blessed you would have been at that time. 3)**

57 Thus he says, either because he had called them blessed people at
that time, because of their so great constancy in the faith, or because
those who are of such a nature as he had praised the Galatians can truly
be called blessed, unless someone thinks that apostolic modesty
(verecundiam) is manifested here; since he had wanted to say: Where then
is your reverence for me, your reverent behavior and, as it were, your
worship? he would rather have attributed this to their blessedness than
to his honor, according to the example of Christ, who also used to
attribute his miracles (virtutes) to the faith of those on whom they
were performed; or if one

3\) Here again it is the text of the Vulgate which Luther explains: Ubi
68t erZo kentitucio vsstra? That is: Where then is your blessedness?

1534 Lri. \"Li. m, 335-337. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IL, 227-230. 1535

If he wants to remain with the simple mind, he imposes on them the faith
in Christ in which they were blessed, and therefore reproaches them.

**I am your witness that if it had been possible, you would have plucked
out your eyes and given them to me.**

58 St. Jerome thinks that it is an exaggerated speech (hyperboles). But
I do not believe that it is necessary to assume hyperbole here, since it
is obvious from what has been said before that they also put their lives
in danger for the apostle. Therefore, it is not strange that if it had
been possible, that is, if he had allowed it to happen, and it should
have happened that way (otherwise, how could it not be possible if they
wanted it?), they would also have plucked out their eyes; if by the
secret interpretation (mysterium) of the eyes he does not allude to a
hidden rebuke, namely, that they, who at that time submitted their eyes,
that is, their mind, to the apostle quite willingly, in order to be
instructed in the faith, which makes the wise foolish, and makes those
who see not, are now again reversed, so that they are vexed by their
eye, of which the Lord commanded that we should pluck it out and cast it
from us.

59\. See what it means when a shepherd neglects the sheep of Christ.
Such great love, such great faith, such sincere service of the
Galatians, the false apostles overthrew so quickly in a short time,
since the apostle was gone: what should the devil do now, where there is
no shepherd, or if there is one who never visits or feeds the sheep of
Christ? Can then the sheep be preserved by the title, name, and power of
the shepherd 1) alone? For if these \[the titles 2c.\] remain unharmed,
one thinks that the church is unharmed.

**V. 16. Have I then become your enemy, that I should tell you the
truth?**

60 Jerome interprets this correctly from the truth that he speaks to
them in this letter, not from the truth in which he

1\) In the first redaction and in the Erlanger: pastores instead of
xastoris. - \"the sheep\" is added by us.

first instructed. For, as I said, the apostle has to deal with it, so
that the Galatians would not be too unwilling about what he had told
them until then, some of which was quite hard, but still true. Therefore
he precedes them and says: \"Do not take it for granted that my words
are harsh, 2) but rather see how true they are. Nevertheless, I may have
attacked you somewhat harshly, but will you therefore consider me your
enemy and not rather your friend, because I speak the truth to you, even
though it is necessarily harsh?

61 O a most beautiful example to teach the truth! For you must strike
the wound in such a way that you know how to soothe and heal it, be
severe in such a way that you do not forget the goodness. So God also
puts lightning into the rain and dissolves the clouds and the black sky
into fruitful showers. The proverb also says that the thunderstorm in
which lightning is mixed with rain does no harm, but that which comes
without rain and alone is to be feared and harmful. For even God\'s word
shall not be angry without ceasing, nor shall it threaten forever.

**V.17. They are not jealous for you, but they want to make you
disgusted with me, so that you will be jealous for them.**

62 He counters the excuse, which he sees that they can put forward and
say: That we obeyed those people, we did so because they seemed to seek
our salvation with godly zeal and (as one says now) in good intention
(bona intentione), especially since no one should be his own master and,
as it says in Deut. 12, 8, should not do what seems right to him. He
answers: I know that they have a zeal, but not a good one, nor do they
understand the matter well.

\(63\) Here it should be noted that although the word \"zeal\" is often
the same as \"to follow,\" the apostle takes it in its ordinary meaning
to mean to envy with love, or to strive out of love for someone.

2\) The Weimar edition has here the conjecture: aeeixitis instead of:
aeeipits.

1536 Lri. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians 4, 17.
18. W. IX, 230-233. 1537

and make efforts. And to state this matter more fully in our opinion,
\"loving\" is done in two ways, in a good way and in an evil way, so is
zeal. For we love at times, but not in a good way \[, so we zeal at
times, but not finely\]. But as love is to love the good, hatred to hate
the evil, so zeal (aemulatio) or jealousy (zelus), in that it includes
both, is actually: to hate the evil in a beloved object, and the more
fiercely you love it, the more ardently you will hate and not want to
allow evil in the one you love.

Therefore, by \"zeal\" (zelum) I use to understand an enraged love or an
envy out of love 1). Thus the apostle 2 Cor. 11, 2. 3. says: \"I am
zealous for you with godly zeal\", where one cannot even pretend that he
speaks of following (imitatione), because it follows: \"For I have
trusted you to one man. But I fear lest your senses be moved\" 2c., as
if he wanted to say: I love your chaste faith in such a way that I
cannot help fearing and hating lest you should be perverted; clearly
interpreting what it is to \"zeal with godly zeal.\" Yes, by this very
word he indicates the twofold zeal. \"Divine zeal,\" that is, the zeal
which is according to God, is the hatred of evil in the beloved object
(according to truth), or the love of good and the hatred of evil in the
beloved object according to truth; \"human zeal\" is the hatred of evil
in the beloved object, or the love of good and the hatred of evil in the
beloved object, but according to appearance and in an erroneous way.
Such is the zeal of the false apostles, of whom he says, \"They are iron
about you, but not fine,\" that is, they seek your good and abhor your
evil, but in a bad way, because they sought to raise up among the
Galatians the evil piece (malum) of the righteousness of the law, as if
it were something good.

1\) In all editions except the Weimar one the form urnurosuiu is found
here, which Heidnecker, who has derived it from aruurus, has translated
with: \"bitter envy\". But from the context it is clear that it speaks
of \"love\", so umorosurn will have to be read. In the great
interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians, Walch, old edition, vol.
VIII, 2497, cap. 4, § 231 we find \"a godly zeal\" (xia inviclia).

This is the foolish zeal with which, as he writes Rom. 10, 2, also the
Jews are zealous for God, that is, for what is of God.

For \"zeal\" (aemulari) cannot be taken for \"follow\" (imitari) in this
place, because the false apostles did not follow the Galatians at all,
but on the contrary (he says), \"they want to make you fall away\"
(excludere), namely from Christ and the trust in him, that you should be
imprisoned in the trust in the law, \"so that you should zeal for
them\". In this place it may be put for \"to follow,\" though nothing
can be objected to the other meaning, if you understand it to mean that
the false apostles wished to be loved by the Galatians, that they \[the
Galatians\] should strive (ambiri) for them with godly zeal, and (as
disciples are wont to do for their teachers) become jealous of them,
that they should love what belonged to those, and hate what was against
them, so that he would not have said improperly: They want to exclude
us. But in order not to seem to be suspected of presumption, he says,
\"They want to exclude you,\" 2) so that, when we are excluded, they may
at the same time exclude you.

**V. 18. Zeal is good when it is always for good, and not only when I am
present with you.**

66 He now refutes the second part of their excuse. For the first was
that they sought their blessedness with godly zeal, which the apostle
denies. He says: \"They do not care for you finely\", they do not seek
yours, but their benefit, so that they may boast of you, as he says
later, Cap. 6, 13. The other part of the excuse is that one must obey
and not believe oneself. To this he replies, \"It is indeed good to be
zealous and to follow others, but always do this in a good cause, never
in an evil one, not only when I am present, but also when I am not
present, so that it may be seen that you do not do it because of me,

2\) According to the Vulgate. - The conjecture of the Weimar edition: ut
vodis sxelusis simul nos \<mo\<M6 oxaiuüunt does not make sense to us.
It seems to us that the reading of the editions is completely in
accordance with the context.

1538 Lri. vai. Ill, 339-341. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 233-235. 1539

but for the sake of the cause itself. \[Therefore I am surprised that
the interpreter and St. Jerome have passed over this text in such a way,
although it is quite dark when one says: \"Zeal for the good in the
good.\" What is it to zeal for the good in the good In Greek it is said
thus: 1) It is good to zeal always in a good cause, or: The zeal, if it
is always in a good cause, is good. For it is the infinitive \"zeal\",
not the imperative \"zeal\", 2) unless a prudent forger has done
violence both to the interpreter and to Jerome.

What the apostle wants is this: \"Test everything and keep what is
good\" \[1 Thess. 5:21\]. We see that he gave this rule to all churches,
and yet it has been completely lost for many centuries.

**V.19. My dear children, whom I bear again with fears until Christ
takes form in you.**

See the wonderful love of the apostle, how he is nothing else at all
than the Galatians (for he transfers everything to himself so that he
completely forgets about him), how he suffers in them, how he labors,
how he glows, not being concerned about any of his own affairs, but
about the Galatians. O what an apostolic example for a Christian
shepherd! True 3) love does not seek its own. My dearest children! My
motherly heart is full of anguish; I have been a father, I have become a
mother, I carry you in my womb, I give you your form, I form you. I
would like to give birth to you and bring you into life, if only I could
do it somehow. St. Jerome praises this tender love (affectum) with many
words. Because only this means to search the souls, not the money.

Be careful how he chooses his words. He does not say, \"So that I may
have Christ in you.

1\) Instead of: \"In Greek it is called so,\" the editions of the first
redaction read: \"Therefore Erasmus and Stapulensis have translated it
from the Greek suitably so.\"

2\) In the Vulgate: akmulavaivi.

3\) Wittenberger: vere instead of vera.

He does not give them a form, but so that he \"gains a form\" by
attaching more importance to the grace of God than to his work; like a
mother, he carries them in his body as an unformed (rude) seed until the
Spirit cooperates and forms them in Christ. A preacher can be concerned
with how he gives birth to Christians, but he cannot give them their
form, just as a mother in the flesh (carnis) does not give the fruit its
form, but only carries it so that it is formed and born. He also did not
say, \"until you are formed in Christ,\" but \"that Christ may take form
in you,\" because the life of a Christian is not his own, but Christ\'s,
who lives in him, as he said above Cap. 2, 20. \"But I live; yet now not
I, but Christ liveth in me.\" We must be destroyed and lose our form, so
that Christ may gain a form and be in us alone.

**V. 20. But I would that I were now with you, and that my voice might
walk.**

70 \[Jerome thinks that he says this because the holy Scriptures, when
read, edify, but create much more benefit when brought from the letters
into the voice, as he also writes to Paulinus of the efficacy (energia)
of the living voice. This, however, is not the only thing the apostle
intends, but\] he says, \"I would that I were with you now,\" for the
sake of it, \"that I might change my voice,\" not in musical change, but
in theological, that is, because a written epistle, if it scolds too
harshly, causes offence, but if it is too friendly, does not have the
right effect on people without understanding. In so serious a matter the
Scripture is dead, giving as much as it has. But if he were present, he
could arrange his speech according to the different listeners, scolding
those, pacifying those, pleading with those, punishing those, and
striking the right note each time according to the circumstances.

71 For it is clear that the apostle is therefore concerned that he might
have become too punitive in the foregoing, and too praiseworthy here in
praising and speaking kindly, fearing in a godly way that he might miss
the mark on both sides, either hurting too much or not hitting hard
enough.

1540 Lk. quai. Ill, 341-344. shorter interpretation of Galatians 4,
20-24. W. IL, 235-237. 1541

as was necessary after all. And so he is in limbo between the two and is
at a loss, does not know what to do, does not consider it harmless
(integrum), neither to punish nor to praise. This opinion is proven by
the following word:

**For I am mad about you.**

That means (as Erasmus translated quite correctly), I am wavering, I am
troubled, and I do not know what to do with you. (On this opinion also
St. Jerome has contributed much to the explanation. At last he says
peevishly and almost carelessly, and while he has to do with other
things: \"I am wrong about you\", and I am steered here and there by my
ignorance, and since I do not know what to do, I am torn and mangled on
different sides. For I do not know which words to choose first 2c. This
is what Jerome has pronounced here and there\].

**V. 21. Tell me, you who want to be under the law, have you not heard
the law?**

73\) Jerome and the Greek text have: \"Have you not heard the law? 1)
Jerome labors that in this passage the first book of Moses, from which
the apostle took what he says, is called \"the law.\" But since among
the Hebrews the five books of Moses are called XXXX, that is, the Law,
the apostle not inappropriately calls the first book of Moses the Law,
in which, if nothing else, at least circumcision is commanded, the
noblest law of the Jews and the first of all.

**V. 22-24 For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one of the
maidservant and the other of the free woman. But he that was of the
bondwoman was born according to the flesh: but he that was of the
freewoman was born through the promise. The words mean something.**

74 Not as if these words in the first book of Moses were to be
understood figuratively, but the apostle indicates that he is saying
this in figurative speech.

1\) \"The Vulgate offers: IsZistis instead of audistis.

(per allegoriam) said what was literally said there.

75 The question arises, how it is that Ishmael was not also born through
the promise, about whom, Gen. 16, 11. 12. so many promises are given to
his mother by the angel of the Lord before he was born. Again, Cap. 17,
20, many more promises are given to Abraham about him by God Himself
before he was born. \[But it is clear that Ishmael was not born by
God\'s promise, but he was conceived by natural power from the young
Hagar at the command of Sarah, but Isaac was conceived from a barren and
old mother by the supernatural power of the Promiser.

For the angel\'s saying to Hagar \[Gen. 16:11\], \"Behold, you have
conceived and will bear a son,\" are certainly not words of a promise
that she should conceive, but a prophecy of things to come concerning
the one who has already been conceived, or the words of a commandment.
Therefore Isaac is the son of promise, yet born of the flesh, but not by
the power of the flesh, 2) nor even conceived after the flesh.

**For these are the two testaments, one from Mount Sinai, which gives
birth to bondage, which is Hagar.**

Because the Galatians were believers, they could be instructed by
figurative teachings. Otherwise, as it says in 1 Cor. 14, 22, tongues
serve as a sign for unbelievers 3). But nothing can be proven to
unbelievers by figurative things, as Augustine also teaches in the
letter to Vincentius. Or at least the apostle, out of fatherly concern
and with will, paints the matter in parables and figurative speeches to
the Galatians, who are weak people, in order to make the word
understandable to them.

2\) earuis is missing in the editions of the first redaction and in the
Erlanger.

3\) Here we have adopted with Weimar\'s the reading of the first
redaction: iuüätzlidus, kläslikus, which is found in the editions of the
second redaction, contradicts 1 Cor. 14, 22.

1542 Lri. val. Ill-344-346. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. ix, 237f. 1543

to the needs of the people. For unlearned people are captivated
(capiuntur) by parables, parables and allegories, they also enjoy them.
That is why Christ also teaches in the Gospel, as Matthew (Cap. 13,
13\], teaches in parables, so that everyone could understand it.

Now let us see how he treats this figurative teaching against the
righteousness of the Law. He says: \"These are the two testaments\",
that is, the two women, Sarah and Hagar, have been a figure of the two
testaments under one and the same Abraham, which means the heavenly
father. \[But, what I almost passed over, of the secret interpretations
and the figurative speeches we must also say something, since the matter
and the time require it\]. One is used to assume four kinds of
understanding of the Scriptures, which they call the letter, the
tropology, the allegory and the anagogy (as, Jerusalem according to the
literal understanding is the capital of Judea, tropologically it is a
pure conscience or faith, allegorically the church of Christ,
anagogically the heavenly fatherland. Thus Isaac and Ishmael are in this
place, according to the letter, the two sons of Abraham; in a figurative
sense (allegorice) the two Testaments, or the synagogue and the church,
the law and grace, tropologically flesh and spirit, or virtue and vice,
grace and sin; anagogically glory and punishment, heaven and hell; yea,
according to others, the angels and the devils, the blessed and the
damned. One may, of course, allow those who wish to do so this
playfulness, if only they do not get into the habit of the presumption
of some people, that they tear up the Scriptures according to their
liking and make them uncertain; Rather, 1) they may add this to the main
and right understanding, as it were, as a secondary ornament, by which
either the speech may be more richly adorned, or, according to the
example of Paul, the unlearned people may be more sweetly nourished as
with a milk doctrine; but this must not be brought forward in the
dispute in order to fortify the doctrine of faith with it. For this
fourfold (qua- driga) (though I do not reject it)\], this has

1\) Instead of uäjieiunt in the issues we have assumed uchieiunt.

neither 2) in the reputation of Scripture, nor in the custom of the
fathers, nor in grammar \[sufficient\] reason. For \[first of all, it is
evident that\] the apostle does not distinguish in this passage between
allegory and anagogy; indeed, what those call anagogy he calls allegory,
interpreting Sarah \[v. 26.) as the heavenly Jerusalem which is above,
our mother, that is, her anagogical Jerusalem. \[Then the holy fathers
treat the allegory in a grammatical way together with the other figures
in the holy scripture, as St. Augustine teaches even abundantly in his
book \"of the Christian doctrine\". And anagogy does not denote a figure
of its own, but also a general quality of the sayings, that is, it is
called anagogy when in the recessu and in the particular 4 something
else can be understood than the words read, therefore it is also
translated as \"going back\" (reductio). The word \"allegory\" also
means the same thing, namely, speaking of strange things
(alieniloquium), that is, as St. Jerome says, the speech pretends in the
words something other than it means in the sense. In this it is agreed
that tropology is a speech that concerns morals, 5) and there is nothing
to prevent it from sometimes being an allegory, since something else is
said by which good or evil morals are signified. Now the free use which
the Fathers made of these names seems to have been forced into the
captivity of this fourfold distinction (quadrupli) by a certain
timidity, just as many have also sacrilegiously distinguished many other
things which are the same in substance and in word\].

79 It must rather be remembered, what has also been said above, that
with Origen and Jerome the spiritual

2\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger non
instead of nse. - \"this\" added by us to continue the sentence of the
second redaction, which is started before the parenthesis, here.

3\) Cf. § 80 at the beginning.

4\) Instead of iiEpuruto of the issues, we have adopted with the Weimar
in sexurato.

5\) Therefore, tropology is also called moralis. Cf. Tischreden, Cap.
52, § 5. Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XXII, 1341.

1544 Lll. Kai. Ill, 346-348. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 4, 24. W. IX, 238-240. 1545

Mind seems to be, which the apostle calls allegory here. For they take
\"the letter\" for the outward appearance (figuram) and the history. But
the secret interpretation and the allegorical sense they call the
spiritual mind, and a spiritual man they call he who understands
everything in a high way (sublimster), who (as they say) admits nothing
of the Jewish statute (traditionis). According to this rule, almost all
the writings of Origen and Jerome are directed, and, to say it boldly,
they not infrequently fall into difficulties from which they cannot
extricate themselves.

For, in order to pass over the fact that the hidden sense (mysticus
sensus) is either an allegorical or \'anagogical one, or in general,
which has something else in reserve (recessu) than it shows at the first
sight (in fronte), and this is opposed to the historical or figurative
sense, these two words \"letter\" and \"spirit\", then also literal and
spiritual sense, must be separated and preserved in their proper
meaning. For the letter, as Augustine 1) says beautifully and briefly
about the 70th Psalm, is the law without grace. If this is true, then
every law is a letter \[, may it be an allegorical or a tropological
one\], indeed, as we said above, everything that can only be written,
said, or thought without grace. But grace alone is the mind. Hence
spiritual mind is not called the hidden or anagogical, in which even the
ungodly excel (praestant), but quite properly life itself and the law
which comes to exercise (experimentalis), since it is written in the
soul by the finger of God through grace, and in general all that is
fulfilled which the law commands and requires. For he also calls the
holy ten commandments Rom. 7, 14. a spiritual law, while yet the
commandment \"Do not let yourself be lusted after\" is a letter. If it
is called a spiritual mind because it indicates the spirit that the law
requires in order to be fulfilled, there is no law that is not
spiritual.

1\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and in the
Erlangen iäem instead of \^uZustinus.

would be. But then it is only a letter (literalis), if the grace, which
it should fulfill, is not there. But then it is not a letter for itself,
but for me, especially if it is understood in such a way that grace is
not necessary.

We conclude, then, that the law is always spiritual in itself, that is,
it indicates the spirit which is its fulfillment. For others, but never
for itself, it is a letter. For when I say, \"Thou shalt not kill,\" you
hear the sound of the letter, but what does it indicate? Certainly this,
thou shalt not be wrathful, that is, the thing itself, which is a kind,
loving conduct toward one\'s neighbor. But this is love and the spirit
by which it is fulfilled.

Because the law indicates the real and only spiritual thing, the law is
also called spiritual, because it always indicates it. But because it
does not and cannot give it to us, it is called a letter for us, however
spiritual it may be. But since no work is done rightly (bene) without
love, it is clear that every law which commands a good work indicates
and demands a good work, that is, a work of love, and is therefore
spiritual. Therefore we rightly call the spiritual mind of the law the
one by which we know that the law requires the spirit, and convicts us
of being carnal. But the literal mind we call that according to which
one thinks, yes, is caught in the error, that the law can be fulfilled
by our works and powers without the Spirit of grace. Therefore the
letter kills, because it is never rightly understood if it is understood
without grace, just as it is never rightly kept if it is kept without
grace; on both sides is death and wrath. This is taken from the book of
St. Augustine against the Pelagians. 2)

83 But we return again to the apostle. \"One from Mount Sinai that gives
birth to bondage.\" It has been sufficiently said what the bondage of
the law is, into which we are given if we accept the law without grace.
For

2\) Baseler, Weimarsche and Erlanger: exuota instead of: exn-eta.

1546 \^l\'1- Oai. Ill, 348-351. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IL, 241 f. 1547

we keep it, either prompted by fear of evil or by hope of reward, that
is, hypocritically, acting on both sides as servants, not as freemen.

But he calls it a testament. Therefore, in order for it to be
understood, we must also see here how the testament is recognized
(symbolum). First, there is the testament itself, which was the
appointment (nuncupatio) of the land of promise, as it is written in
Exodus 3:8. The testator was the angel in the person of God; the
inheritance itself, which is disposed of (testata), is the land of
Canaan; those in whose favor the will is made are the children of
Israel, as all this is described in the second book of Moses. But this
testament was confirmed by the death and the blood of the cattle, with
which they were sprinkled, as one reads 2 Mos. 24, 8. because the carnal
sacrifice (hostia) coincided with the carnal promise and the carnal
testament and the carnal heirs. \"Which is Hagar\" (he says), that is,
this testament of servitude, which gives birth to servants, is the
allegorical Hagar, the handmaid.

**V. 25 For Hagar is called in Arabia Mount Sinai, and goeth unto
Jerusalem, which is at this time, and is servant with her children.**

First of all, it is striking (movet) that he says that Mount Sinai is
long to Jerusalem, the city in Judea, while he says that it is in Arabia
(St. Jerome reads: \"which adjoins\" (conterminatus est), and in
explaining it he says: which is in the neighborhood (confinis est));
perhaps that for this reason Mount Sinai is rightly said to be in the
neighborhood of Jerusalem, not because the mountain reaches the city,
but because Judea (in which Jerusalem lies, as it were, in the middle)
and desolate Arabia (in which Mount Sinai is) are adjacent. For Judea
has on the east rocky Arabia, and next to it \[toward the south\] it
abuts desolate Arabia, so that because of the proximity of the whole it
can also be said of the part that it is adjacent to a part, and at it
long. \[Stapulensis, who investigates the meaning of the Greek word,
says that it is to be understood in such a way that Sinai is a mountain
range hanging together (mons

conjunctus), that is, it goes and reaches in a kind of mountain chain
(tractu), or, to use a geographical (cosmographico) expression, extends
to Jerusalem; which cannot be understood otherwise than that Mount Sinai
is connected by the country in which it lies (continente sua) with the
country in which Jerusalem lies, just as Wittenberg reaches to Leipzig,
that in the Saxon country to this in the Meissen country\]. 1)

In the Greek it is written: \"Hagar is the mountain Sinai in Arabia\",
and Hagar is here used neuter, so that it refers to \"mountain\", which
is in the Greek neuter gender. But immediately it (Hagar) is also put in
the feminine gender, since he says, \"Which (quae) is the Hagar.\" So
that the order is, \"Which one is Hagar. For here Hagar is Mount Sinai
in Arabia\" 2c. (and he (Erasmus) says that in the Greek notes it is
remembered that Sinai in Arabic means Hagar. And the text of the apostle
himself has perhaps this opinion, since he says: \"Hagar is the mountain
Sinai in Arabia\"), that is, Hagar is and is called in Arabia the
mountain which with us is called Sinai, or: The Arabs call Mount Sinai
Hagar in their language; so that he would give the reason that he had
said that the one testament was from Mount Sinai, and this was therefore
Hagar, because by an allusion taken from Arabic (allusione Arabica),
Mount Sinai was called Hagar, therefore, since God had so ordered it,
Hagar was made a figure of Mount Sinai, which gives birth to bondage
through the law.

We have said above (Cap. 1, § 38) that the apostle does not disdain to
use allusions from foreign languages, since he indicated that the
Galatians, if their name is seen as a word taken from Hebrew (hebraica
allusione), means \"turned away\", as he indicates here by an allusion
taken from Arabic to the maid Hagar. But also Solomon in his Song of
Songs (Cap. 4, 8.) calls the

1\) Baseler, Weimarsche and Erlanger: statt:

what Jena TÄW. I. finds.

1548 2ri. Sai. Ill, 351-353. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 4, 25. W. IX, 242-244, 1549

Mount Amana with the names Senir and Hermon and Lebanon, according to
the different languages (as it is also written 5 Mos. 3, 8. 9.: \"As far
as Mount Hermon, which the Zidonians call Sirion, and the Amorites call
it Senir\"), taking from a foreign language an allusion and an image for
the praise of his bride. Therefore, because he foresaw (v. 24) that he
would use figurative speech, it was entirely fitting that he put the
name of the maid Hagar together with Mount Sinai (where the testament
signified by Hagar (Agarenum) began) by some allusion, and that by the
conveniently presented opportunity that both had the same names. (Also
no other reason (ratio) is to be required here from the apostle, since
he uses the figurative speech for the sake of the weak ones).

\(88\) But what is the use of saying that Mount Sinai is long unto
Jerusalem? Was it not enough that the one testament was from Sinai and
from the maid Hagar? There is nothing that I could say about it, since
all the others pass over this. Therefore I must express my assumptions.
He seems to want this, that (as under the Allegorisiren one allegory
again another to produce uses), since he came from the maid Hagar by the
equality of the name on the mountain Sinai, At the same time, he
occasionally came from the earthly Jerusalem to the heavenly one in an
allegorical way (ä\^\^o\^xw\^), caused by the same reason (argumento) of
the name, since it is interpreted as \"seeing peace\" and yet should be
more correctly called Sinai, that is, \"contestation\". But before
transferring the name Jerusalem to the heavenly Jerusalem, he is content
with having compared both with each other, and weaves in (implicat) many
allegories. For otherwise he would have said clearly, For Jerusalem is
the city in heaven which gives birth to liberty; for by this word he
would have done away with a very dark speech (anapodoton)^1^ ).
Therefore (he says), since the heavenly Jerusalem is so far from this
earthly one, there is nothing in it,

1\) \^napoaeoton is an irregularity of speech that is not continued in
the way one should expect after the beginning.

that this is not Sinai, but in Judea. Since this borders on Arabia, it
is the same as if it were Sinai itself, on which it borders. It agrees
with this mountain by the common land border, also by common birth of
the law, since it is adjacent to that heavenly in no piece, also does
not belong to it, but rather to SinaiHagar, to which it is adjacent. \[I
pass over here many strange ways to allegorize, which the apostle
indicates here, so that I do not add still greater darkness to the
darkness\]. Therefore this: \"Jerusalem, which is at this time\", must
be referred to the future Jerusalem, just as Hagar referred to another
Hagar, so that the sense is: Jerusalem, which belongs to this life, and
both the thing, and the secret interpretation (mysterio), is adjacent to
the mountain Sinai.

89\) Then he adds: \"And is servant with his children\", which 2) he
does in order to exclude those who were in Jerusalem and belonged to the
Jerusalem \"which is above\". This (he says) I call \"Jerusalem, which
is at this time\" and will not be in the future, not even the whole, but
that \"which is servant with its children\", that is, those who in it
are servant to the law, whose border they are adjacent to. (What it
means to be subservient to the law has been said enough and to excess.
Note also the Hebrew way of speaking: \"Children of Jerusalem\" they are
called; because the city is the mother, those who dwell in her are
called children, as in the 147th Psalm, v. 12, 13: \"Praise, O
Jerusalem, the Lord; he blesseth thy children in thee.\" But this is
frequent and quite common in the prophets).

90 (Now we also want to show the allegories of the names according to
Jerome.) \"Sara\" means a princess (princeps genere feminino) or a
mistress. Therefore the children of Sarah, the children of the mistress,
the children of the princess, are rightly called children of the free,
whereas the children of the handmaid are called children of the servants
(servae) and of bondage. For the apostle has also called the name of the

2\) Ü06 is missing in the editions of the first redaction, in the
Erlanger and in the Weimarsche.

1550 Li-1. 6ai, III, 35S-355. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 244-246. 1551

Sara almost expressed, since he calls her \"the free one\". For princes
are also called XXXXX in the Scriptures, 1) that is. Free and willing.

91\. But \"Hagar\" means a wanderer or a stranger, a resident, a
temporary sojourner (mora), which is rightly opposed to the citizens and
householders of God. He says: You are not strangers and sojourners, as
if he wanted to say: You are not 2) relatives of Hagar (Agareni), but of
Sarah (Saraceni), not strangers, but children of the free and the
mistress. \"A servant does not remain in the house forever, but the son
remains forever\" (John 8:35.). The righteousness of the law is
temporal, but the righteousness of Christ remains for all eternity,
because the former serves in this life for reward (mercenaria), but the
latter is free, by grace (gratuita), an heiress of the life to come.

Arabia\" is the setting (of the sun) or the evening that turns to night,
but the church and the gospel is called in many places the dawn and the
morning time. So finally the law and the synagogue are subject, but
grace reigns and is undisturbed (cubat) in the midsummer of eternity.
How? if the apostle also wanted to indicate that Arabia was a desert,
for that also means \"Arabia\", indeed, Arabia in the holy Scriptures is
almost always taken for the desert Arabia. (For happy Arabia is called
by the name of Sheba and other special names;) stony Arabia is called
Kedar, Ammon, Moab, Midian 3) and by many other names, so that Arabia
seems to be so called from its desert nature, so that it signifies the
barren and desolate synagogue or righteousness of the law before God;
whereas the church is the fruitful one before God, though it is a
solitary one (deserta) before men.

93, \"Sinai\" means temptation, as St. Jerome testifies, that is, unrest
and disturbance of peace, which we have from the law; for from the law
comes knowledge of sin, therefore also unrest of conscience.

1\) In the Erlanger wrong: röI\'Np

2\) of is missing in the editions of the \'first Redaction and in the
Erlanger.

3\) MsüLan is missing in the editions of the first redaction, in the
Erlanger and in the Weimarsche.

\"Jerusalem\" means seeing peace, peace of conscience. For through the
Gospel we see in the Church forgiveness of sins, which is peace of
heart.

94\. Ishmael means the hearing of God or one who hears God, and is the
people who went before and heard that Christ would come after them, but
they did not see Him before their eyes and clearly. They heard the
prophets, they read Moses, but still they did not recognize the present
Christ, because they always had Him at their back, always heard Him and
never saw Him. So is everyone who wants to be justified by the law. He
hears about the righteousness of the law and does not see that it is in
Christ. He looks at one thing 4) and hears another. He looks at what is
before him and at his powers, not at the virtues of Christ, but he
always hears that he will be forced by the law to righteousness, to
which he never comes.

Isaac\" means laughter, because this belongs to the grace, which makes
the face of man happy with its oil. This is opposed to weeping, namely
over the guilt that comes from the law. Therefore, all these names, when
compared with the opposite ones, beautifully indicate the difference
between law and gospel, between sin and grace, synagogue and church,
flesh and spirit, the old and the new being (vetustatis et novitatis).

**V. 26. But the Jerusalem that is above, that is the free one, that is
the mother of us all.**

96 He should have said: The other testament is from the Jerusalem that
is above; but in the meantime he has turned his attention to the other
Jerusalem, changed the division and put something that does not
correspond to the previous (anapodoton fecit) 5), but suffices the sense
with other words. For in fact the other testament took its beginning in
Jerusalem, in that the Holy Spirit was sent from heaven to Mount Zion,
as Isaiah, Cap. 2, 3. says: \"From Zion shall go forth the law, and the
word of the Lord from Jerusalem\", and

4\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger ulio
instead of ulia.

5\) Compare the note to s 88.

1552 Lr). Kai. Ill, 3SS-357. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 4, 26. 27. W. IX, 246-249. 455Z

Ps. 110:2 says: \"The Lord will send the scepter of your kingdom out of
Zion\". But, because the earthly Jerusalem was indeed the inheritance
promised at Sinai by the first testament, but another has been promised
to us in heaven, therefore we also have another Jerusalem, which is not
adjacent to Mount Sinai, and not near the bondage of the law, nor a
kindred of it. But there is also this difference. The law of the letter
is given from Mount Sinai to the people to whom temporal things are
promised, but the law of the Spirit is not given from Jerusalem, but
rather from heaven on the day of Pentecost; to it heavenly goods are
promised. Therefore, just as Jerusalem is the mother of all, and a
capital of those who are her children and her citizens under the
Sinaitic law, so Jerusalem, which is above, is the mother of all those
who are her children and her citizens under the law of heavenly grace.
For these ttachten (sapiunt) after the things that are above, not after
the things that are on earth, because they have the pledge of the Spirit
and the deposit of the promise and the firstfruits of the future
inheritance, the eternal citizenship and the new Jerusalem.

**V. 27. For it is written, Be glad, thou barren that bearest not, and
break forth and call, thou that conceivest not; for the lone woman hath
many more children than she that hath a husband.**

97 This is written in Isaiah, chap. 54, 1, and argues against itself by
a wonderful contrast and contradiction. The barren and widow rejoices in
her many children; again, the married and fruitful one has no children.
Who can understand this? He speaks in images and in the spirit, in that
the likeness is taken from the fleshly birth, in which children are born
from a woman who is inseminated by a man. This man in figurative speech
(allegoricus), who makes both married and widowed, both barren and
fertile, is the law, which in Greek reads better (as St. Augustine
says), because in this language \"the law\" (νόμος) is of male gender,
just like the

Death (θάνατος), whom the apostle likewise calls in the male gender
\"the last enemy\" \[1 Cor. 15:26\].

98\. The law (I say), the man of the synagogue, or of any people who are
outside the grace of God, indeed begets many children, but to his great
sorrow; But all sinners, trusting in the wisdom of the law and in the
righteousness of works, boast of the law, that they became such people
through the law, and resemble their father, that is, the law, in all the
outward appearance of life, while inwardly they are far different in
spirit from the likeness of the law, since (as I have said) sin rather
increases through the law, which indicates sin, not takes it away,
whereof Rom. 7, 5. is more extensive. He says: \"While we were in the
flesh, the sinful lusts which were stirred up by the law were strong in
our members to bring forth fruit unto death.\" Now this man inseminates
his wife, that is, he teaches the synagogue good things. But this,
abandoned by the grace of the Spirit, only gives birth to sinners, who
hypocritically pretend to the law, but are only more provoked against
the law, like the Jews against Moses in the wilderness, who was a figure
of the law and of this man.

99\. the church or any nation becomes free from this man by grace, by
which he dies to the law in such a way that he now does not need the
urging and driving of the law, but willingly and freely does everything
that is of the law, as if there were no law, because no law is given to
the righteous \[1 Tim. 1:9\]. Thus it comes about that she who was
subject to the law as a fertile woman with sinful offspring is now a
widow and without law and lonely and barren, but in a good and desirable
widowhood and barrenness, for by this she becomes the wife of another
man, namely of grace or Christ.

For grace follows the law, and Christ follows Moses. Gifted by this man
with another fruitfulness, she speaks the word Is. 49, 21. f.: \"Who
begat me these? I am barren, single, cast out and rejected. Who has
begotten me these-

1554 kri. \"ai. Ill, 3Z7-360. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 24S-252. 1555

went? Behold, I was left alone; where then were they? Thus says the Lord
GOD: \"Behold, I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and I will raise
up my banner to the nations, and they shall bring thy sons in their
arms, and bear thy daughters in their shoulders\". This is because the
children of the Church are not instructed by the teaching letter, but by
the effect (tangente) of the Spirit of God, as it is said in John 6:45:
\"They shall all be taught of God.\" For where the Spirit does not work,
there the law teaches, and there the multitude of the people give birth,
but nothing but sinners, as I have said, and only the work of men is
done there; they make such people as they themselves are; but neither of
them are good. But good come into being (fiunt) without law, by the
grace of the Spirit alone.

We must familiarize ourselves with this figurative expression of Paul,
so that the strange rarity of the meaning does not spread darkness over
Paul\'s words. For St. Augustine also shows in an excellent way that the
lying of Lot\'s daughters with their father means this present trade.
For Lot is the law, namely the law, which his daughters make drunk, that
is, they abuse the law, nor do the synagogues of the nations understand
it rightly; with the wine of their opinion they make it drunk, and
forcefully insist that this is the law and is considered to be what it
is not. Then they become pregnant by the law made drunk in this way, are
taught it, receive it, fall in with it, and give birth to Moabites \[and
Ammonites\], that is, superstitious people, without the grace of the
Spirit, who are presumptuous of the works of the law, who for all
eternity do not enter into the church of God. Therefore, \"Moab\" is
rightly interpreted: He who is of the Father, and \"Ammon\": The people
of sorrow, because this is the only glory of the saints of works and the
hypocrites, that they come from the law, that they live according to the
law, that they presume on the Scriptures alone, as if they were
legitimate children of the law. Therefore it is also said in Jerome that
Moab is very proud. However, they do not pay attention to it, as it is
not.

that their conscience is calm, and that they are a people of sorrow,
since without grace, which makes the heart firm, they cannot be calm in
the works of the law, bearing the burden and heat of the day in vain.

\(102\) Of course, the elder daughter is more insolent and boasts that
she has her son from the father; Moab (she says) from the father. This
is the sensuality and the flesh in which the saints of works boast that
they are of the law. For before men the works of the law \[and those who
do the works of the law\] shine. But the younger does not boast, but
calls her son: an unhappy people. This is the conscience, which has not
rest through the law and its works, but rather unrest and fear. Let this
be enough.

103 The apostle says that our mother has many children, although she is
lonely, barren, a widow, without a husband, without the law, without
children who are instructed and prepared from the law, therefore she
should \"rejoice and break forth\" and shout for joy that she is barren
in this way and neither gives birth nor is in labor, while in the
meantime the children of the law decrease and the children of grace
increase in number. The figure of Hannah and Peninna, 1 Sam. 1, 4. 5.
fits very well to this matter, especially when the hymn of praise of
Hannah is added, so that it can seem that Isaiah took his prophecy from
this passage, which the apostle introduces here, in that the same spirit
was present and enlightened him: \"Until the barren woman gave birth to
very many (she says \[Cap. 2, 5. 9. according to the Vulgate\]) and she
who had many children decreased\", \"for no man is strong in his
strength\" 2c.

**But we, brethren, are the children of the promise according to
Isaac.**

104 He applies the allegory. \"We are, Isaac\'s, after,\" that is, we
are children of the free and the mistress like Isaac, and just as he was
a son, not according to the flesh, but \"according to the promise\"
through the flesh, so are we, because we were promised to Abraham in his
seed, as is more extensively said above. But the Jews are after Ishmael,
that is, they are

1556 Lri. 6-u. Ill, 360-362. shorter interpretation of Galatians 4,
28-30. W. IX, 2S2-2S5. 1557

Children of the handmaid, not according to the promise, but children
according to the flesh; so also all who rely on being justified by the
law and its works.

**V. 29. But as at that time he who was born according to the flesh
persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit, so it is now
also.**

105\) The first book of Moses in the 21st chapter does not indicate what
kind of persecution Ishmael was after Isaac, but this can be concluded
from the words of Sarah, who said to Abraham when she saw that the son
of Hagar, the Egyptian, was mocking her son Isaac: \"Drive out this maid
with her son, because this maid\'s son shall not inherit with my son
Isaac\", as if she wanted to say: I see that he trusteth to be the heir,
and despiseth my son: but he hath forgotten that he is the maid\'s son.
But it is clear that this mockery was such that Ishmael, puffed up by
the firstborn, exalted himself, mocked and insulted Isaac, as if he were
the first son of Abraham. When Sara saw this, she established the
opposite: \"I say that the son of the maid shall not inherit\", calling
him \"the son of the maid\" in a diminutive way (per tapinosin).

\(106\) And this understanding is fortified by the Hebrew text, where we
read: \"And when Sarah saw that the son of Hagar, the Egyptian, whom she
had borne to Abraham, was mocked\" (ridentem) or made a mockery of
(ludentem) (for \"with her son Isaac\" is added in our Bible \[namely in
the Vulgate\]), as if she wanted to say: At this he showed himself
puffed up \[, therefore he mocked\], and vented his displeasure on
Isaac, that Hagar had borne him to Abraham; therefore he most certainly
mocked Isaac, the true heir, because of the inheritance. And to this is
true the secret interpretation of the figure which the apostle treats.
For so it is now with Israel (he says), whose pomposity (vesica) is that
they alone are the seed of Abraham, that they alone are heirs of the
promise. But no one has persecuted the true children of Abraham more
cruelly than they of all people, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles.

For they are Ishmael, who hear in the writings of the prophets that GOD
will come after them, but since He appears before them (coram positum),
they do not recognize Him, having in them both the name and the attitude
and manner of their father Ishmael.

Finally, the word \"a mocker\" (ludentem \[XXXX\]) is the same from
which the name Isaac \[XXXX\] is formed, which is interpreted: Laughter
or joy, to indicate that no doubt Ishmael had been a mocking man 1) and
had used the name \"Isaac\" with sharp derision to ridicule him, as if
he had thought him a truly ridiculous heir and good-for-nothing man. For
the Scripture does not emphasize this word \"a mocker\" (ludentem) or
\"a mocker\" (ridentem) in vain, and tells that by it the so holy woman
was moved. But the apostle cites this to strengthen the Galatians, so
that they will not cease to be Isaac\'s successors (Isaaceni) because of
the persecution of the Ishmaelites, because it must be so. But it will
happen that they will be cast out, as follows:

**V. 30. But what does the Scripture say? Cast out the maid with her
son; for the son of the maid shall not inherit with the son of the free
woman.**

He speaks emphatically (epitatice), things that are quite opposite to
the presumption of the maid and her son. She is a maid (he says) and
misses being mistress; he is a son of the maid and ridicules the son of
the mistress and mocks him bitterly. But let this be far off; rather let
them be cast out. From this it is again seen that the maid Hagar
consented to this, or at least allowed her son Ishmael to mock Isaac,
because she hoped the same as her son, namely that she would be
mistress. And it is not said: Push out your son, but: \"Her son\", by
which it is asserted that Ishmael was also not Abraham\'s son, but the
maid\'s son. He says: \"So it goes now also.\" Not the children
according to the flesh are heirs, but the children of promise.
Therefore, if you

1\) Wittenberger: piaeulum instead of: äieseülum.

1558 **Lri. Kai. Ill, 362-364. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 2SS-26I.** 1559

If you do not want to be cast out with the children of the maidservant,
wait as children of the free. The Scripture will not lie, which says
that the son of the maidservant is to be cast out, even against the will
of Abraham, yet also by God\'s command.

**V. 31. They are we now, brethren, not the children of the handmaid,
but of the free.**

He makes the application of history and allegory, and draws the whole
summa in a short conclusion, which can already be abundantly understood
from what has been said. For \"to be a child of the handmaid\" means to
serve the law, to be a debtor to the law,

Being guilty of doing the law, being a sinner, being a child of wrath,
being a child of death, being a stranger to Christ, being cut off from
grace, being without part in the inheritance to come, being a child of
the flesh, being a hypocrite, being a hired servant, living in the
spirit of bondage in fear, and all that he has enumerated here and
elsewhere. For this evil has innumerable names. And although our
translator 1) has added at the end of this chapter: \"With this freedom
Christ has set us free\", we want to treat this, just as the Greeks, as
the beginning of the fifth chapter.

1\) This is the Vulgate.

The fifth chapter.

V. 1. Stand therefore in liberty, that Christ may set us free, and be
not entangled again in the bondage of the yoke.

1\. \[I impress upon you to excess that this is freedom and bondage, of
which Paul says Rom. 6:20, 18, 22: \"If ye were servants of sin, ye
would be free from righteousness. But being made free from sin, ye are
become servants of GOD.\" But we want to set this before you in an order
and figure:

+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| The freedom from justice:          | The bondage of sin.             |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+
| The bondage of justice:            | > Freedom from sin\]            |
+------------------------------------+---------------------------------+

For he who is free from sin has become a servant of righteousness. But
he who is a servant of sin is free from righteousness, and again. All
this I repeat, knowing that through the multitude of locusts
(locustarum) and bruchorum (bruchorum) with the fruits of our land 2) it
has come to pass that this bondage and liberty is everywhere not
understood, so much is the little human flesh

2\) \"Fruits of our land\" is called here the right understanding of the
word of God.

of those who oppose or contradict both, namely of free will, torn down
and completely ingrained. Yes, they also have a carnal opinion of
freedom. The apostle also had to confront these people in the very same
6th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans \[v. 12 ff.\] \[who thought\],
3) as if it were free to do anything we want in Christ, whereas this
freedom is such that by it we do voluntarily and cheerfully, without
regard to punishment or reward, what is said in the law; but bondage,
that we do it out of servile fear or childish inclination (amore).

2\. there is therefore \[in such doing\] 4) nothing; nor is there any
difference between a servant of sin and a servant of the law, because he
who is a servant of the law is always a sinner, in that he never
fulfills the law otherwise than with the outward appearance of works, to
whom a temporal reward is given, 5) as to the sons of maids and
concubines, but the inheritance is given to the son of the free.
\"Christ (says he) has set us free with this liberty.\" It is a

3\) Added by us.

4\) Added by us.

5\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger dstur
instead of datur.

1560 Ari. 6ai. Ill, 364-366. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 1.
2. W. IX, 261-263. 1561

Spiritual freedom, which must be held in the spirit \[not the pagan
freedom, which even the pagan Persius knew was not sufficient\], it is
freedom from the law, but in the opposite way than it tends to take
place among men.

3 For this is human freedom, when the laws are changed without men being
changed. But this is Christian freedom, when men are changed without the
law being changed, so that the same law that was previously abhorrent to
free will now becomes pleasant, since love has been poured out in our
hearts through the Holy Spirit. He teaches that we are to stand firm and
steadfast in this freedom because Christ, fulfilling the law for us and
overcoming sin, sends the spirit of love into the hearts of those who
believe in him. By this they become righteous and lovers of the law, not
by their works, but by Christ\'s meek gift, by grace. If you depart from
this, you are ungrateful to Christ and proud of yourself, wanting to
make yourself righteous and free from the law without Christ.

Note the emphasis in the words: \"Do not let yourselves be taken in
turn,\" \"do not let yourselves be taken into bondage,\" \"do not let
yourselves be taken into a servile yoke,\" \"do not let yourselves be
held\" **(**contineri**),** or, as it is more significantly expressed in
Greek: \"Do not let yourselves be taken\" (μη *ένέχεσ&ε),* almost as he
said above \[Cap. 3, 23.): \"Keep yourselves under the law\" as in a
dungeon, that is, so that you are not kept under the exceedingly heavy
and unbearable burden of the law, under which, after all, you can be
nothing but servants and sinners, become unfree people
(possideamini**),** (as Erasmus says:) be beaten into ropes, 1) be
entangled. It is worse (minus) to be held (teneri), but to be held in
bondage, that is hard, the very hardest, to be held in the bondage yoke,
especially after having obtained freedom.

5\. \"Insist,\" he says, providing a better (majora) to them than he
sin-

1\) Jenaer, lom. Ill: iUaquoiniiii, Wittenberg and Weimar:
illa\^ussmini, instead of illuHusamiui.

He said that they had not yet fallen, otherwise he would have said: Look
up again. Now he says more mildly: \"Stand\", so that at the same time
he instructs that no one should punish immediately as if he despaired of
the repentance of the punished, but rather clearly indicate that one has
good hope, which is not done by the banishers (fulminatores) of our
time, who are satisfied with the fact that they have atoned for their
terrible desire to show their violence.

**V. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you: Wherever you are circumcised,
Christ is of no use to you.**

6\. After the apostle has nullified the righteousness of the law with
many and very strong reasons of proof, and has abundantly shown the
reason for faith in Christ, he now exhorts with no less effort of all
forces (impetu); he terrifies, he threatens, he promises, watering what
he had already planted, and tries everything and adapts (temperat)
everything to the circumstances with quite apostolic ardor and zeal, so
that it is exceedingly lovely to see such a glorious picture (tantum
speculum) of apostolic care.

\(7\) First of all, he says that it is of no use to Christ if they are
circumcised, and I, Paul, proclaim this to you, adding his name to it in
order to make his words all the more emphatic. Again, I also say here
anew that it is not evil to be circumcised, but to seek righteousness in
circumcision (because that is why they were circumcised) is ungodliness.
And it is easier to see the false confidence in righteousness in
ceremonial works than in the moral works of the holy ten commandments;
for even in these one must not seek righteousness, but in faith in
Christ.

\(8\) I say this so that no one will think from this that the apostle is
arguing against the ceremonial things of the law alone, but he has only
taken the clearest work of the law before him, but at the same time
understands all the works of the law.

9 This seems to be contradicted by Rom. 2, 25: \"Circumcision is of good
use if you keep the law.\" How, says Hierony-

1562 Oai. Ill, 366-369. interpretations on the epistle to the Galatians.
W. IX, 263-266. 1563

mus, can circumcision be of any use in keeping the law, since even
Christ is of no use to the circumcised? Here the holy man brings in many
things. \[In short, it is impossible for the law to be fulfilled without
Christ, as has already been said many times, for the apostle has this as
a fixed premise (pro constanti hypothesi), and has proved it
sufficiently. But for those who keep the law (that is, who have Christ,
the fulfiller of the law, through faith), it is free to be circumcised
and not to be circumcised, for everything is useful to them, everything
serves for the best \[Rom. 8:28\]. But those who allow themselves to be
circumcised in a servile way and out of fear of the law, so that they
thereby do justice to the law and want to become righteous as a
necessary righteousness, throw Christ and the grace of God away by
presuming to fulfill the law in another way than through Christ. Thus
Christ is of no use to them for the sake of circumcision, while
circumcision for the sake of Christ does no harm to them.

\(10\) To the same foolishness, yes, godlessness, perish those who,
either out of anguish of conscience or in imminent danger of death, when
they finally realize that their life is exceedingly evil and see how far
they are from the law of God, either despair or fall into a similar
godlessness, doing enough for the sins and wanting to keep the law in
the future in order to satisfy their conscience, since they believe they
will be good if they fulfill what the law prescribes. Furthermore, they
do not understand \"fulfill\" to mean that one believes in Christ alone
(the fulfiller of the law), but that they fulfill the law with many
works. These ungodly righteousnesses we learn from the statutes of men
and the abominable theology, whose head is Aristotle and whose feet are
Christ, since these alone rule. For in such a way they raise their
miserable satisfactions high, and it is to be marveled at how high they
raise them by the fair of indulgences, as if it were too little to
believe in Christ, in whom, by faith alone, is our righteousness,
redemption, satisfaction, life, and glory.

11 Therefore, when you have come to the knowledge of your sins through
the guidance of the law, beware that you do not first take it upon
yourself to do enough for the law from now on, wanting to lead a better
life, but despair completely of your past life and your future life, and
firmly believe in Christ. But by believing, and thus being justified,
and fulfilling the law, call upon him that sin may be destroyed in your
heart also, and that the law may be fulfilled there also, as it is
already fulfilled in your heart by faith, and only then do good works
according to the law.

\(12\) Therefore I like the way that nothing but Christ crucified is
held up to people who are dying, and that they are exhorted to faith and
hope. Here at least (however much the deceivers of souls may have
deceived us throughout our lives) free will falls away, good works fall
away, the righteousness of the law falls away, leaving only faith and
nothing but the invocation of the mere mercy of God, so that I have
often come to the opinion that in death there are either more Christians
or better Christians than in life. For the freer the trust is from
one\'s own works, and the more exclusively it is directed to Christ
alone, the better Christian it makes, and all good works of the whole
life must be directed to this faith. But now we are pressed upon our
merits by the mists and clouds and whirlwinds of human statutes and
laws, then also by unlearned interpreters of Scripture and preachers; We
do enough for sin by our own efforts, and do not direct our works to
sweep out the vices of the flesh and destroy the body of sin, but, as if
we were already completely pure and holy, we heap up, like the grain in
a barn, that by which we want to make God a debtor and sit in heaven, I
do not know how high. Blind, blind, blind people! Christ is of no use to
all of them; they know other counsel to make themselves righteous.

\(13\) Now it follows that this word, \"Where ye are circumcised,\" does
not mean both the outward work and the inward work.

1564 cri- Kai. Ill, 369-371. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 5, 2. 3. W. IX, 266-269. 1565

The apostle speaks in the spirit of what is going on inwardly in the
conscience. For the outward work is something indifferent. The whole
difference lies in the opinion, the mind, the conscience, the intention,
in the position of the heart (dictamine) 2c. Therefore, if the works of
the law are done in such a conscience as if they were necessary, and in
the confidence of thereby obtaining righteousness, then one walks in the
counsel of the wicked, treads in the way of sinners, and he who teaches
such things sits where the scoffers sit \[Ps. 1:1\]. But if they are
done in the godly attitude (pietate) of love and in right confidence
(fiducia) and in freedom, in that righteousness is already attained
through faith, then they are merits.

14 But they are done in the godly spirit of love, when they are done for
necessity or according to the will of another. For then they are not
works of the law, but works of love, and are not done because the law
commands them, but for the sake of the brother who wants them or needs
them, just as the apostle himself did them. This opinion must be fixed
for you in all works according to any law. For in this way a priest or a
monk, if he has done the works of his ceremonies, even keeping chastity
and poverty, in order to become righteous and good by them, is an
ungodly man, and denies Christ, since one who is already justified by
faith should use these works to put off the flesh and the old man, so
that faith in Christ alone may increase and rule in him, and so the
kingdom of God may come. Therefore, he will do this with a cheerful
heart, not so that he may earn much, but so that he may be cleansed.

But how great a sickness is now in these herds, who are monks and
priests with the greatest reluctance and only for the sake of this life,
not even seeing a hair\'s breadth of what they should be, what they
should do and what they should seek. Forgive me, dear reader, for making
so many words. This Midian has come upon the Church in such great
multitudes that six hundred people

like Gideon, let alone three hundred trumpets and jars to destroy them
\[Judges 7:16\]. The strong waters of the Assyrians have come up to the
neck of Judah, they have spread their wings to fill your land, O
Immanuel, as far as it is, because we have despised the waters of
Shiloh, which are still \[Isa. 8:7, 8, 6\]. Therefore we have earned
nothing with the binding keys but innumerable cords of souls.

**V. 3. Again, I testify to everyone who is circumcised that he still
owes to do the whole law.**

The first evil that should terrify you is that Christ is of no use to
you, which means nothing else than that the law has not been fulfilled
by you. Therefore the other evil is that the burden of the law is still
upon you, and that you are guilty of doing the whole law. For both are
certainly a great pity: to lack so great a good that is in Christ, and
to be oppressed by so great an evil that comes from the law.

\(17\) But I beseech thee, dear Paul, by what inference can this
conclusion stand, or rather have its course? You let yourself be
circumcised, therefore you are guilty of the whole law? Does he who is
circumcised not at least keep the law of circumcision? Jeremiah answers,
Cap. 9, 26: \"All the Gentiles have uncircumcised foreskin, but the
whole house of Israel has uncircumcised heart.\" Again, 1) the apostle
is speaking from his presupposition that the work of no law is a right
work unless it is done in the faith that purifies the heart. Therefore
neither circumcision nor any other work does justice to the law, but
only outwardly and hypocritically. For this alone is a good work, which
proceeds from a good and pure heart. But a good heart can only be born
of grace; grace does not come from works, but from faith in Christ.

18 Thus the circumcision of Abraham would have been nothing if he had
not first believed. Justified by this faith, that

1\) Here we have assumed with the editions of the first Redaction and
the Erlanger iterurn instead of item.

1566 Dri. 6 \"I. Ill, 371-374. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 269-271. 1567

He did a good work by circumcising himself. This is what he says Rom. 2,
25. \"If you do not keep the law, your circumcision has already become
foreskin.\" What is this different from: A circumcised man is not
circumcised, and he who keeps the law does not keep the law? because he
does not keep it according to that part of him which is the greater and
better, namely, with the heart, but only with the flesh. Thus Jacobus
says \[Cap. 2, 10.\], \"He that sinneth against One is wholly guilty of
it.\" For he who fulfills One Law by faith fulfills all. For faith is
the fulfilling of all laws for Christ\'s sake, who fulfilled it. Now if
thou lackest faith in One thing, thou hast it already in no thing. So he
rightly says: Whoever circumcises himself without faith, without inward
circumcision, does not circumcise himself, but does not do the work of
any law, and is still guilty of the whole law. \[Jerome understands it
this way: if they were circumcised, it was necessary that they also kept
the rest of the law, as if the Galatians had only kept circumcision. I
do not like this opinion, because the false apostles had imposed the
whole law of Moses on the Galatians, as he said above \[Cap. 4, 10.\]:
\"You keep days, and moons, and feasts, and seasons\", therefore he
rather wants to show that just the opposite occurred by keeping the law,
namely, that they did not keep it, but rather transgressed it really and
worse.

**V. 4. Ye have lost Christ, who would be justified by the law, and have
fallen from grace.**

19 Behold what I have said: Not the work of circumcision, but reliance
on righteousness is condemned by the apostle, saying, \"Who desire to be
justified by the law.\" This is a sin of ungodliness, that ye would be
justified by the works of the law. The works of the law can be done
rightly by the righteous, but no ungodly person can be justified by
them. Indeed, even the righteous, if they fail to be justified by them,
lose the righteousness they have and fall from the grace by which they
were justified, that is, they lose their righteousness by the works of
the law.

The first step is to make sure that the people have been transferred
from a good country to a barren one.

20 Again, he seems to be secretly alluding here to the name
\"Galatians\" by pointing to the \"turning away,\" 1) that they have
fallen back from grace into the law. So you see how steadfastly the
apostle insists that we are justified by faith alone, and that works are
not the principia for bringing about righteousness, but a duty of the
righteousness already attained, and a service to increase the same.

21\] Jerome rebukes the Latin translator for the word: Evacuati estis,
because it indicates more: You have ceased in the work of Christ. But I
like the emphasis that lies in this word extraordinarily. It means: You
are idle, you are vain, you are empty of the work of Christ, and
Christ\'s work is not in you, since (as said above) a Christian does not
live, does not speak, does not work, does not suffer, but Christ in him.
For all his works are the works of Christ, so unspeakably great is the
grace of faith.

22\. Whoever, therefore, allows himself to be turned away from the law,
he then lives in himself, he does his work, his life, his word, that is,
he sins and does not fulfill the law, he is idle in regard to Christ,
Christ does not dwell in him, he does not use his either, he keeps an
exceedingly wicked and quite unholy Sabbath, that he abstains from the
works of the Lord, whereas he should abstain from his works
(sabbatissare), be empty and idle, so that the works of the Lord might
be done in him, which, as St. Augustine teaches, was once done by St.
Augustine. Augustine teaches, was once modeled by the Sabbath.
Therefore, he who believes in Christ is emptied of himself, he becomes
free (otiosus) from his works, so that Christ may live and work in him.
He who seeks to be justified by the law is emptied of Christ, he is set
free from the works of God, so that he may live and work in himself,
that is, so that he may perish and perish.

**V. 5. But we wait in the Spirit through the faith of righteousness,
which must be hoped for.**

1\) Compare Cap. 1, § 38.

1568 Lri. Sai. Ill, 374-376. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 5.
6. W. IX, 272-274. 1569

23\. \"In the Spirit through faith\" seems to be spoken in the Hebrew
way, instead of: We wait by the Spirit, which is of faith; or, because
we believe, therefore we wait, not carnally, but spiritually, for the
righteousness which must be hoped for. But those who do not believe are
empty of the Spirit, therefore from works they carnally expect the
righteousness that must be hoped for. Faith makes spiritual people,
works\] carnal people.

\(24\) I have told you before that a man without grace cannot do the law
except either for fear of punishment or for hope of a promised reward;
but both are done in a carnal way and out of desire for reward, so there
they do not expect in the spirit what they hope for, but in the flesh
they desire a thing which they may enjoy. For they do good not for the
love of righteousness, but for the benefit of reward.

25\) What is this: \"We wait for the hope of righteousness\"? 1) Who
waits for a hope? Some take \"hope\" for the thing hoped for, as it is
said in the third book of Seneca, that with Athanasius \"faith\" is
taken for the thing believed or for the words of faith: \"This is the
right Christian faith\" 2c. But I do not like to hear that faith and
hope are taken in this way. For, just as it is right to say, I live a
life, it seems to me that it may be said without inconsistency: I hope
for a hope; but I will not quarrel about it. Let each one accept what he
can or wants. I know that this is generally the way of speaking of
Scripture, that it attaches to faith and hope what is obtained by faith
and hope. For in this way \[men\] are called gods, they are called true,
righteous, holy, which is God\'s alone; in that they have a part in him
and are attached to him, they are of this nature. Thus hope (spes),
because it is attached to things to come, is called hope (speratio) or
the hoped-for \"hope\" for the sake of this attachment to these things.

1\) The Vulgate text reads: 8pem ju8titiae exLpsetainus.

2\) Added by us.

\(3\) since faith is righteousness before God for this reason, because
it is attached to divine righteousness and truth and agrees with them,
which is due to grace, not to nature.

**V. 6 For in Christ neither circumcision nor foreskin counts for
anything, but faith working through love.**

26 Here it is clearly proven that circumcision is permitted, which St.
Jerome and his followers deny with great vehemence (strepitu); for if it
were not permitted, the foreskin would have to be necessary. But he
says: \"the foreskin counts for nothing\", therefore it is not
necessary. Again, the foreskin is also permitted; for if it were not
permitted, circumcision would be necessary. But circumcision counts for
nothing, so it is not necessary. \[What remains, then, but what St.
Augustine says here correctly? For it cannot be said that even to
Timothy Christ was of no use because Paul circumcised him, since he was
already a Christian. For he did this because of the aversion that others
took to it, in that he did not in any way hypocritically perform it, but
regarded it as a middle thing (ex indifferentia) according to the words
(1 Cor. 7:19.): \"Circumcision is nothing, and the foreskin is
nothing.\" For circumcision does no harm to him who does not believe
that blessedness does not lie in it\].

\(27\) To show that this is a middle thing, Paul has very wisely put
both; for if he had said, Circumcision is not useful, it would have
seemed as if the foreskin were necessary. Again, if he had said,
Foreskin is not useful, it would have seemed as if circumcision were
necessary. But only the opinion that one has about it, the confidence
that one places in it, and the conscience that one has about it, make a
difference between the two,

3\) These brackets find set by us.

1570 All. Kai. Ill, 376-378. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 274-276. 1571

both of which are permissible, indifferent, and mediocre, as are all
other works of the law. Thus it is said in 1 Cor. 7:18, 19: \"If anyone
is called circumcised, let him not be circumcised. If anyone is called
in the foreskin, let him not be circumcised. Circumcision is nothing,
and foreskin is nothing, but keeping God\'s commandment.\"

28 What is this? Doesn\'t \"having had God\'s commandment\" mean being
circumcised? Didn\'t God command this through Moses and Abraham? I have
said above that those who are circumcised in the flesh, without
circumcision of the heart, are uncircumcised before God, although it is
true that the ceremonial things of the Law had to be kept by the Jews
until Christ. For the promise of Abraham and the Law of Moses lasted
until Christ, as Moses, Deut. 18, 15, clearly says that they should hear
the prophet whom God would raise up, like Moses himself. So Moses did
not want to be heard beyond this prophet, who is Christ, as the apostle
Peter says the same passage in the Acts of the Apostles, Cap. 3, 23,
against the Jews. And since God commanded Abraham to be circumcised, He
certainly wanted it to last only until the appearance of the promised
blessing. For when the seed came, in relation to which the promise had
been made, the promise and the covenant of the promise with its seal
certainly came to an end at the same time.

29\. after Christ, therefore, circumcision is nothing, yet a middle
thing (neutra) and permitted, like any other things, as days, foods,
garments, places, sacrifices 2c., though they were also nothing before
Christ, since they were done without the inherent righteousness, as
Isaiah Cap. 1, 11. says, \"What shall the multitude of your sacrifices
profit me?\" and Micah Cap. 6, 6. \[Vulg.\], \"What due sacrifice shall
I offer to the Lord?\" 2c. Thus it is said in Heb. 9, 10. that all these
things are \"laid up until the time of correction.\" But even the works
of the holy ten commandments were outside of grace; therefore they too
must have an end, that the right works of the same may follow in the
Spirit.

30 I have said this so that no one may think that I am saying that
circumcision, even in the sight of Christ, is a mediocrity and
indifferent.

or it was permitted for the Jews to have a foreskin. For Job and many
others in the east, Naaman the Syrian, the son of the woman of Sarepta,
King Nebuchadnezzar, when he was converted, were righteous and yet
uncircumcised, because they were not bound by the Law of Moses, but only
the Jews who had received it.

This, that he says: \"The faith which is active through love\", is an
explanation, which explains the speeches and gives the weak a right
understanding, so that we recognize of which faith he speaks so often,
namely of the right and sincere one, of which he says in the first
letter to Timothy \[Cap. 1, 5\]: \"Of a good conscience and of undyed
faith. The colored (ficta) faith, however, is that which our theologians
call the (acquisitam) acquired \[by its own powers\] 1) then also the
faith which, although infused (infusa), is without love.

32 And here I do not treat their useless questions and wretched
opinions, by which they suppose that for the infused faith the acquired
faith is necessary, as if the Holy Spirit needs us, and not rather we
need him in all things. For that they dream that if a child who has just
been baptized were brought up among Turks and unbelievers without a
Christian teacher, he could not know what a Christian man ought to know,
is a sham, as if we 2) did not daily learn in the most horrible way what
the Christian doctrine is good for those who are not drawn inwardly from
God; again, how great things are done by those who are not taught by
heart in so many and great things as the theologians teach and are
taught to them. It is something living, indeed, the life and the thing
itself, when the Spirit teaches; he knows, speaks, works all things in
all; he whom GOtt teaches is certainly no different than when GOtt
creates a man anew. For who teaches the shapeless seed of man to live,
to see, to feel, to speak, to work, and the whole world to be vigorous
in all its works.

1\) Added by us. Cf. Walch, old edition, vol. VIII, 2145, § 290.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction, in Weimar\'s and Erlangen\'s
6xp6riantur instead of oxperiarnur.

1572 Lri. Oai. Ill, 378-381, shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 6,
7, W. IX, 276-279. 1573

show? Those little friends are ridiculous and put forward exceedingly
foolish thoughts about God.

\(33\) Therefore he that heareth the word of Christ sincerely, and
cleaveth unto it in faith, shall also be clothed with the spirit of love
shortly, as he said above \[Cap. 3:2\], \"Received ye the Spirit by the
preaching of faith, or by works?\" For it is not possible that thou
shouldest not immediately love Christ also, if thou hearest him with a
sincere heart, seeing that he hath done and suffered so great things for
thee. If thou canst love him that giveth thee twenty florins, or doest
thee any service, how shouldst thou not love him that giveth not gold,
but himself for thee, that receiveth so many wounds for thee, sweateth
and shedeth blood, dieth, and suffereth all things that are most
dreadful (extrema)? But if you do not love him, it is certain that you
will not sincerely hear this, nor rightly believe that it has happened
for you; for that you do so, the Spirit works. \[But the other faith,
which works miracles, is a free gift of God, which is also spread over
the unbelievers, who do what they do for their own glory, of whom it is
said in 1 Cor. 13:2, \"And if I had all faith,\" 2c.\]

34: So, with great elegance and emphasis, he says: \"The faith that
works through love\", that is, \"is active\", as Erasmus teaches from
the Greek, not the one that snores by acquiring it by itself (per
acquisitionem sui), but the one that is active through love, as he said
above \[Chap. 2, 8\]: \"For he who was powerful with Petro was also
powerful with me among the Gentiles\", because he expresses the powerful
working.

**V. 7. You were running fine.**

\(35\) It is a way of speaking in Scripture that to walk, to stroll, to
run, to journey, to step, to tread, and the like are taken for the whole
Christian walk (conversari). Way, journey, step, footsteps and the like
are taken for the whole Christian walk (conversari), yes, also for
believing and loving. For one approaches God (as Augustine says) not by
space, but by the position of the heart and love; that is, with the feet
of the heart and mind.

deln. Therefore he also says that our walk is in heaven \[Phil. 3, 20.),
dealing (sapimus) with what is above, where Christ is.

Although this is quite common in Scripture, it is nevertheless necessary
to mention it, because now everywhere the widespread error prevails that
they run for religion against religion to Rome, Jerusalem and St. James
and to a thousand other places, as if the kingdom of God were not in
them. \[This godlessness is aided not a little by the splendid and
impudent splendor of indulgences, by which the unlearned great multitude
(who do not know how to distinguish) are seduced and far prefer this
wandering to the practice of love, by which alone one runs to God; this
they could practice abundantly in their homeland. But the shameful gain
blinds the shepherds, so that they do not oppose this common error\].
But the apostle does not say, \"Ye walked,\" but, \"Ye ran,\" by which
he praises them especially highly, and flatters them in a fatherly
manner. For \"running\" is found among the perfect, as Ps. 19:6. says,
\"She rejoiceth as a hero to run the way,\" and in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians \[Cap. 9:24.\], \"Run therefore, that ye may seize it.\"
Again, of those who are perfect and hardened in evil, it is said in
Proverbs, Cap. 1:16, \"Their feet run to evil, and hasten to shed
blood,\" and the same is repeated by Isaiah, Cap. 59:7. Therefore, to
\"run in Christ\" is to hasten, to be fervent, to be perfect in faith
and love of Christ.

**Who stopped you from disobeying the truth?**

Who has hindered you in the good course, and hindered you so completely
that you do not believe the truth? as if to say: No man\'s cunning, no
man\'s influence (auctoritas), no man\'s reputation (persona) or outward
appearance, however great it may be, should have moved you. Sleepy
people and those who hardly crawl in Christ (that is, even weak
Christians), someone might well deceive, endure and seduce, but that
those who run, are in heat, and now even

1574 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 381-383. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 279-28 1575

Those who received me like Christ, who would have opened their eyes, who
endured all dangers of life and property for me, are so quickly, not
only kept away, but even turned away so far that they do not believe the
truth, who should not be surprised at this? You are truly Galatians and
all too easily turned away, since you were so soon pushed down from such
a great height of perfection into such a great depth of the opposite
superstition.

At the same time, remember what human nature is, what free will is, when
God removes His hand; then what the people (populi) should do if they
lack the good service of shepherds, since the Galatians, who were so
great in Christ, fell so soon and so hard when Paul was absent. Now let
those grab themselves who want to be shepherds of many oerters, yes,
shepherds over many shepherds, and boast of their authority, while in
the meantime they do not even provide pasture for themselves. \[For even
today these people, according to their exceedingly depraved disposition
(corruptissimae affectiones), interpret what Christ said to Petro (John
21:16), \"Feed my sheep,\" thus: Be a superior (praelatus) over the
sheep and rule over them. And this alone is feeding Christ\'s sheep
today, even though they have not seen a syllable of the gospel (which
alone is the feeding of the sheep). They also interpret the word (Matth.
16, 18.): \"You are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church: On
the rock, that is, on the authority of the church; while Christ has
shown the firm foundation of faith in the spirit; and they make of the
most spiritual faith in Christ a completely earthly authority. Therefore
it is not necessary for us to say, \"Who has kept you from disobeying
the truth?\" but: Why has no one kept you from obeying the lies in which
you walk so exceedingly shamefully (pessime)? For what should we do
otherwise, since the shepherds have in view not that whither we should
run, but how mightily they themselves would reign\]? Jerome thinks that
this bit: \"You will not come to an agreement with anyone\" is entirely

1\) because it is not found in the Greek books, nor in any of the
writings of those who have interpreted this letter of the apostle,
therefore we also want to pass it over.

**V. 8 Such persuasion is not from him who called you.**

St. Jerome reads: \"Your persuasion\", and disputes much about free
will, which must be taken with caution, especially since he tells the
views of others, that is, compiles interpretations of others
(commentaria scribat). I like the opinion of Erasmus, who says:\]
Neither vestra, nor est, nor haec is written in the Greek, and it is an
answer to the previous question, in this way: \"Who stopped you from
disobeying the truth?\" Surely nothing but persuasion, which is not from
GOD who called you. But \"persuading\" can be taken in two ways, in an
active way and in a suffering way, only that it implies a more severe
rebuke and fits better to the previous question if it is taken in a
suffering way (passive), so that the meaning is: Ye were kept away,
because ye were too soon persuaded. You are Galatians, you \[soon\] let
yourselves be turned away from Him who called you, as I said 2) above
\[Cap. 1, 6.\]. Such perfect people should not have been persuaded so
soon, however much the persuaders penetrated them. Again, note that he
rather calls faith a persuasion, because it is such a thing that cannot
be proved unless it is believed by him who persuades. For faith does not
suffer the persuasion of the sophists.

**V. 9. A little leaven leavened the whole dough.**

40 In our editions (codicibus) it is not well said: \"A little leaven
spoils the whole dough\", and the interpreter has rather expressed his
opinion than translated the words of the apostle. But St. Jerome
translates this thus: A little

1\) Nor does it appear in the Vulgate.

2\) In four editions available to us: üixi. Erlanger and Weimarsche:
ctixit.

1576 **Lri. 6ai. Ill, 383-386. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 9.
W. IX, 281-283.** 1577

Leaven leaveneth the whole dough.) He expresses the same opinion, even
uses the same words 1 Cor. 5, 6: \"Do you not know that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole dough?\" and it seems that the apostle used this as
a common saying, which is admittedly very beautiful and emphatic. But
the apostle clearly indicates 1 Cor. 5, 7. 8. that there is a twofold
leaven, since he says, \"Feast on the old leaven,\" and again, \"Not in
the old leaven.\" So there is also a new leaven.

41 The old leaven is a harmful teacher, a harmful doctrine, a harmful
example. The apostle speaks here of the first and second; of the third 1
Cor. 5, 6. 7. where he commands that the fornicator be cast out from
them as old leaven, \"so that you (he says) may be a new dough\".
Likewise Matth. 16, 6. and Luc. 12, 1.: \"Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy\", which the evangelists themselves
interpret later from the teaching of the Pharisees. The mass or dough is
the people, a disciple, or the godly teaching of pure faith. But as
leaven is like dough, so perverse doctrine always attracts the
appearance of truth, and cannot be distinguished otherwise than by
taste, that is, by the discernment of the spirit 1).

42\. The new leaven is Christ, the word of Christ, the work of Christ,
and all 2) Christians, that is, teacher, doctrine, example. But the
dough is the people, the wisdom of the flesh, the old man, the life of
the world 2c. Hence it is said Matt. 13:33: \"The kingdom of heaven is
like unto leaven, which a woman took, and mingled it together with three
measures of flour, until it was thoroughly leavened.\" The woman, the
Church or the wisdom of GOD, takes the leaven (that is, the word of the
Gospel) and hides it (abscondit); for the word of faith works powerfully
within the conscience, not in the outward works of the law, as is said.
\"In my heart (it is said \[Ps. 119, 11. Vulg.\]) I have heard thy

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen
spirituum instead of Spiritus.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen
oncinis instead of omnes.

Sayings hidden.\" For it justifies in the spirit before GOD. \"Under
three bushels of flour,\" in a certain number and measure of His elect.
For it is, as Jerome testifies, satum 3) in Hebrew a kind of measure
\[according to the sages of the land of Palestine, which holds a bushel
and a half (and this is about how much our wives use to take to leaven
the flour). Now let someone interpret the three bushels by some secret
interpretation, we must allow that, only he must understand a certain
number and measure of the people, be it according to the choice of the
holy trinity or otherwise. \"Until it is leavened,\" that is, as I said
above, faith, by which we are justified in spirit, is, as it were, a
hiding of leaven and a kind of mixing (temperatura) of the Word of God
with our souls. Faith accomplishes this by mortifying the flesh, by
destroying sin, and by sweeping out the old leaven, so that it alone
reigns in all the members and leavened the whole.

\(43\) Since we are called in Scripture one bread, one drink, and the
doctrine likewise bread and drink, we must be accustomed to this
figurative speech, and understand the mixture of the flour and the
leaven, and the changes thereof, from the doctrine and from the changes
of the people (populorum) in their minds. Therefore, although the
apostle speaks of evil doctrine in this passage, yet, because he makes
use of a general saying, he must also be understood of any evil desire.
\[If we begin to be tickled by such a one, we are to repel it
immediately with this saying, \"A little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump,\" for if we do not resist it in the beginning, it gains strength,
and will stain the whole body and soul by consenting to it or liking it.
But if the law of Moses is a leaven, as the apostle thinks, though there
is nothing sinful in it, what will our statutes be, whose breath stinks
so strongly and grossly of flesh and blood)?

3\) Hebrew: NXO. - The Greek vä-ov is formed from the form. (Gesenius.)

1578 Dri. ttai. Ill, 386-388. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 283-285. 15 79

**V. 10. I promise you in the Lord, you will not be of a different
mind.**

44 He beautifully arranges his word so that one should not think that he
trusts in men. I have good confidence in you, but I trust not in you,
but in the Lord. (And though it would be the same sense: I trust, as to
you, in the Lord, yet I know not what hidden emphasis is far more
pleasing to me, since he says, as it were, with Hebrew idiom (Vulg.),
\"I trust in you in the Lord.\" For this also seems to be a kind of
sweet flattery, to which the fatherly care induces him, that he trusts
in them, yet not otherwise than \"in the Lord.\"\]

45 This word now: \"You will be minded\" (sapietis), which is so
frequent in the New Testament, and is sometimes expressed by \"wisdom\"
and \"prudence,\" as Rom. 8:6: \"The prudence (prudentia,) of the flesh
is death,\" should become familiar to us straight (tandem). For all that
which in other languages is expressed by the most diverse words, as, of
the heart (endeavor, endeavoring concern, well-disposed, feeling,
feeling for, thinking for, judgment, resolution, presumption, counsel,
remembrance, disposition 2c., is expressed by this Greek word *(fpm\^pa,
φρόνησις* from

pressed. Therefore it says Ps. 1, 1: \"Blessed is he who does not walk
in the counsel (consilio) of the wicked.\" (\"Counsel\" is that,\] 1)
which is called in Deut.

The term \"conceit\" 2) is used when we say: \"It seems right to me.

46 \"Not otherwise\" cannot be referred to the first preceding, but it
refers to the content of the whole epistle and the whole epitome of it,
so that the meaning is: You have learned the gospel from me; I hope that
you will set your minds on nothing new, on nothing different, that you
will not be fickle (mutabitis), in that he again speaks kindly
(blandiens) and in a godly way expresses a courageous opinion, while
they had already begun to be of a different mind, or something else had
begun to seem good to them.

1\) Added by us.

2\) Erlanger and Weimarsche: \"Gutdunkel. In the editions of the first
redaction: \"Gutdünken.

**But he who deceives you will bear his judgment, whoever he may be.**

47\. \"Misleads\", that is, by its teachings, turns you away from the
right faith and pushes you out of the position you held.

\(48\) But will not the one who misleads them be excused by his godly
zeal and good opinion (\[bona intentio\] as they say) or his ignorance,
or that he is a disciple of the apostles, and a great one at that? No
(he says), every one \[who misleads you,) 3) be he who he will, however
great, has done no small sin, \"he shall bear his judgment.\" This is a
scriptural expression: \"to bear his burden,\" \"to bear his judgment,\"
\"to bear his iniquity,\" by which their condemnation is expressed. For
those who are in Christ do not bear their burdens, but, as Isaiah, Cap.
53, 4. 6. says, \"Christ bore our sickness,\" and \"the Lord cast upon
Him all our sin.\" But each one\'s sin is unmistakable, and yet he must
bear it, as the 38th Psalm, v. 5, says: \"For my sins are upon my head,
like a heavy burden they have become too heavy for me.\"

49 It is therefore frightening that Paul says here, \"He will bear his
judgment. Likewise, see with what pride he denies the prestige of the
person: \"Let him be who he will.\" I do not care whether he is an
apostle or a disciple of the apostles; I do not care about the person.
We see in Paul such a deep contempt for the reputation of men, and that
under the pretense of persons and the outward appearance (larvis) of men
so much evil is committed, and yet we cannot be dissuaded even by this,
that we should not willingly let ourselves be seduced with eyes to see
and with willing hearts under the pretense of holiness, great
reputation, power, liberties (praescriptionis), prerogatives, and such
quite trifling things. For this must not be said now in the church,
\"Let him be who he will\"; but it is enough for someone to say, This is
how he holds it, this is how he wills it, this is how he commands: then
the whole Christian church has said it. \[Finally, some of the heralds
of the Antichrist are there

3\) Added by us.

1580 Dri. o-a. Ill, 388-391. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 5, 10. 11. W. IX, 285-288. 1581

They have come to gossip in the most abominable manner that no one,
especially not the Roman Pontiff, should say, \"Why are you doing this?
He has no judge on earth, and Christ would not have provided
sufficiently for his church if he had not given men such great power as
he has. Our time is worthy to hear such words, which are more
nonsensical than the most unspeakable ungodliness; for such it deserves
in Christ.

**But I, brethren, if I still preach circumcision, why do I suffer
persecution?**

50 For as he said above Cap. 1, 10: \"Do I intend to please men? If I
were still pleasing men, I would not be Christ\'s servant.\" Bkit these
words he expresses the same as here, namely, that he suffered
persecution from the Jews for the sake of the word of Christ, by which
circumcision is exalted, as is written in the Acts of the Apostles and
many epistles. So he says, \"By this evidence also you know that
circumcision is nothing, that I myself, as I write to you, do so, that I
also suffer persecution for its sake, which I would not have to suffer
if I agreed with them and taught circumcision.

St. Jerome thinks that those false apostles also misused the name of
Paul to turn away the Galatians, namely, because Paul also circumcised
Timothy and made a vow in Keuchrea, as was said above. But notice, he
does not say: If I still \"allow\" circumcision, but \"preach\" it. It
should not be preached as necessary, although it could be suffered as
harmless, if only faith in Christ prevails.

**Thus, the aggravation of the cross would have ceased (**evacuatum
est**).**

\(52\) When circumcision is preached, the Jews are satisfied, so their
anger ceases. For it is the same word that he used above \[Cap. 5, 4\]:
Evacuati estis, that is, the trouble is without work, idle, futile; this
word indicates that the trouble among the Jews is, to be sure

will have nothing more to do with it. But what kind of conclusion is
this: Circumcision is preached, therefore the aggravation of the cross
ceases? Then: Is it not to be wished that there should be no more
trouble about the cross? Or do you, dear Paul, want as many people as
possible to be vexed? Who can suffer that?

With regard to the first, the apostle actually accuses the Jews of being
offended by Christ. Thus 1 Cor. 1, 23, 24: \"We preach Christ crucified,
an offense to the Jews and a foolishness to the Greeks, but to us who
believe divine power and divine wisdom.\" And Luc. 2, 34. Simeon says of
the Jews: \[This one is shredded to a fall and resurrection of many in
Israel\", and Isa. 8, 13. 14. it says: \"Sanctify the LORD of hosts. Let
him be your fear and your dread, and he shall be your sanctification:
but a stumblingblock and a rock of offence unto the two houses of
Israel, a snare and a fall unto the inhabitants of Jerusalem.\"
Therefore it is rightly said that if he made himself agreeable to the
Jews by preaching circumcision and approving of their ungodly
righteousnesses, they would not be offended nor persecute him.

54 As to the second, it may be said: The apostle does not want there to
be trouble, but he cites the clear experience that the trouble of the
cross has not ceased, in order to prove that he does not preach
circumcision, so that the meaning is: Just from this you see that I do
not preach circumcision, because you see that the trouble of the cross
has not ceased; for the Jews\' rage and trouble continue, as does my
persecution; both of which would undoubtedly have ceased if I had
preached circumcision. So this very experience on both sides, that I
suffer and they are angry, must prove to you superfluously that we
disagree about circumcision. This is enough for the unintelligent
Galatians. By the way, whoever is looking for a more detailed solution
of this question, treat the saying \[Matth. 18, 7\]: \"There must be
trouble\", and Rom. 11, 8: \"God has given them a fierce spirit\" 2c.,
and how it had to happen this way, so that the Scriptures would be
fulfilled. This great sea we want to pass over here, although I

1582 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 391-383. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W.ix, 288f. 1583

does not want to deny that the apostle only lightly touched on this 1).

**N. 12. Would to God that they also were cut off who disturb you.**

Jerome thinks that the apostle is cursing here, but he takes great pains
to excuse it, or at least to make it seem minor. But since we have
learned from what has been said before that the saints are wont to
curse, and were wont to curse formerly, and that Christ also cursed the
fig tree; or if it should seem too small a thing for a fig tree to be
cursed, Elisha certainly cursed men, the boys at Bethel, in the name of
the Lord, and Paul has 1 Cor. 5, 5. the fornicator to Satan and says,
Cap. 16, 22., in the same epistle, \"If any man love not the Lord
Jehovah Christ, let him be Anathema, Maharam Motha\" *(άνά&εμα, μαράν
ά\^ά\\* which, as Burgensis says, is the worst kind of cursing among the
Hebrews (where ours, I believe, quite wrongly interpret μαράν *ά&ά* by:
\"The HER is coming\"): so we must not \'wonder if he curses here also,
wishing them evil according to the outward man, by whom, as he saw, the
good of the Spirit was hindered. \[The word: \"May they also be cut
off\" (abscindantur) Jerome refers to the parts of shame, for he
remembers those who are cut off. This is such a great evil (passio) that
if it has been inflicted on someone against his will, it is avenged by
the public laws; but if it is done voluntarily, he becomes dishonorable.
We read Deut. 23, 1. (Vulg.): \"A man who has been circumcised, whose
testicles have been crushed or removed and whose member has been cut
off, shall not enter the congregation of the Lord\", and Cap. 25, 11.
12. it is commanded that the woman\'s hand be cut off without all mercy,
which, when men quarrel with each other, that she may save her husband,
seizes the other by his shame. Is this not foolish and

1\) We have assumed tuetum with the editions of the first redaction of
the Weimarschen and the Erlanger. In the first edition of the second
redaction we find: traeturn, from which in the Wittenberg and in the
Jena, lom. Ill: traetaturn has been made.

ridiculous, if it were also written in the books of the pagans? Yes, of
course, if God did not like to turn the wisdom of the world into
foolishness, who did not want our pride to reject with disgust such
great mysteries (sacramenta) in such shameful (but they are only through
our sin) things. The two testicles are certainly the two testaments. For
a scribe, being learned in the kingdom of heaven, will bring forth out
of his treasure things old and new. Does not the mother (uterus) of the
woman mean the will and the conscience? But I pass over this, because
those who are pure will find this for themselves, but the unclean will
not hear this without danger. But the hand of the woman, which is to be
cut off because she has attacked the shame of a strange man, seems to me
to be the sacrilege of those who, in the dispute between a right and a
false teacher, put Scripture in the rear, even pervert it, and seek to
gain the victory through their sense and human opinions. But what is
this? That Paul, who understands the law exceedingly well, since he
deals with circumcision and the teachers of circumcision, seems to wish
them not only to be circumcised, but also to be entirely circumcised,
not only in the foreskin, but also both the testicles and the member?
With this he obviously alludes to the mystery, which is also indicated
by the Greek text, which adds the little word \"also\" 2), namely:
\"Would God that they were also cut off\" (abscindantur), as if he
wanted to say: If then they certainly wish to be circumcised, I wish
that they may also be circumcised, and be those circumcised ones from
whom the testicles and the member have been taken away, that is, who
cannot teach and beget spiritual children, and are to be expelled from
the church. For a bishop, indeed, Christ is the man of the Church, which
he makes fruitful by the seed of the Word of God, by means of his
testicles and member in complete chastity and holiness. But the members
of the ungodly shall be cut off, because they put forth a strange seed
and an adulterous word\].

2\) et is missing in the Vulgate.

[1584 Ali. Kai. Ill, 393-395. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 5, 13. W. IX, 289-291. 1585]{.underline}

**But ye, brethren, are called to liberty. But see to it that through
freedom you do not give place to the flesh, 1) but through love serve
one another.**

(Others read: \"Through the love of the Spirit, one serves the other\";
but there is little in this. That which here Origen, as Jerome relates,
imposes of the darkness, of the flesh of the law, I neither understand
nor accept. It seems to me that the apostle\'s meaning and the context
are clear\]. For (says he) \"unto salvation ye are called,\" that is,
from the bondage of the law unto the salvation of grace, of which I must
so often speak, because those so often waver. The law (I say) makes
servants, since it is fulfilled by them for fear of threats, and to
obtain the promises (amore promissorum); not in vain; and so it is not
fulfilled. But since it is not fulfilled, it holds them as guilty and as
servants of sin. But faith, having received love, makes us do the law,
neither by constraint nor by temporal stimulus, but freely and
continually.

\(57\) To be circumcised, then, is a work of bondage, but to love one\'s
neighbor is a work of freedom, because the former is done by unwilling
people because of the threat of the law, but the latter is done out of
overflowing (fluente) and joyful love, by willing people.

58\. Furthermore, the words: \"Only see that you do not give place to
the flesh through freedom,\" he says for this reason, so that we do not
understand freedom according to a false delusion, by which we wish that
each one would be allowed and free to do what he desires, as also occurs
in Rom. 6, 14, where he says, teaching the same freedom: \"You are not
under the law but under grace. Here it is asserted that we are free from
the law, but immediately he makes the objection to himself \[v. 15.\],
\"How now? Shall we sin because we are not under the law? Let that be
far off!\" This is the same thing he calls here, \"giving place to the
flesh,\" if freedom were thus taken in a carnal way. We are not free
from the

1\) In Luther\'s edition üstis was missing, which is in the Vulgate.
Therefore he inserted here: \"Remember to add: \'pray\', because he did
not put the word \'pray\', but concealed it.\"

Laws according to human ways (as I said above), by which the law is
abolished and changed, but according to divine and theological ways, by
which we are changed and become friends of the law from enemies of the
law.

59\. On this opinion it is also said in 1 Peter 2:16: \"As freemen, and
not as having liberty to the cover of wickedness, but as the servants of
God.\" See what it means to \"give place to the flesh,\" namely, a
\"cover of wickedness,\" by which one thinks that he does not have to do
good works and live rightly, because he is no longer bound by any law;
whereas rather freedom has to do with the fact that one no longer does
good works out of compulsion, but cheerfully and freely. 2)

60 But also in this passage the apostle himself says that this freedom
is a bondage of love. He says, \"By love serve one another.\" For this
is freedom, that we should love only our neighbor. But love teaches
exceedingly easily to do right in all things, and without the same
nothing can be taught rightly (satis).

\(61\) Therefore, behold, how foolish men are, when they think that by
the liberty whereby we are set free from the law and from sin, liberty
is given to sin; why, again, do they not also understand that by the
liberty whereby we are set free from righteousness, liberty is given to
us to do good? For if they think that one can rightly conclude: I am
made free from sin, therefore I can do sin, one must also make this
conclusion: I am made free from righteousness, therefore I will perform
righteousness. If this is not correctly concluded, then that conclusion
is not correct either.

62\) This foolish conceit comes from human reasoning (sensu) and the
need to make oneself righteous (as I said), because human justification
is by works; therefore the

2\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen:
oxsrsmur instead of: opsrsntur.

1586 Lri- Oai. Ill, 395-397. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 291-294. 1587

Freedom from righteousness and the idleness (otium) of righteousness
understood after (post) the end of \[by one\'s own efforts\] 1) acquired
(acquisitae) righteousness. But the righteousness of faith is given
before works, and it is the foundation (principium) of works. Therefore
it is the freedom to do something, as the latter is a freedom to leave
something, in that both behave in a completely opposite way, as it is
said in Is. 55, 9: \"As much as heaven is higher than earth, so are my
ways higher than your ways.\"

This carnal conceit, then, understands freedom from righteousness rather
in such a way that it makes a hateful bondage out of it. For it hates
the law and its works, therefore it is anxious (metitur) for no other
freedom than that the law be changed and abolished, while its hatred
remains.

So \"the flesh\" is not understood figuratively here, but is taken in
its proper meaning for the sins of the flesh, or the flesh in which are
the sins by which we are moved to seek what is ours and to neglect what
is our neighbor\'s. But this is contrary to love, and he who uses
freedom in such a way uses it to give room to the flesh, so that it may
have room for its lusts. But this is contrary to love, and he who uses
freedom in such a way uses it to give room to the flesh, so that the
flesh, now that it has been given freedom, has room to serve its lusts
with contempt for the neighbor.

**V. 14. For all the laws are fulfilled in One Word, in which: Love your
neighbor as yourself.**

65 In the third book of Moses, Cap. 19, 18, and Rom. 13, 8, 9, it says:
\"Owe no man anything, but to love one another: for he that loveth
another hath fulfilled the law. For that which is said, Thou shalt not
commit adultery; Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not steal; Thou shalt
not bear false witness; Thou shalt not lust after any thing; and such
other commandments as these are written in this word: Thou shalt love
thy neighbor as thyself.\" In Greek, instead of \"instauratur,\" it is
capitulatur or summatur, as Hierony-

1\) Added by us.

The word \"fulfilled\" is translated in different places. Therefore,
also in this place \"fulfilled\" must be understood as: brought together
into a short epitome or \"verfasset\".

I say this so that no one may think that the apostle teaches that the
old law is fulfilled by the new, that this is a spiritual mind
(intelligentia) and spiritual words, since grace alone is the
fulfillment of the law, and words are not fulfilled by words, but things
fulfill words, and powerful teachings (virtutes) confirm a speech.
Otherwise, is not this supremely spiritual commandment to love one\'s
neighbor written in the third book of Moses, Cap. 19, 18? So by this
word the whole law is summed up, but by grace it is fulfilled. Therefore
we are called to freedom, we do the whole law, if we, if the neighbor
needs it, serve him only through love.

Therefore, it is rightly said above \[Cap. 5, § 1) that the bondage of
the spirit and the freedom from sin or from the law are one and the
same, just as the bondage of sin and of the law is one and the same with
the freedom from righteousness, or from righteousness and the spirit.
One passes from one bondage to another, from one freedom to another,
that is, from sin to grace, from the fear of punishment to the love of
righteousness, from the law to the fulfillment of the law, from the word
to the thing, from the image to the reality, from the sign to the being,
from Moses to Christ, from the flesh to the Spirit, from the world to
the Father; all this happens at the same time. But since this
commandment is called by the apostle the complete short epitome (summa
summarum) of all laws, and in this one main piece (capitulo) of love
everything is concluded (concluduntur) (as Jerome translates), so we
have to bear with it a little.

First of all, how many people there are who describe what one should
speak, what one should do, what one should suffer, what one should
think, for there are many things that men can do one against another,
since they have so many senses, so many members, since there are so many
objects, so many cases, so that there is no end to giving laws and
making books.

1588 Lri. Ill, 397-400. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 14. W.
IX, 294-296. 1589

For how many commandments does the tongue alone need? How many the eyes?
How many the ears? How many the hands? How many the taste? How many the
feeling? Then, how many the household? How many the friends? O what an
innumerable ulcer! If you do not believe it, just look at the nowadays
extremely unfortunate study of the rights and the laws.

\(69\) But with what brevity, how quickly, how effectively does this
commandment sum up everything! it seizes all these things at the head,
at the source, at the root, at the heart (I say), from which, as wisdom
says (Proverbs 4:23), either life or death comes. For among the works of
man, some are more inward, others more outward, but none is more inward
than love; nothing more secret than this is found in the human heart.
When this movement of the heart (affectu) is set on the right track,
then the other members no longer need any commandments. For everything
flows from this position of the heart (affectu); as this is constituted,
so is everything else constituted; without this everything else is
altogether futile effort. Of this it is said in Ecclesiastes, Cap. 10,
15: \"The work of fools is sour to them\"; whereas in Proverbs, Cap. 14,
6: \"To him who has understanding, knowledge is easy.\" Hence in the
prophets the righteousness of men is called toil and misfortune (dolor).
Ps. 7, 15: \"With calamity he is with child, but he shall bring forth a
defect\"; likewise, v. 17: \"His calamity shall come upon his head\";
and elsewhere in the Psalms \[Ps. 140, 10:\] \"Let the calamity of which
my enemies counsel fall upon their heads\"; and Ps. 10, 7: \"Let his
tongue cause toil and labor.\" \[For thus the Hebrew XXX is translated
sometimes by \"calamity,\" sometimes by \"toil,\" signifying
ungodliness, or more properly the ungodly righteousness of laws and
works, which can never quiet the heart of man. Hence this word is in
frequent use: XXX XXX, that is, the house of an idol. For thus the
prophet calls the house in which Jeroboam set up the golden calves, and
made Israel to sin\]. For in these righteousnesses, which are without
love, there is much toil and labor, but no fruit.

Therefore, St. Jerome here complains about the people who live in his
time, 1) saying: \"But now, when everything is more difficult, we do
only a few things in part. Only that we do not do, which is easiest to
do, and without which everything we do is in vain. The body feels the
harshness (injuriam) of fasting, vigilance debilitates the body, charity
(eleemosynas) is sought with great effort, and the blood of martyrdom,
though fervent in faith, is not shed without pain and fear. There are
people who want to do all this; love alone is without work 2c. What do
you think he would have said if he had seen that in our time, through
the multitude of laws and superstitions, love is not only without work,
but is completely extinguished? For in my judgment, nothing else can be
brought up that is more corrupting to love than the great multitude of
laws and statutes by which men are seduced to build on works, and are so
taken up with human righteousness that they are forced to forget love
also. Now let us also see what an emphasis lies on the words, and how
heavy they weigh (epitasin).

First, he describes the noblest virtue, namely, love. For he does not
say: Be kind to your neighbor, shake his hand, do him good, greet him,
or do any other outward work, but: \"Love,\" since there are also people
\[Ps. 28:3\] \"who speak kindly to their neighbor, and have evil in
their heart.

Secondly, he describes the noblest object of love, because he puts aside
all respect of the person, and says: \"Your neighbor. He does not say,
Thou shalt love a rich, powerful, learned, wise, righteous, just,
handsome, pleasant man 2c., but without all limitation (absolute), \"Thy
neighbor,\" declaring by this very fact that though we are all different
according to persons and statuses, yet before GOD we are One Dough and
have equal standing. For if there is a difference of persons

1\) 608 we have rendered by: \"The people who live in his time\".

1590 Lri. Oai. Ill, 400-402. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 296-2SS. 1591

This completely obliterates this commandment, for those who do this have
an abhorrence of the unlearned, the poor, the weak, the lowly, the
foolish, the sinful, the sullen, for they do not have people in mind,
but rather their larvae and their outward appearance, and so they are
deceived.

Thirdly, he holds up to us the noblest example of both of these, saying,
\"like yourself. We must look for the examples of other laws outside
ourselves, but this is shown to us in ourselves. Furthermore, external
examples do not move sufficiently, because they are not felt and are not
alive. But this example is felt within, lives and teaches most
powerfully, not with letters, not with the voice, not with thoughts, but
through the perception (sensu) of experience. For who does not feel
alive \[how he loves himself\], how he seeks everything, is intent on
it, and strives for that which is wholesome, honorable, and necessary to
him? But this whole feeling is a living indicator, an inward admonition,
a very tangible testimony of what you owe to your neighbor, namely the
same as to yourself, and likewise from the bottom of your heart. What is
it, then, that we trouble ourselves with many books? Why do we seek many
masters? Why do we toil with works and righteousness? All laws, all
books, all works are to be judged according to this innermost feeling
and heart attitude (affectus). A Christian man must be trained in this
throughout his life by all works.

Therefore, no more effective example of this divine teaching could be
held up to us, because we do not see and hear it like the examples of
the other laws, but we experience and live it, and we can never be
separated from it, nor can it be separated from us. Nor could a more
worthy object be held up to you than your neighbor, that is, one who is
completely like you and most closely related to you; nor could a more
perfect kind of virtue be held up to you than love, which is the source
of all good, just as covetousness (cupiditas) is the root of all evil.
And in this very short commandment there is absolutely everything that
is high (summa), so that it is with full truth the epitome, the head,
the perfection (perfectio), the end

of all laws, without which all other laws are rightly regarded as
nothing.

Therefore, you have no reason to complain that you do not know what or
how much you owe your neighbor. Away with those sharp distinctions of
the school theologians (magistrorum). \"The word is near thee in thine
heart\" \[Rom. 10:8.\], written with such coarse letters that thou canst
grasp it with thy hands, since thou livest and feelest this rule: \"As
thyself,\" saith he, thou shalt love, no less than thou lovest thyself.
But how much you love yourself, no one can tell you better than you
yourself, who feel this yourself, what another could only guess in you.
Therefore, no one can tell you better than yourself what you should do,
say and wish for your neighbor. For here the proverb does not apply that
he who teaches himself is a very bad teacher; rather, here you will be
the very best teacher for yourself, who deceives you the least of all,
while all others are deceitful. The law of God is so easily and so
closely laid out for us that no one can excuse himself if he does not
live rightly.

76\. And God be lamented that nowadays this matter is so neglected, both
by preachers and listeners, while in the meantime so many caterpillars
and locusts, yes, bloodsuckers swarm forth in heaps, who proclaim
indulgences, vigils, sacrifices, building of churches, They are always
coming back to it and preaching it, while the only thing that covers the
multitude of sins, brotherly love, is left behind.

It follows that those theologians who say that no work is good without
love are right, but they teach very badly when they say that we do not
know when we are in love. They really force us to imagine that love is,
as it were, a quiet, hidden quality in the soul. What does this dream
amount to but that they say that we do not feel that which is closest to
us and is the most vital thing that is in us, namely precisely the
heartbeat (pulsum) of life, that is, the attitude of the heart? Or does

1592 Art- Out. Ill, 402-405. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 14.
W. IX, 299-301. 1593

this Mercurius a kind of Sofias, as he is found in the comedy of
Plautus, make of us that we should neither feel nor know ourselves 1)?
Dear, can I not feel whether I like or dislike another? Why then do I
express my displeasure (criminor) at a person who is repugnant to me, or
praise the one to whom I am attached? Or do I not realize it when I
speak evil of people, do evil to them, speak well of them, do good to
them?

78\. but (they say) 2) this disposition of the heart may be derived from
nature, but nature is a very deceitful imitator of grace. I answer: I
admit that nature is very desirous of grace, but only to the cross; but
it has something quite different in mind than suffering the cross,
indeed, the opposite, and opposes grace in the most hostile way.

But \"cross\" is what I call repulsiveness. For nature loves, praises,
does good and speaks good only as long as it has not been offended. But
if you come too close to it or oppose its will, then nature does its own
work, and its love falls away and turns into hatred, screaming, malice
2c. For she has clung to reputation, not to truth; she has loved the
person and the appearance, not the thing itself. She has been a friend,
not of the neighbor, but of the neighbor\'s goods and things. Love,
however, never falls away, it suffers everything, it believes
everything, it tolerates everything, it loves enemy and friend in the
same way, and does not change even if the neighbor changes. For just as
a neighbor remains a neighbor, no matter how much he may change, so love
remains love, no matter how much it may be harmed or helped.

Therefore, the cross is the test and (as they say) the touchstone of
love, which contains nothing in itself that could justify saying it is a
hidden quality, and you do not know and feel whether you love your
neighbor.

1\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and in the
Erlangen aZuoscamus instead of coAHO86NNLU8.

2\) Wittenberger: inyuit instead of inyuiunt.

If you feel in the cross (ibi) that you retain a sweet heart, do not
doubt that you have come higher than nature, and that Christ has endowed
you with love; but if you are bitter, realize that it is nature fei, and
seek love.

The love of nature seeks a sweet and quiet life, yes, as the poet says
3), it values the friendships after the benefit, seeks its own, and is
only intent on receiving good. But love (caritas) is a strong love
(amor), which endures in the midst of adversity, proves friendship with
its services, seeks what is the other\'s, intent not on receiving but on
giving; yes, right love distributes good and receives evil. But a
carnally minded man (carnalitas) receives good and distributes evil, or
at least withdraws from his neighbor.

\(4\) But also beware of those who think that a prayer or any other work
of love is done without regard for the neighbor, if it is only the
result of an inner and hidden quality. This is a very crude, indeed, an
exceedingly harmful mind. Rather, you pray in love when, moved by a kind
heart toward your brother, whether he be friend or foe, you pray for
him. Then you speak good in love when you confront the one who speaks
evil (detractori) for no other reason than because you have taken your
brother to your heart, be he friend or foe, and cannot suffer his good
reputation to be stained, not because you hope (I say) for honor or
friendship, but out of pure benevolence, wishing him well. So you do
everything else in love, if in it you have only the best and the
advantage of your neighbor in mind, and in general of every man, whether
he be friend or foe. Behold, this instruction will teach you how far you
have advanced in Christianity. Here you will find out whom you love and
whom you do not love, how much you have progressed or fallen behind. For

3\) Ovid. (Weim.)

4\) Wittenberg oavete instead of oave.

1594 All. 6 \"i. m, 405-407. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. ix, 301-303. 1595

If you have one against whom you are not friendly, you are already
nothing, even if you do miracles.

Finally, through this rule, you will learn to make a distinction between
works and good works, by yourself, without a teacher. Then you will see
clearly that it is better to do good to your neighbor, to speak good of
him, to do good to him, and to direct your whole life to be a service to
your neighbor in love (as the apostle said just before), than to build
up all the churches of the world, to have the merits of all the
monasteries, and to perform all the miracles of all the saints, without
this, that you may serve your neighbor thereby.

\(84\) Behold, this is the doctrine which today they not only do not
know, but with their statutes, as with innumerable troops, they utterly
destroy. Their pretense is that they teach never to love one\'s neighbor
other than according to his person, making distinctions among works and
the outward appearance of the same, and arguing only about them. \[And
the very common distinction between the natural law, the written law,
and the evangelical law is to be received with no less caution. For
since the apostle here says that all laws come together in the One and
in the Summa, surely love is the end of the whole law, as he also says 1
Tim. 1, 5. But also Christ makes this natural law (as it is called)
Matth. 7, 12.: \"All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to
you, do ye even so to them,\" expressly that which the law and the
prophets are, since he says: \"For this is the law and the prophets.\"
But since he himself teaches the gospel, it is clear that these three
laws are not distinguished both according to their office and according
to the wrong understanding of those who understand it in this way\].

Therefore this written law, \"Love thy neighbor as thyself,\" teaches
exactly the same thing as the natural law, \"All things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you (for that is to love yourself), do ye
even so to them\" (which surely means to love others as oneself, as is
evident). But what does the whole Gospel teach otherwise? Therefore

A law which passes through all times, which is known to all men, is
written in all hearts, and leaves no excuse to anyone from beginning to
end, although the Jews added the ceremonies, then also the other peoples
their own laws, which were not binding for the whole world, but only
this One, which the Holy Spirit prescribes without ceasing in the hearts
of all men.

86\. Also this must be very well observed, that some fathers have drawn
from the words of this commandment this opinion that the ordered love
begins with oneself, because (so they say) the self-love is prescribed
as the rule according to which you should love your neighbor. I have
considered this on all sides in order to understand it, but, as I
consider, it is futile *labor*. I do not want to impose my opinion on
anyone, but only to indicate my view. I understand this commandment in
such a way that self-love is not commanded, but only love toward one\'s
neighbor; first, because self-love is already by itself in all men;
second, because God, if He had willed this order, would have said: You
shall love yourself, and your neighbor as yourself. But now he says,
\"Love your neighbor as yourself,\" that is, as you already love
yourself, without need of a commandment to do so. But also the apostle
Paul imposes this 1 Cor. 13, 5. on love, that it does not seek its own
by completely denying self-love. Christ commands \[Marc. 8, 34. f.\]
that one should deny oneself and hate one\'s life, and Phil. 2, 4.
clearly states: \"Each one does not look to what is his own, but to what
is another\'s.\" Finally, if a man had the right self-love, then he
would no longer need the grace of God, because this love, if it is the
right one, loves himself and his neighbor. 1) For this commandment
commands that it be not another love, but the same love. But (as I have
said) this commandment presupposes that man love himself, and Christ,
when he says Matt. 7:12, \"All things whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you,\" no doubt gives the explanation

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger UiliMt
instead of UitiMt.

1596 Lri. 6üi. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the Galatians 5,
14. W. IX, 303-306. 1597

He does not believe that people already have a favorable disposition and
love for themselves, and he does not command it there, as is evident.

Therefore, in my opinion (as I said), the commandment seems to speak
only of perverse love, with which each one, forgetting his neighbor,
seeks only his own; but it becomes a true love when man again forgets
himself and wants to serve only his neighbor. This is also indicated by
the members of the body, each of which serves the other at its own risk.
For the hand fights for the head and receives injuries for it; the feet
step into the dung and into the water to save the body. But through this
ordered self-love, which Christ wanted to destroy completely through
this commandment, the seeking of one\'s own benefit is maintained in a
very dangerous way.

88\. If, however, it must be admitted that self-love is ordered here
first, I will at least go higher and say: Such love is always ungodly,
since it is in itself, and it is also not good, if it is not outside
itself in God, that is, that, since my favorable disposition toward
myself (voluntate mei) and my love toward myself are completely dead, I
seek nothing but that the will of God alone 1) be done in me, that I be
ready for death, for life and for every form that my potter wants to
give me. This comes sour, is very difficult and impossible for nature.
For here I love myself not in myself, but in God, not in my will, but in
the will of God. And in such a way I will then also love my neighbor as
myself, by wishing and working that only God\'s will be done in him, but
in no way his own will. But I believe that they did not understand it
that way, and the commandment does not seem to speak of this love
either. Therefore I will warn every one to beware of these heathen
doctrines, Thou shalt be thy own neighbor, and the like. For these are
perverse \[and also perverted against the grammatical meaning\].

1\) Dei is missing in the editions of the first Redaction and in the
Erlanger.

meaning. For \"neighbor\" is used no differently than in reference to
another person. Therefore, a Christian must say: You shall be neighbor
to another\], as this commandment also indicates.

But here the question arises: How can the whole law be included in this
one commandment, especially in the Old Testament, where there are so
many customs and so many ceremonies? Does he who loves his neighbor also
do all these? For that the commandments of the Decalogue are included in
them is no difficulty, as is evident from the apostle\'s letter to the
Romans, Cap. 13:9. But who then immediately also sacrifices cattle, is
circumcised, keeps times and years 2c., just as we honor parents, do not
kill, do not commit adultery, do not steal 2c.

Jerome, as is his way, holds that the ceremonial laws are to be
fulfilled in a spiritual way. But what shall we then say of the laws of
other peoples, which the apostles and even Christ Himself have likewise
commanded to be kept? Finally, in this way we shall make the apostle
uncertain 2) since he is to teach that the holy ten commandments are
fulfilled in a different way from the ceremonies, and yet uses the same
word. I say, in agreement with what I said before, that after the spirit
of love has been received from the preaching of faith, it is permissible
to do everything else that is ordained in ceremonies and in a human way,
whether among Jews or Gentiles, and that this must not be held as if
salvation lay in it, But these things must be kept for the sake of love,
because of those with whom we must live, as long as they themselves
require us to keep them, so that peace may not be disturbed and
divisions and turmoil may not arise, for love tolerates everything. And
in this we have not so much to fear that these laws may not be acted
against as that those who live by them may not be vexed, since love
commands us to

2\) In the editions of the first redaction, in Weimar\'s and Erlangen\'s
aeyuivoeuna instead of arndiAuum.

[1598 Lri. Kai. m, 409-412. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 306-308. 1599]{.underline}

according to their wishes. Therefore, if God had willed that the
ceremonies of the Law should continue, or if for some reason one or more
of them had to be kept, it should be done by all means. But after he has
done them, they do not bind us at all. In this way one must keep the
imperial laws, the pope\'s laws, the city laws, the secular and national
laws, only for this reason (as Christ says \[Matth. 17, 27.)), \"so that
we do not offend them\" and do not violate love and peace.

91\. And thus it is clear that not even a law can be conceived which is
not also written in love. For without a doubt, you would want to be
obeyed if you had commanded anything; therefore, by the law of nature
and the law of love, you are urged to do the same to another, especially
to God and to those who have authority as God\'s representatives, if
only you observe that you do not place your happiness in these
commandments of men, but know that you must serve others through love.

But the legislators themselves are much more indebted to love, so that
when they see that their laws are oppressive or even harmful to their
subjects, they take care in every way that they serve the benefit of
others and do away with them. This, however, concerns by far the
ecclesiastical legislators the most. For without a doubt they would not
like to be burdened with a syllable of the law. If they do not want to
do this to others, they are not bishops, but tyrants, who burden people
with infallible burdens, which they themselves do not want to touch even
with a finger.

From this you will understand, dear reader, why I call some papal laws
tyrannies, because nowadays they have to be abolished for very many and
quite just reasons; first, because they are burdensome and odious for
the whole world; the bishops should give in; second, because they are
mere money nets and are sold outrageously by dispensations; third,

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction unö in the Erlanger:
arsäsiulurri instead of osätziMuiri.

because they serve ungodliness, but in doing so they destroy true
righteousness, in which our salvation lies, and love from the bottom up.
\[Nevertheless, they should be kept for the sake of love, where trouble
would arise from their contempt.\]

94 Finally, I believe that it is clear enough that the apostle is not
only speaking of ceremonial laws, but of all laws in general. For love,
after faith is received, fulfills all laws cheerfully and freely (that
is, fulfills them in truth), and does not base on them or on the works
of the law the confidence that he will be saved thereby; that is, keeps
them in a servile way and fulfills no law.

**V. 15 But if you bite and devour one another, see to it that you are
not consumed one by one.**

In all the epistles where the apostle wants to persuade them to love, he
almost always adds that they should be of the same mind, that they
should not exalt one above the other because of the different gifts
given to them. For he holds up to them the image of the body and its
members, Rom. 12, 4. ff. and 1 Cor. 12, 12. ff. as the members of one
are concerned for the other, and one serves the other and does not hurt
it.

The apostle knows that the Galatians are men, and that the more
excellent the gifts are, the more harmful they are if love is lacking.
Knowledge puffs up, the administration of power puffs up, everything
else puffs up, except love, which edifies. It alone uses all things
rightly, because in all gifts of God it does not please itself, but
serves others. Where it is not, there is strife, strife and strife, and
as it is said in Romans 12:3, people do not think moderately of
themselves, but think more highly of themselves than is proper. This
evil (I say) seems to me to be touched by the apostle here, which is
most contrary to the service of love. For because each one puffs himself
up with the gift that has been given to him, and is not concerned how he
may serve the other with it, but only how he may gain an advantage,
strife and rivalry must inevitably arise, mutual contempt, and evil.

1600 Lri. 6ai. m, 412-41S. Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to the
Galatians 5, 15. 16. W. IX. 308-311. 1601

Defamation, condemnation, sacrilegious judgment, anger, envy, clamor,
malice 2c. The same opinion is explained in Eph. 4, 31. f. and Phil. 2,
1-4. more extensively, because here he passes over it briefly.

97\. The meaning is thus: I know that you are human beings and can fall
into temptation, since one wants to be considered more excellent than
the other, and you do not want to be good stewards of God\'s manifold
grace toward you. But take care that you do not speak evil of one
another, that you do not bite one another, that you do not give way to
such temptation, but (as I have said) serve one another through love,
each with the gift that he has abundantly received, the one with
teaching, the other with giving, as Rom. 12:3, but not that he who
teaches should be puffed up against him who is able to give, because he
does not give as much as he wants, nor that he who is able to give
should be puffed up against him, because it seems to him that he has no
need of his teaching, and so in all other gifts. For (as I have said)
such pomposity is very near to those who are able, so that they boast of
not needing others, and so do not serve one another in love, but consume
themselves in mutual contempt, hatred, arrogance, slander 2c.

**V. 16 But I say, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not carry out the
lusts of the flesh.**

98\. He means to say that what I have said, \"that you do not bite and
devour one another,\" is as much as that I want you to live in the
spirit, then it will happen that you do not do such things. I know that
such lusts sometimes arise in you, but do not obey them, but walk in the
spirit, that is, increase and become more spiritual, as he says Rom.
8:13. on the same opinion: \"If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die:
but if ye kill business by the spirit of the flesh, ye shall live.\"
\"Killing business by the spirit of the flesh\" is what he calls it
here: \"walking in the spirit\" and resisting temptation, lest 1) they
should bite one another and die. It

1\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: ae
statt: H6.

is impossible that we should not be moved to bite and devour one
another, but these impulses must be resisted by the Spirit. But this is
a beautiful figurative speech: \"biting and devouring\", which is very
frequent in the holy scriptures. Hence it is said in the Psalms \[Ps.
57:5\], \"The children of men, their teeth are spears and arrows;\" and
Ps. 3:8, \"Thou shatterest the teeth of the wicked;\" and Proverbs
30:14, \"A kind that hath swords for teeth, that eateth with their
molars, and devoureth the wretched of the land, and the poor of the
people.\" Proverbs 1:12: \"We will devour them alive, as hell\"; and Ps.
52:6: \"Thou speakest gladly all things to destruction (that is, to
devour, to devour) with a false tongue.\" But he seems to understand by
\"biting\" the innocent, the slander, the reproach; by \"devouring\"
revenge and oppression from the other side; by \"being devoured\" the
destruction of both parts.

Notice the meaning of the word when he says: \"You will not perform\"
(perficietis). For between the \"doing\" and the \"accomplishing\" of
the lusts of the flesh or of the spirit, according to Paul\'s opinion,
there is this difference (as it is said by St. Augustine in the third
book against Julian in the last chapter), that \"to do the lusts\"
means: to have them \[the lusts\], to be tickled and moved by them,
whether to anger or to pleasure. But \"to perform them\" means: to
consent to them and perform them; these are the works of the flesh. But
that we do not have them or do them, that will, as St. Augustine says in
the first book of his Retractations Cap. 24, will take place only when
we will no longer have the mortal flesh. Therefore he says that all
saints are still partly carnal, although they are spiritual according to
the inner man; in the sixth book against Julianus. Thus love lusts after
the desire of the spirit, so that it cannot lust after the flesh, but it
does not accomplish this, because it cannot be without the desire of the
flesh. And I want to remind you that he not only calls unchastity a lust
of the flesh, but also all the works that he will soon list.

[1602 Dri. Kai. Ill, 415-417. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 311-313. 1603]{.underline}

For this reason Augustine says these words: \"The pleasures of the flesh
are not accomplished unless one consents to them; though one is moved by
impulses, they are not accomplished by works. That is why Paul said in
his letter to the Romans \[chap. 7, 18\]: \"I will, but I cannot do
good.\" For \"to do what is good\" means not to pursue the lusts, but
\"to accomplish what is good\" means not to be lusted after. Thus the
lusts of the flesh are not accomplished, though they are, but neither
are our good works accomplished, though they are (fiant).

\(101\) From all this it is evident what the Christian life is, that is,
a contesting, a struggling, and how to instruct those who are contested
by various impulses, so that they do not despair when they feel that
they are not yet free from evil impulses to sin of any kind. Thus it is
said in Rom. 13:14: \"Wait for the body, but so that it may not become
lustful\"; and Rom. 6:12: \"Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal
body, to give obedience to it in its lusts.\" No one can be without
lust, but we are able not to obey the lusts.

I have explained this more carefully and extensively because of the
theologians who everywhere say that it is improperly spoken (propter
impropriistas meos), who deny that every good action is at the same time
partially evil, and who say that the sin of lust is only improperly
called a sin. But you believe the apostle and Augustine, who say that
the good is \"done\", but not \"accomplished\". That the good is done is
good, but that it is not accomplished is evil, because the law of God
must be accomplished. But all the saints also have shortcomings in this,
and so they sin in every work.

It is not merely inauthentic sin, but sin in truth; for it is not
inauthentic grace, nor even inauthentic God, nor even inauthentic
Christ, nor even inauthentic the Holy Spirit who forgives and sweeps it
away. It is true, of course, that, as Augustine testifies, in baptism
the guilt (rea

tus) of sin has been taken away, but nevertheless the mainspring (actus)
of it remains, that is, that God (according to Ps. 32, 2.) does not
impute sin, but heals it. For if he wanted to impute, as he could in
truth and rightly, then everything (totum) would be mortal sin and
damnable sin.

**V. 17 For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
the flesh.**

\(104\) Now, as \"the spirit\" in this passage does not mean chastity
alone, so it necessarily follows that \"flesh\" does not mean unchastity
alone; I have said this because of necessity, 1) because the custom is
ingrained in almost everyone that \"lusts of the flesh\" are taken only
for unchastity. If one wanted to follow this custom, one could not
understand the apostle. Since he treats this subject well in Rom. 7, 22.
f. and explains it in more detail, he says: \"For I delight in the law
of God according to the inward man. But I see another law in my members,
which is contrary to the law in my mind, and takes me captive under the
law of sin, which is in my members.\" 2c. For Paul did not speak this in
the person of others, as St. Augustine says in the sixth book against
Julianus Cap. 11, that he once understood it this way, indeed, did not
understand it. But he says that the Manichaeans and the Pelagians
understood it this way. Thus says St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2, 11: \"I exhort you
as strangers and pilgrims: abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against
the soul.\"

Jerome is deeply involved in the question of how he might find a middle
between spirit and flesh and media opera; and, following his Origen, he
distinguishes spirit, soul and flesh; therefore, he separates the
spiritual man from the natural (animalem) and the carnal man. And even
though this three-headedness seems to be established from the passage 1
Thess. 5, 23: \"Your whole spirit, together with soul and body, must be
kept\" 2c.,^2^ ), it is nevertheless

1\) äixi is missing in the editions of the first redaction and in the
Erlanger.

2\) Instead of the following until the end of this paragraph, the first
redaction offers: \"so I dare not tell the

1604 Lri.Lai. Ill, 417-420. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 17.
W. IX, 313-316. 1605

From 1 Cor. 2:14 it is completely obvious that the natural man is also
condemned, since it says: \"The natural man hears nothing of the Spirit
of God. Therefore, since the natural man does not live in the life of
the Spirit, nor does he have spiritual impulses, there is no doubt that
the apostle wants the natural and the carnal man to be the same.
Therefore, no one can rightly conclude from Origen\'s opinion that there
is a kind of middle-work. Thus we also see in Genesis 2:7 that this is
called a natural (animalis) man, who has natural life and movement about
him.

I do not separate flesh, soul and spirit at all. For the flesh lusts
not, except through the soul and spirit by which it lives, but by spirit
and flesh I understand the whole man, especially the soul itself. In
short, to give a very rough simile: Just as I can call a sore or
diseased flesh both healthy and diseased (for it is not a flesh that is
wholly disease), since, insofar as it begins to become healthy and is
healthy, it is called health, but where the wound or disease remains, it
is called disease; and just as the disease or wound hinders the
remaining healthy flesh, so that it cannot fully do what the healthy
flesh could do: so the same man, the same soul, the same spirit of man,
because he is mixed and defiled with the mind of the flesh, insofar as
he hears what is of God, is spirit; but insofar as he is moved by the
lure of the flesh, is flesh; if he assents to the same, he is all flesh,
as Gen. 6, 3.^1^ ). Again, if he completely agrees to the law, he is
completely spirit, which will happen when the body will be spiritual.

So you don\'t have to imagine that these are two different people, but
that they are two different people.

I do not want to join, nor even to renounce it, partly because in the
quoted passage Peter evidently takes \'spirit\' and \'soul\' for the
same thing, since he calls it the soul, against which the lusts contend,
while Paul says that the flesh lusts against the spirit, and partly
because it seems to me that the apostle takes the carnal man for the
same thing as the natural fnillialsi\') man.\"

1\) In all editions except Weimar\'s, erroneously: 66\". 8.

It can, however, be called both, but the name day fits better, since it
leans from the darkness of the night to the day.

Both are beautifully shown in the half-dead man in Lucas \[Cap. 10, 30.
f.\], who, when he was taken in by the Samaritan, began to be healed,
but was not yet completely healthy. In the same way, we too are made
well in the church, but we are not yet completely well. Because of this
circumstance we are called flesh, because of that spirit. It is the
whole man who loves chastity; the same whole man is tickled by the lure
of unchastity. There are two whole men, and yet only One whole man. Thus
it comes about that man fights against himself and stands against
himself, he wants and he does not want. And this is the glory of God\'s
grace, that it has made us our own enemies. For in this way it overcomes
sin, just as Gideon overcame the Midianites, namely by an exceedingly
glorious triumph, so that the enemies strangled one another \[Judges
7:22\].

\(109\) In this way the water which is poured into the wine on the altar
fights at first with the wine until it is consumed and becomes wine: so
it goes with grace, and, as was said above, the leaven is hidden in
three bushels of flour until the whole is leavened.

**These are against each other, that you do not do what you want.**

See how bold the apostle is; he is not afraid of fire, he denies free
will: this is something marvelous to our ears. He says that what we want
cannot be done, while we have made the will (this is probably what
Aristotle said) the king and lord of all powers and actions. And this
error and exceedingly great heresy would still be tolerable if he had
said this of those who are apart from grace. But now, so that he would
have no excuse why he should not be burned, he claims this about those
who live in the spirit of grace. He says

1606 Dri. 6ai. Ill, 420-422. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 3W-31S. 1607

Rom. 7, 14. 19.: \"But I am carnal, sold under sin. The good that I want
I do not do, but the evil that I do not want I do.\" If a righteous man
and a saint complain about his sin, where will a sinner and an ungodly
man remain with his works before those who are good in nature and
morally good? The grace of God has not yet made free will perfect, and
he himself wants to make himself free? How can we be so nonsensical?

Enough has been said about the difference between the spirit and the
flesh; neither completely destroys the other in this life, although the
spirit subdues the flesh against its will and makes it subservient to
itself. Hence it is that no one may presume to boast that he has a pure
heart or is pure from his filth. For my flesh does nothing that it would
not be said that I do. But if the heart is unclean, then neither is any
work clean; for as the tree, so is the fruit. This I say again against
those who speak of inauthentic meaning (im- propriistas), who find in
themselves good actions without any infirmity or inauthentic so-called
sin, opposing their shameful 1) opinions to the so clear text of Paul.
He says: \"You do not do what you want\" because of the rebelliousness
of the flesh, which is contrary to the law in your mind and your
spiritual will.

Here the apostle does not observe the distinction he made above between
\"to do\" and \"to accomplish,\" for he takes \"that ye do not do\" for
\"that ye do not accomplish,\" as is evident: \"that you do not
accomplish,\" as is evident. But also Rom. 7, 19. he does not keep this
difference, because he says: \"The good that I want, I do not do\", that
is, I do not accomplish it. But \[since he says), \"The evil that I
hate, that I do,\" here he keeps this distinction, because he does the
evil, but does not accomplish it. Now, if someone should find this
distinction of Augustine\'s

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction and in the Erlanger:
iinxropris dieto vitiosos, suas sto. instead of: impropris dieto,
vitiosus 8nu8 sto. which the Weimar edition offers. -

let him think otherwise, only let him not abandon this understanding
that there is a battle in us between the spirit and the flesh, by which
we are prevented from fully fulfilling the law, and that therefore we
are sinners as long as we are in the flesh, and that in every good work
we need the pardoning mercy of God and should say \[Ps. 143:2\]: \"Lord,
do not enter into judgment with your servant, for before you no living
person is righteous.\"

**V.18. But if the Spirit governs you, you are not under the law.**

113\. He says, \"I have said that you should walk in the spirit,
following the desires of the spirit, resisting the desires of the flesh,
so that you do not bite and devour one another, but serve one another
through love, which is the fulfillment of the law. For if you do this,
and are thus led by the spirit, and obey the lusts of the spirit,
behold, you are not under the law, you owe nothing to the law, but
fulfill the law. Why then did you want to return to the law? Why do you
try to fulfill the law in another way?

\(114\) I have said above that to be under the law is not to fulfill it,
or to fulfill it in a servile way without a joyful heart. But this
joyful heart is not obtained by the law, not by nature, but by faith in
Christ. And this being governed by the Spirit, this obeying the desires
of the Spirit, this struggle and effort (and this is our whole life)
causes God to mercifully forgive us for not doing what we want. For we
are not yet spirit, but we are governed by the spirit. For the word John
3:6, \"That which is born of the Spirit is spirit,\" indicates what we
are to be, but this passage indicates what we are; we are to be spirit,
but we are still under the guidance of the Spirit and, that I say so, in
the process of the Spirit giving us our right form (in formatione
spiritus).

115\. but those who are under the law are also in the works of the
flesh, as it says in Rom. 7:5: \"When we were in the flesh, sinful
lusts, which were caused by the flesh, were in us.

4608 Lrl. \" ai. Ill, 42L-424. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5,
18-21. W. IX, 319-321. 1609

Law aroused, strong in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death.\"
So also Rom. 8, 14.: \"Whom the Spirit of GOD impels, they are the
children of GOD.\" For this \"governing\" (poorer) and \"driving\" is
the same as \"drawing,\" whereof it is said in John 6:44: \"No man can
come unto me, except the Father draw him\"; likewise Cap. 12:32.When I
am lifted up from the earth, I will draw them all to me,\" that is, I
will move them sweetly, I will make them joyful and willing, I will
awaken the desire of the Spirit 1) in those whom Moses and the law
compelled as sad and unwilling, or enticed, as it were, as children for
a while with temporal promises. Thus the bride says in the Song of
Songs, Cap. 1, 4. \[Vulg.\], \"Draw me, we will run after thee, to smell
thy ointment,\" as if to say: Moses and the prophets by the word of the
law terrify and urge with terrifying threats the powerless (aridam) and
unwilling, but thou draw me gently by the word of grace, and by the
remembrance of the mercy which thou hast shown me, and anoint me
sweetly. For the smell of the ointment is the gospel of the grace of
GOD, in which the ointment of the grace of GOD is smelled, that is,
perceived by faith. Therefore also in Sirach, Cap. 24, 19. 20.
\[Vulg.\], it is said, \"In the streets I have given a lovely smell of
me, like cinnamon and balsam, like the best myrrh I have given a lovely
smell of me,\" and Ps. 45, 9. \"Thy garments are vain myrrh, aloes, and
kezia.\" So Paul says \[2 Cor. 2, 15.\], \"We are unto GOD a good smell
of Christ, both of us, among them that are saved. \"2c. \[The same
\"draw\" is also called \"hiss\" in Isaiah, Cap. 7, 18. \"At that time
the LORD will hiss at the fly that is in the uttermost border 2) of
Egypt\" 2c., that is, he will blow with the Holy Spirit, he will stir up
their spirit to lust against the flesh 2c. Thus it is written in 1 Kings
19:11, 12 that Elijah did not perceive the Lord.

> 1\) Wittenberger and Erlanger: Kpiritug eoneupigesutiam, Weimarsche:
> spiritu. That the former reading is correct follows from z 114.

2\) Here the text offers: in sxtrsmis ünibus, while the Vulgate offers:
in sxtrsmo üurninurn.

not in the strong wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire (which
are all terrors of the law), but in a quiet, gentle drinking, because
the law of the LORD is not fulfilled in sadness or out of necessity, but
in gladness and with pleasure (suavitate)\].

**V. 19-21 But the works of the flesh are manifest, which are adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, fornication, idolatry, sorcery, enmity,
strife, envy, wrath, strife, dissension, divisions, hatred, murder,
drinking, eating, and such like.**

Here it is most evident that \"the flesh\" is used not only for the
lusts of unchastity, but for all that is contrary to the spirit of
grace. For the heresies or sects and discords are faults of the most
sagacious men and of those who shine by an exceedingly holy appearance.
I say this to confirm what I said above, that \"flesh\" means the whole
man, likewise \"spirit\" means the whole man, that is, the inward man
and the outward man; or the new man and the old man would not be
distinguished according to the difference of the body and the soul, but
according to the disposition (affectus).

\(117\) For since the fruits or works of the Spirit are peace, faith,
chastity, 2c. and this is done in the body, who can deny that the Spirit
and His fruit are in the body and in the bodily (carnalibus) members, as
1 Cor. 6:19, 3) is expressly said? \"Know ye not (saith he) that your
members are a temple of the Holy Ghost?\" Behold, not merely the soul,
but the members also are a spiritual temple. And again \[v. 20. Vulg.),
\"Praise and carry God in your body\"; he does not say: in your soul. On
the other hand, if envy and enmity are the faults of the mind, who will
deny that \"the flesh\" is in the soul? Therefore, a spiritual man is
the whole man, as far as his mind is directed (sapit) to what is God\'s;
a carnal man is the whole man, as far as his mind is directed to what is
his.

118 The apostle knows nothing of Aristotelian philosophy and does not
mention these vices.

3\) Weimarsche: 1 Cor. 6, 15. 3, 16.

1610 Lri. Kai. Ill, 424-426. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 321-323. 1611

He calls them works, to all of which he attributes one and the same
habitum, the flesh, that is, the whole man born of Adam. For even today
they search for the source (subjectum) of the vices and virtues, and
have not yet found whether it is to be placed in the rational or in the
unreasonable part of man. 1) \"Blessed is he whom thou, O LORD,
chastenest and teachest by thy law (that he may be delivered from these
foolish and vain thoughts), 2) that he may have patience in evil, until
the pit be prepared for the wicked\" \[Ps. 94:12, 13\]. Therefore, with
the apostle, you should despise these \"conditions\" (habitibus) and
other folly of moral philosophy, and know that you are either flesh or
spirit, and that both are known by their fruits, which the apostle here
clearly enumerates.

In the number of vices almost no one agrees with the other. St.
Augustine takes thirteen, St. Ambrose sixteen, our Latin translation
(noster) seventeen. St. Jerome lists fifteen, omitting fornication
(impudicitiam) and murder, and says: \"In the Latin manuscripts it is
reported that in this register of sins adultery, fornication, and murder
are also written, but it must be known that no more than fifteen works
of the flesh are mentioned, of which we have dealt. Thus far Jerome.
\[Erasmus and Stapulensis almost agree with our translator, except that
they add \"adultery\" and take away either \"indulgence\" (luxuriam) or
\"fornication.)

120\) The apostle does not contrast each fruit of the Spirit with one
work, but confuses one work with many, and many works with many fruits,
so that he contrasts love and joy with fornication, impurity, and
indulgence, which are perverse love and perverse joy; peace, patience,
gentleness, kindness, goodness with enmities, strife, discord, wrath,
quarrels, 2c.; faith with the herds (haeresibus),

1\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar one and in
de\^ Erlanger: sint instead of: sit.

2\) These brackets are set by us.

of idolatry, sorcery; chastity (continentiam) to bingeing and eating.

The first vice is \"fornication,\" which is well enough known.

122; The second, \"impurity\"; by this St. Jerome understands all
disorderly (extraordinarias) pleasures, and such as cannot be spoken of.

The third is \"lewdness\" (luxuria) (for \"lewdness\" (impudicitia) in
our text seems to have been brought into the text from the margin, since
someone has written it either over \"impurity\" or \"lewdness\"
\[luxuria\] for the sake of explanation or has wanted to indicate that
it is so in other books). Although Jerome has extended this quite
broadly (generaliter), also to the excess in marriage, the Greek
*άσέλγεια means lewd* being (lascivia).

or, as Ambrose says, lewdness (ob- scoenitas), which may extend to
manners, also to gestures and words.

The fourth, \"idolatry,\" is also sufficiently known, but now at least
it is not the gross \"idolatry\" as it was among the Gentiles. But those
to whom the belly is their god, and who are miserly, are, as the apostle
indicates, also idolaters. Idolaters are all flatterers and courtiers,
and all who seek their glory in a man, either in themselves or others.
Thus, not a small number of princes and bishops today are idols.

12.\]. The fifth is \"sorcery\". This evil increases nowadays in a
marvelous way. Thus (, namely φαρμακεία,)3) is called, as Jerome
testifies, the art of magic (ars malefica). For φάρμακο means in Greek.

a poison or a medicine; therefore a woman who prepares medicines
(pharmaceutria) is a sorceress. 4) Therefore the apostle points to
sorcerers (magos), black artists (maleficos), blessing-speakers
(carmina- trices) and any others who deceive their neighbor, harm him,
steal from him through an alliance with the devil. But it is also
through the testimony of such a great apostle.

3\) Added by us.

4\) In the Jenaer, Tom. Ill: vonskoin instead of: vsnsü\<?n.

1612 Dri- \"Li. Ill, 426-42S, Shorter interpretation d. Galatians 5,
19-31. W. IX, 323-32S. 161Z

stels evident that such sorceries are not nothing, but that they can
harm, which many do not believe.

The sixth, \"enmity,\" seems to be resentment and secret hatred of one
against the other.

127 \"Hader\" (lites), which our Latin translation expresses by
contentiones, the Greek text by, that is, Hader (lis), is a work of
enmity, which has been called above \"envy\" (aemulationes) or jealousy
(zeli). \[\"Wrath\" is known.)

\(128\) \"Quarreling\" (rixae), which Jerome thinks is more
appropriately expressed in Greek by *ίρι&είαι*, takes place when someone
who is ready to contradict takes pleasure in another\'s anger, and
quarrels with feminine scolding and irritates the quarreler.

All this can be seen better by experience and by the example of two
adversaries than by a description. For at first they are enemies and at
odds; then, if any opportunity presents itself, they immediately
quarrel; but when they quarrel, they are jealous of each other
(aemulantur), each striving to be superior to the other; but when they
are jealous, they are angry; But if they are angry, they seek on both
sides to say, or do, or omit something that will injure (mordeat) and
irritate the other, that is, they quarrel; but if they quarrel, they are
at odds, and each is ready to defend his own, to belittle that of the
other. Hence sects and heresies arise, as each draws other people to his
side and turns them away from the other. From this arises envy
(invidia), a terrible evil; at last they get into murder and bloodshed.
And that is the end of this evil. Take as an example two adversaries
quarreling in court, or two states hostile to each other, or two
sophists and bad theologians arguing for their opinions. He has
distinguished this bitter and wrathful lust of the flesh into nine
grades or main divisions; so much does the apostle abhor the adversaries
of love. \[Here St. Jerome adds that every one should be a heretic.

who understands the Scriptures differently than the sense of the Holy
Spirit requires, even if he should not be detached from the Church. This
is a harsh judgment on the Aristotelian theologians\].

130\] After that, 1) the seventh is \"drinking,\" which not only refers
to wine, but is also forbidden for any other kind of drink. Therefore it
says Luc. 1, 15: \"Wine and strong (i.e. intoxicating) drink he shall
not drink.\" Of course, it is recommended in many passages of Scripture
that one abstain from wine and be moderate. What follows from drinking,
however, is sufficiently proven by the histories of Noah and Lot of the
same scripture, whose drunkenness took place through no fault of their
own, but not without the misfortune of others. But the histories are
known everywhere. Therefore Christ says Luc. 21, 34: \"Beware lest your
hearts be burdened with eating and drinking.\" \[And surely it is clear
enough that drinking in other lands is a kind of plague sent upon us by
God\'s wrath. Everywhere we flee the pestilence of the body and arm
ourselves with all diligence against it, and take care that we are not
harmed by it. But we plunge ourselves into this plague with
extraordinary blindness, and there is no one to even warn us, let alone
prevent us. Yes, it rages more fiercely than one could hope to eradicate
it).

The last is \"eating\" (comessa- tio), which is called crapula in Luc.
21, 34. As drunkenness weighs down the heart by excess in drinking, so
eating (crapula) by excess in eating. \[And this frequent evil increases
enormously, even among the rulers of the people and the great ones in
Israel, with such great splendor, with such great expense, with such
great quantity and variety of dishes, so that it seems that they aim to
make a mockery of the horrible (insignificant) eating of the ancients).
But the word comessatio comes from the name Comos, 2) which was called
by the Greeks the god of the banquet and of eating, so that,

1\) In the Wittenberg: äecnmuro instead of: äeiväe.

2\) (Weim.)

1614 Lri. Kai. Ill, 429-431. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 325-327. 1615

just as Venus is said to be unchaste, 1) so Komos is said to be eating.
Both are very powerful and close friends of the deities; the belly is
serviceable to the latter, what is under the belly to the latter, and
Komos sustains Venus and gives her support (vegetat), otherwise, without
Ceres and Bacchus, Venus is cold.

132 At the end he adds: \"and the like\", because who could enumerate
the whole swamp of the carnal life? For he has already sufficiently
included arrogance and vain honor under envy (aemulationem) and jealousy
(zelo); slander, cursing, shouting, blasphemies under anger, hatred
(invidiam), discord; deceit, fraud, stalking, persecution (insidias),
lying under the same. He has only indicated some parts, so that the
Galatians would not claim that they did not know how to resist the lusts
of the flesh.

**Of whom I have told you before, and still say before, that those who
do these things will not inherit the kingdom of God.**

See, this is \"walking in the spirit\" and \"not performing the lusts of
the flesh,\" \"being ruled by the spirit,\" \"not being under the law,\"
and understanding the whole law under the One piece of love, namely,
when this is not done. Now you see how faith alone is not enough, and
yet faith alone makes righteous, for if it is the right faith, it
obtains the spirit of love. But the spirit of love flees all this and
thus fulfills the law and attains the kingdom of God. Therefore, all
things must be attributed to faith, and faith to the word, and the word
to the mercy of God, who sends apostles and preachers of the word, so
that all our fullness (sufficientia) is from God, from whom comes all
good and all perfect gifts \[Jac. 1:17\].

134 This is what should be done among the people, and to act in the
order which the apostle observes, namely, that first those who despair
of their strength should hear the word of faith, the hearers believe it,
the believers call, the callers

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Weimar and in the
Erlangen: Uioitur instead: Uioutur.

the ones who are heard receive the spirit of love and, having received
the spirit, walk in the spirit and do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh
but crucify it, the ones who are crucified rise with Christ and possess
the kingdom of God.

But we leave souls with our self-chosen works and statutes, always
teaching and never coming to the knowledge of the truth, yes, setting up
free will and our virtues against godliness, teaching presumption,
vainly boasting of merits according to equity and dignity (congrui et
condigni), and finally completely annulling the knowledge of Christ, and
making men have an evil conscience in an exceedingly large number of
things.

St. Augustine says the following about the word \"those who do these
things: Those (he says) do such things who consent to their carnal
lusts, and resolve to accomplish them, though it is not in their
capacity to do so, and he adds a wonderful distinction. Something else
(he says) is not to sin, and something else is not to have sin. For he
in whom sin does not reign does not sin; it is he who does not obey its
airs. But he in whom these airs are wholly absent, not only does not
sin, but has no sin. Although this can be accomplished in many respects
in this life, it can be hoped for in all respects only in the
resurrection, and when the flesh is transformed.

This distinction teaches the same thing that has already been
sufficiently said above, that man, as far as he walks in the spirit, is
righteous and holy and does not sin, and as far as he is still moved by
the lusts, he is a sinner and carnal. So he has sin in his flesh and his
flesh sins, but he himself does not sin. A wonderful saying: one and the
same man sins and does not sin at the same time. Here the two sayings of
the apostle John are brought into agreement with each other; the former
1 John 1:8: \"If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves\"; the
other 1 John 3:9 and Cap. 5:18: \"He that is born of God sinneth not.\"
So all saints have

1616 nri. cz\^i. in. 431-483. shorter interpretation d. Galatians 5, 21.
22. w. ix, 327-330. 1617

Sin and are sinners, and no one sins. They are righteous according to
that which grace has made whole in them; sinners they are according to
that they have yet to be made whole.

**V. 22. But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience
(**longanimitas**), kindness, goodness, faith, gentleness, chastity.
^1^)**

There is no doubt that Paul enumerated only nine fruits, as is evident
from St. Jerome, St. Augustine, and the Greek text, where they are
listed thus: \"The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience
(longanimitas), kindness, goodness, faith, gentleness, chastity\"
(continentia). It is evident, however, that their number has risen to
twelve through the diligence of some ignorant people, who, having found
patientiam either in the glossa, or in the margin, or in Jerome, put it
in the text in the fourth place, where longanimitas should have been;
but this they have put in the seventh place. Furthermore, they saw from
St. Jerome that continentia meant the same as modestia and castitas, and
they added these two words to the text and changed the position of
\"faith\" and \"meekness.

\(139\) Thus, (2) the basis of their doctrine of the twelve fruits is
completely defeated, not only because of the insufficient number, but
also because of the way in which they understand it. For they make of
the fruits their \"states\" (habitus), which are in the soul according
to their own opinion (subjective). But the apostle makes them living
works of the Spirit, which are also spread through the whole man, for he
opposes them to the works of the flesh. But also \"spirit\" means in
this place (although Jerome opposes it) not the Holy Spirit, but the
spiritual man.

1\) In order to make Luther\'s following argument, which refers to the
Vulgate, understandable, we put its text here: I?ruotu8 nut\^rn Kpiritng
68t: oaritU8, AnuNiura, pax, patient, Ü6niMitn8, donitn8, lonAnniinitns,
inan8N6tu\<1o, tüw\", Mocl68tin, eontinentin, 6N8titN8.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen
psrit instead of: periit.

so that the contrast is: works of the flesh, fruits of the spirit. The
flesh is the evil tree, which bears thorns and thistles; the spirit is
the good tree, which brings forth grapes and figs, as Matth. 7, 16. ff.
says. For Ambrose also says that the law of the Spirit works this, and
St. Jerome, coming again on the right track, interprets \"Spirit\" as
the good tree. Likewise, he \[Paul\] calls it works, not fruits of the
flesh, fruits, not works of the Spirit. Why is this? Certainly because
the works of the flesh are useful to no one, for thorns and thistles no
one can enjoy, but they are evil works that only harm. But the works of
the spirit are useful, and we can enjoy them forever, they are figs and
grapes of the land of promise, therefore they are rightly praised by the
name fruits.

The first fruit is \"love,\" of which it has been said that it is not a
hidden quality, but, as St. Augustine says of faith, that each one sees
it with the utmost certainty when he has it, so also feels with
certainty that he has hope when he has it, so he also sees love with the
utmost certainty, especially at the time of temptation. So it is this
sweet impulse against God, who is angry, and against the neighbor, who
offends. For then love against God proves itself when He strikes and
gives tribulation, as we see in the martyrs and in the suffering Christ.
But then love proves itself against the neighbor, when the neighbor
offends us and seems to deserve hatred. Otherwise, almost no virtue is
more accessible to hypocrisy, to such a degree that the apostle Rom. 12,
9. is only concerned about this one thing, since he says \[Vulg.\]:
\"Let love be without hypocrisy.\" For God has many lovers, of whom it
is written in the Psalms \[Ps. 49:19, Vulg.\], \"He will praise you if
you are pleasing to Him,\" and Ps. 78:36 \[Vulg.\], \"And loved Him with
their mouths, and with their tongues they lied to Him.\" So, though it
may be hidden in peace, in war nothing is felt more vividly than love,
hope and faith, regardless of the fact that they do not feel mistrust
(diffidentiam), despair and hatred.

1618 Li-1. \"Li. Ill, 433-436. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 336-333. 1619

141\. \"Joy\", the second fruit, is (as well as love) against God and
the neighbor. Against God, when we are joyful because of divine mercy,
even in the midst of the storms of the world, and praise and bless the
Lord in the furnace of fire by day and by night. But against our
neighbor, if we do not envy his goods, but wish him happiness in them as
if they were our own, and praise God\'s gifts to him 1).

But just as those who follow the flesh pretend to love only in peaceful
times, so it is with joy. They praise God and God\'s gifts to man, but
only until they are offended; then the works of the flesh burst forth,
they belittle the gifts of God which they praised before, they grieve
when their belittling is unsuccessful, and when the honor of the
neighbor suffers no damage. For no one believes how deep the wickedness
of the flesh is; so many it corrupts in their security until they are
challenged and proven.

The words of the apostle seem simple and clear, but if you apply them,
you will find how difficult it is not to do the works of the flesh,
which those foolish people believe to be very far from them, while they
are exceedingly full of them, because with full impetuosity they break
out because of their spiritual state (religione), their habits
(observantiis), their good works, their rules, their statutes, their
traditions, their human customs. But here they take for their cloak
their zeal and their love of righteousness, and according to this their
holy spiritual nature they ravage in all certainty love and peace and
joy. Of this frenzy are nowadays possessed almost all the monasteries,
all the churches, and, as the Psalm \[Ps. 78, 31.\] says, the best in
Israel. For in those who are publicly wicked these things are easily
recognized. But under the plates, bishop\'s caps, and other holy usages,
this behemoth is finely fattened, and reigns in safety, while they
believe to be doing GOD a service when they are

1\) We have assumed illo with the Wittenberg and Weimar editions; in the
other editions illis is found.

love the flesh of their party, but persecute and innocent all who are
not in it (extraneos) with infinite hatred.

The third fruit is \"peace,\" which is also twofold. Towards God it is
the good conscience, which is based on the mercy of Christ; but
sometimes it is higher than all reason, when it is disturbed by God
hiding and turning away his face, and the conscience is left to itself.
But against the neighbor, when one gives way to his will. For this peace
with men can never exist if everyone wants to be right with regard to
his own, protects it, seeks it, demands it, as nowadays the Roman See
and the right have overwhelmed the church with quarrels, disputes and
legal battles, and are satisfied with a small crumb of peace in which
they agree with their own, and make for themselves a cover of
wickedness, so that they believe nothing less than that they are drowned
in the works of the flesh. For they are not careful how many they
disagree with, but how many they agree with, and are ready to teach
peace to all others also. These understand nothing at all of peace,
which the apostle Rom. 12, 18. praises by saying: \"If it is possible,
as much as is in you, be at peace with all men,\" and Matth. 5, 9.:
\"Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of
God.\"

But the jurists excuse the dissolution of this peace in a very learned
way, because they teach that one should drive out violence with
violence, and exalt that one must uphold justice, as if this were not
the highest justice, that one should leave his right (justitiam) and
give way to the adversary, so that one does not refuse the skirt to the
one who takes the cloak \[Luc. 6, 29\]. In short, it is impossible to
keep the gospel and the rights of men at the same time. Therefore it is
impossible for peace to exist at the same time as rights, especially in
our time, when the gospel is nothing, but rights are everything in
everything. \[This is the angel in Revelation

2\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: 8uK
instead of: siki.

1620 Lri. Kai. Ill, 436-438. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 22.
W. ix, 333f. 1624

(Cap. 6, 4.), whom GOD sent in His wrath to take peace away from the
earth\].

146*.* the fourth fruit is \"Langmuth\" (longanimitas), Greek
μαχρο&υμία. For it is

Here not δπομονη*,* that is, patience, nor *άυοχη,* that is, endurance
(tolerantia), although St. Jerome wants to take patientia and
longanimitas for the same. But it seems to be something else to endure
(tolerare) the wicked, and something else to suffer their injuries and
still expect their improvement, to wish that it may go well with them
(salutem), not to think of revenge; this is peculiar to longanimitatis.
Rom. 2:4: \"Or despisest thou the riches of his kindness, patience, and
longsuffering?\" It is \"goodness\" according to which he is kind to
them; \"patience\" according to which he suffers them to abuse his
benefits, bears the ungrateful, repays good with evil; \"longsuffering\"
according to which he expects their correction.

The fifth fruit is \"kindness,\" the sixth \"goodness,\" which, as
Jerome indicates, are distinguished thus: Kindness is a gentle (lenis),
loving, quiet virtue, suitable for the fellowship of all the good,
inviting to confidential intercourse, sweet in its speech, moderate in
its manners, hence St. Ambrose has \"lenity\" (lenitas). This is called
everywhere and in bad Latin (barbare) amicabilitas, in German:
freundlich \[holdselig\], leutselig, Greek γρηστότης*,* which2 Cor. 6,
6. is translated suavitas, since it says, \"In kindness (suavitate), in
the Holy Spirit,\" and hence he has Rom. 16, 18. called \"sweet words\"
χριστολογίας. And to my mind the Latin translator would more properly
have said suavitas than benignitas, because malignitas, the opposite
vice, is too gruesome to denote the sullen and unkind. For of the unkind
one says: He is a good man, but he does not know how to accommodate
himself to the ways (moribus) of men; \"he is well 1) pious, but
altogether too unkind and not leut-

1\) \"wohl\" is missing in the editions of the first Redaction, in the
Weimarsche and in the Erlanger. - The words in speech marks are given by
Luther himself in German.

blessed\". \"Kindness\" (bonitas) can thus be somewhat more unkind
(tristior) and have a brow crinkled with sternness (moribus); but it is
ready to do good, harms no one, is useful to all; but it lacks somewhat
the affable behavior (humanitatis).

The seventh fruit is \"faith. This is what St. Jerome understands by
faith, which is called by the apostle Hebr. 11, 1 \"a certain confidence
of that which is hoped for\" (substantia rerum sperandarum). (For he
interprets the word substantia as \"possession\" by saying: \"For we
hope that what we possess in faith will come to pass. I too have long
been of the opinion that I perceived substantia to be used almost
everywhere in Scripture for goods (kusultatidus) and possessions,
especially as I adhered to Jerome\'s saying about this passage. For what
the writers of sentences (sen- tentionarii) have gathered about the word
substantia, of what use should it be to enumerate it? But after my dear
Philipp Melanchthon, 2) who is a youth in body but an old man in spirit
with a venerable gray head, whom I use as a teacher in Greek, has not
allowed me to adhere to this opinion, and has shown that substantia,
when it means goods (facultatem), in Greek is not υπόστασις (this word
is used by the Apo

stel Hebr. 11, 1.), but either ουσία*,* or βροτδς*,* or υπαρξις*,* I
have changed my opinion, and admit that according to my understanding
δπόστασις or substantia actually means existence (subsistentiam) and
essence (substantiam), by which each consists in itself, as Chrysostom
holds for it, or also a promise, a covenant (pactum), of which it is not
now time to speak more extensively, an expectation, which the meaning
and proper opinion of the verb from which δπόστασις comes admits.\] But
it may be taken faith in this place without inconsistency for
truthfulness (veritate), or Zu-.

2\) This spelling of the name is found in the editions of the first
Redaction, while Melanchthon himself writes \"Melanthon\" throughout the
prefaces to the Wittenberg Gesammtausgabe of Luther\'s writings (German
and Latin).

1622 Lri. 6-a. Ill, 438-440. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 334-336. 1623

The first one is against God, whom we believe (fidelitate), or
simplicity (simplicitate), which deceives no one, which is highly
necessary in the intercourse and common life of men; so that in such a
way we also find a twofold faith: one against God, to whom we hold faith
(fideles sumus)**,** not so much because we keep our promises as because
we believe his promises; the other against a man, to whom we hold faith
by remaining firm and unwavering (tenaces) in the contracts (pactorum)
and promises.

The eighth fruit is \"meekness,\" which Jerome opposes to anger and
quarreling, and which is distinguished from long-suffering only with
great difficulty. But meekness and gentleness are known as the virtue
that does not allow itself to be provoked to anger and does not take
revenge. Beyond this goes long-suffering, which expects the wicked to
mend their ways 1) \[, who have continually given cause for anger\].

The ninth fruit is \"chastity\" (continentia) or more correctly
temperance (temperantia), which must be understood not only of chastity
(castitate), but also of food and drink, therefore the opinion of this
word 2) comprehends chastity and temperance (modestiam). Therefore, here
he also restrains the lewdness (licentiam) of the spouses, so that they
live chastely (continenter), keeping the lust of the flesh in check by
moderation (modestia,).

**V. 23. The law is not against such.**

151 He is always mindful of the proof he wants to provide that the law
does not make those righteous who put their trust in it. Thus it is said
in 1 Tim. 1, 9: \"No law is given to the righteous, but to rebels and
murderers of fathers\" 2c. Those who are of this nature have no need of
the law. So why do the Gala-

1\) Here, in the first redaction, also in Weimar\'s, still follow the
words: Hui otiam non irriturunt, of which we must say that they do not
seem to us to fit into the context. Perhaps otiurnnurn or otiuinuullo is
to be read instead of: etiain uon. After that we have translated.

2\) In the Wittenberg: Hira, soutontia, instead of: \"jus 86Nt6Utiu.

ter return to the law, not only to that of the holy ten commandments,
but also to the ceremonial laws? For you see that the apostle is not
speaking of the ceremonial law alone, but mainly of the moral law as
well.

But here again the apostle speaks theology (theologisat) according to
his way of speaking, therefore one must beware of the foolish
understanding, as if a righteous man should not lead a godly life and do
good; for unintelligent people understand \"not being under the law\" in
such a way. But the righteous man has no law because he owes nothing to
the law, since he has the love that does and fulfills the law. Just as
three and seven (this is an example Augustine uses) do not have to be
ten, but are ten, nor does any law or rule have to be sought for them to
be ten, so a house that is already built does not have to be built
first, for it already has what the master builder\'s art sought, as it
were, as a law: so the righteous man does not have to live godly (bene),
but lives rightly and does not need a law to teach him to live godly. So
a virgin does not have to be a virgin. Now if she sought to become a
virgin by any law, would she not be senseless? But the unrighteous must
live godly, because he does not live godly, which the law requires. He
emphasizes all this so emphatically that they may not presume to be
justified by law and works, but may receive the Spirit through faith
without law and works, by which they may be sufficient for the law, as
has been said enough and superfluously in the foregoing.

**V. 24 But those who belong to Christ crucify their flesh along with
their lusts and desires.**

He is answering a hidden question that someone might be moved to ask by
what has been said before. If the law is not against such people, and
they are righteous and not debtors to the law, why then do you command
that they not do the works of the flesh, but walk in the spirit and do
other things? Do you not

1624 Ari. Kai. Ill, 440-142. shorter interpretation of Galatians 5, 24.
W. IX, 336-339. 1625

a debt from them? Do you not prescribe the law? Are not your
commandments against them? Why do you contradict yourself? What do you
think he would answer other than what we learned above, that\' those who
are perfect in this are not under the law; they fulfill the law
completely. Therefore the law is in no way against them. But since there
is no one in the flesh who could perfectly accomplish this goal, 1)
those who belong to Christ are at least preserved in crucifying their
flesh and fighting against its lusts and thus fulfilling the law of God
in the spirit, even though they serve the law of sin with the flesh (as
he says in Rom. 7:25).

Therefore, the description of the fruits of the spirit, against which
the law is not, is rather the intended goal for which those who are
spiritual should strive, than that he should consider that some have
arrived there. So the law is not against them only in so far as they
live in the spirit; it is against them in so far as they are moved by
the lusts of the flesh. And that this is a guideline for understanding
everything else in which the righteous and the saints on earth are
praised is beautifully and abundantly demonstrated by St. Augustine in
his book \"Of Nature and Grace\". Thus it says in Rom. 6, 6: \"Our old
man is crucified together with Christ,\" and above, Cap. 2, 19, 20: \"I
am crucified with Christ. But I live; yet now not I, but Christ liveth
in me.\" \[I pass over what St. Jerome teaches here from Origen, and I
do not like it well either\].

The apostle had said that the law was not contrary to the Spirit, who
had

1\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen:
rrttinZit instead of: uttinAnt.

If they do not do the works of the flesh, they do good and turn away
from evil. Why? Because they are Christ\'s, they belong to Christ, not
to Mosi, not to the law. But if they are Christ\'s, they undoubtedly
have a crucified flesh, not through the law, which only agitated the
flesh more, but through Christ, as if to say: You cannot belong to
Christ if you want to belong to the law. If you belong to the law, you
will not crucify the flesh, and the law will be against you. Therefore,
those who are Christ\'s are not under the law and at the same time
crucify the flesh together with the lusts (vitiis) and desires.
\"Lusts\" (vitia) or in Greek \"passions\" (passiones \[πα&ήματα\]*),*
according to Jerome, is an all-embracing word.

The word \"passion\" is a more common expression, so it should be added
to \"desires\" (concupiscentiis), because the passions (passiones) can
also bring pain with them. But how, if by vitia or passiones he should
understand the disorderly impulses of a mind inclined to anger, which
rage in bitterness of heart, and by \"desires\" the impulses (affectus),
which are pleasant through the tickling of the flesh inclined to desire
(concupiscibilis)? (Everyone may follow his opinion).

The manner (forma) of this crucifixion is known. For the nails are the
word of God, which penetrate by the hammering (impulsum) of God\'s grace
and prevent the flesh from following its lusts. Thus it is said in
Ecclesiastes Cap. 12, 11: \"The words of the wise are thorns and, as it
were, nails, deeply driven in, which are given by the counsel
(consilium) of the masters from One Shepherd,\" that is, from Christ
through the apostles and prophets.

1626 Lri. ttra. Ill, 44L-444. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 339-342. , 1627

**The sixth chapter.**

**Cap. 5, v. 25. If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the
Spirit.**

\(1\) I do not think that it matters much that our books here begin the
sixth chapter, which Jerome and the Greeks only begin with the words:
\"Dear brethren, if a man be overtaken with a fault,\" 2c. He keeps the
same order in this epistle as in the letter to the Romans. For there,
too, he first teaches faith through eleven chapters, in the twelfth he
deals with love and the fruits of the Spirit, in the thirteenth and the
following his endeavor is directed to the care of the weak in faith. So
also here; after having instructed them in faith and love, he also takes
care, among other things concerning life, that they do not turn away
from the weak or fallen with disgust.

For St. Augustine expresses the correct opinion (in my opinion) that
this is said against those who, having come from the letter to the
spirit, despise the weaker ones by boasting of themselves in vain honor,
and therefore they are reminded that they, if they are spiritual, do not
want to please themselves, but bear the infirmities of the weak, as he
says in Rom. 14:1 and Cap. 15:1. For if they did not do this, they would
have begun in the spirit, but would not have walked in the spirit, since
they would have become arrogant despisers of their brothers.

3\. So this is the meaning: I am sure that you have been taught both by
this my doctrine and by the former in the spirit, that there still
remain some among you who are full of scrupulosity, and cannot yet
separate the right doctrine (opinionem) of faith from the works of the
law, in that they do not refrain from the works of the law because of
conscience concerns, because they do not sufficiently trust in
righteousness by faith alone: these (I say) you must not despise, but
lovingly accept them, until they, through habit and the precept of the
law, are able to do what is right.

The image of the strong will also become strong and firm. For the sake
of this, such people are always left among you, as it were, as arms in
the midst of a people, so that there may be people on whom you can
exercise the ministry of love. And therefore, \"if we live in the
spirit, let us also walk in the spirit,\" that is, let us persevere and
progress, which will happen if we do not allow ourselves to be seduced
(tentari) by the frailty of the weak into harboring an aversion
(fastidium) toward them and finding pleasure in ourselves. For this
would be to turn away from the Spirit, if we please ourselves, but do
not serve others through love. \[Just as today there is a great
multitude of the weak, even among the most learned, who are miserably
tormented by a false conscience about human laws, and do not dare to
trust in faith alone in Christ. And the children and effeminate men who
rule in the church make no concession to our weakness, but with storm
and violence they lay before us the unmanageable masses (robustas offas)
of their opinions, only to fortify their tyranny. Immediately if you do
not answer what they want, they say: So you are a heretic, a pagan, a
man who makes divisions (schismaticus). But of this elsewhere).

4\. \"Walk\" (στοιχωμεν) is the same verbum, which stands above Cap. 4,
25. stands, \"And longs (σύστοιχε) unto Jerusalem,\" 2c., so that the
sense is, Mount Sinai is in Arabia, and longs, that is, extends, walks,
goes along, unto Jerusalem, as is there said; and afterwards \[Cap. 6,
16. Vulg.), \"As many as follow this rule\" (στοιχήσουσι), that is, go
along, walk. For it is the proper meaning of this word: to go along in
order, to walk in the right way, to go forward \[, as given by Erasmus).
But the apostle uses this verb here in an appropriate way, that they
should not deviate, neither to the left nor to the right.

1628 Li-I. Osl. m. 444-446. shorter interpretation d. Galatians 5, 25.
26. W. IX, 342-34S. 1629

but to walk and walk rightly in order after they have received the
Spirit. For since there are strong and weak in the people, a twofold
trouble arises; the one on the left with the weak, the other on the
right with the strong, whom the apostle endeavors to keep in the middle,
and wants to ward off both troubles.

\(5\) The trouble is with the weak when that which the weak do not
understand happens, and they cannot separate the evil appearance from
the thing, which is discussed in great detail in the fourteenth chapter
of the Epistle to the Romans. For example, when the weak saw that others
ate all the foods forbidden by the law as unclean, they did not dare to
eat them because they were troubled in conscience, and yet they could
not disapprove of the example of the others. Here Paul became a Jew with
the Jews, a weak man with the weak, in order to serve them through love
until they also became strong in Christ. Therefore it is said in Romans
14:15: \"But if your brother is grieved because of your food, you are
already not walking according to love.\" This is how it should be done
in all other ceremonies concerning days, feasts, clothing, etc.

The other offense is that of the arrogant, who again take offense at the
weak, being impatient because of their slowness and their clumsiness.
Thus they took no heed of the weak, and too freely used the liberty of
Christ against the law, doing these things to the annoyance of the weak,
whereas they should have kept the whole law before they had offended
even one. For this is how one walks in the spirit. For what is the use
of the spirit of liberty against the spirit of love?

7 We are free, they say. Yes, of course, but your freedom must be
subordinated to your brother\'s weakness, because it does you no harm if
what you are free to do is not done, but it does your brother harm if
his weakness is annoyed by your freedom. But it comes to love that you
look at what is the other\'s, not so much that you take many liberties,
but rather how much you give to your brother.

You may benefit your brother. For love submits to this servitude, since
it frees you from the bondage of the law. \[But nowadays, dear God, how
many abominations of the worst kind are committed, and then all this is
imposed on the weak to bear, and they are supposed to lay out for the
best (pie) what the strongest can hardly bear. But without a shepherd
they are not shepherds nowadays; everything is different in appearance
than in fact and truth\].

**V. 26. Let us not be stingy with vain honor, indignant and hating one
another.**

8\. he further interprets what he had said. Then (he says) you will walk
rightly in the spirit and go along, 1) if you, being strong, do not blow
yourselves out against the weak, do not take pleasure in yourselves and
boast against them that they are not like you, as that Pharisee in his
eagerness for honor praised God and disgraced the tax collector.

\(9\) For if ye do this, ye shall, through all vain honor, provoke and
provoke the weaker to envy, and so ye shall be indignant one with
another, and they shall be envious; but neither of them shall walk in
the right order of the spirit. You the devil turns away to the right,
those to the left; you by vain glory, those by envy. Yes, after the
example of Christ, your strength shall bear the weakness of those, until
they also become strong. For we live not for ourselves, but for our
brethren, if we live in the spirit and in love. Therefore we will do
what is useful and necessary for them.

10\. he says Rom. 13, 8: \"Owe no man anything, but to love one
another.\" (1 Cor. 8:13.:) \"If the food offends my brother, I would
never eat meat.\" Why? Because I love my brother, whose blessedness is
incomparably higher to me than my freedom, according to which I desire
that which he does not yet understand to be lawful. Thus, if my brother
is offended by my righteousness, wisdom, power, or any work which is
perfectly lawful for me, I must refrain from it and be subservient to
love. \[But now see what the exceptions (exemtio-

1\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: inwäitis
instead of: inosästis.

1630 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 44S-449. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 345. 1631

The laws of the Church are not only money nets and excuses for the
consciences. Have not the laws of the popes become nothing but money
nets and annoyances to the consciences? Is not the whole of Germany full
of the constant complaint that butter and milk dishes are allowed on
fast days to those who have bought the lead and wax of the Roman Curia,
while the others, meanwhile, in their restriction (ruditate) believe
that this may not happen, even though the pope allows it? That is how
much human laws are ingrained in them. For murder and fornication, and
drunkenness, and envy, and all works of the flesh, they consider far
less than eating this privileged butter. Nor is there any of the bishops
or the privileged (privilegiatorum) who have mercy on this poor lot, but
an unbelievable avarice multiplies these privileges without end, without
measure, by which only the weak are induced to malign, to revile, to
judge. But those strong, the most brazen (robustissimi) despisers of the
laws, in turn, with great pomposity, despise these people and call them
don christian, that is, half fools. 1) This is the way to fulfill love
nowadays. How much more right would the popes act, if they either
completely abolished the laws, so that all would know their freedom,
which they have in Christ, or also did not grant privileges to anyone,
to the great ruin (barathro) of so many weak consciences. How will they
give account to Christ for the trouble they have caused among so many of
their brethren for whom Christ died? But the raging avarice does not
allow them to hear this love even from afar. But this is still childish
and quite small. Let us come to that by which even the most learned and
strongest are vexed (so great is the victory of the devil in the
church). Dear, how great an uproar, how much slander, how great a stench
has come over the Roman Curia because of the palliae 2) and annals by
which the bishoprics and parishes (sacerdotia)

1\) Cf. Tischreden, cap. 27, 66; Walch, St. Louis Edition, vol. XXII,
878.

2\) Pallia - bishop\'s robes. Cf. Walch, St. Louis edition, vol. XVIII,
1008, s 7; ibiä. Introduction p. 5. For \"Annalen\" compare vol. X, 285.

of Germany be completely sucked out? What shall I say of the robbery of
all parishes, of the devouring and devouring of the monasteries and
churches? and that in such a way that there is not an altar, even under
the earth, that would not be completely subservient to the avarice of
the Roman muleteers, while meanwhile learned, good and wholesome men
perish from hunger and lack. But 3) the Romans reap our bodily goods and
sow us spiritual (spiritualia), that is, windy (ventosa) goods, so that
we must live on spirit and wind. For spiritus is the wind, as Ephraim
(in Hosea \[Cap. 12, 2.\]) feeds on the wind. It is no wonder (I say) if
even the strongest cannot bear this, for it goes beyond all measure, and
is hard to bear even for apostolic perfection. But at best none of the
bishops takes the least notice of it, so that they even seem to rejoice
that we are irritated and they are hated, and to use that saying of an
emperor: They may hate, if only they fear. 4) For there is no lack of
such inflated water bubbles, which only boast of their violence. Then,
who is not irritated in the bitterest way by the first of all aversions
(for that of which we have spoken is temporal)? How many decrees
(compositiones) about robbery, usury, inheritance, wills, and now even
about all things that are to be restituted (restitutionum), both
uncertain and certain, whether they belong to minors (pupillis) or to
the poor. And the forgiveness of grievous sins they even impose, nay,
sell most frivolously, both to those who do not want it and to those who
do, under the plea of the one dead building of St. Peter, or even of a
more trifling cause. I confess, this must be borne, one must not be
spiteful, one must not bite! But who will give us such strong legs
(ossa) that can carry it? Or may we also not use our

3\) Jenaer, lorv. I and the Basel have: vsruru, the Erlangen and the
Weimar: vsrs.

4\) In the interpretation of the 101st Psalm, Walch, old edition, Vol.
V, 1273,? 177, Luther says: \"as the Latin Historici write of an emperor
who said: Oäsriut, (lum metuaut, Gram Wider Gram.\" - This emperor is
Caligula.

1632 Ari. 6ai. Ill, 449-451. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 5, 26. 6, I. W. IX, 345 f. 1633

Complain about weakness? May we not say, \"We must bear it, but we
cannot? It is by no means slander nor spitefulness when an infallible
burden is laid upon us to bear, and I cry out that I lack the strength
to do so. - Furthermore, if we act the holy scripture and punish, bite,
cut off this and similar things, we act rightly and align our office. Or
why do those so learned and strong rulers among the people demand of us
that we should tolerate these things, and do not much more demand of
themselves that they should not give us offence (provocent)? especially
since they should first instruct that we take no offense, than that we
be not hateful; then also as such people, who owe greater love because
of their position (statu), they should be much more careful that they do
not provoke (provocent) than we do that we be not hateful, so that in
such a way, we not being provoked, and they not hated, walk in the
spirit that we should live in the spirit. - Perhaps you will say, dear
reader, that I always attack the Roman Curia, which until now was
something exceedingly unusual. I answer: The Lord is my witness that I
do not do this out of inclination, or because I have a desire to do so,
since I desire nothing more than to remain hidden in the corner. But
since I must by all means treat the holy Scriptures publicly, I will
serve the Lord Jesus Christ as loudly as I can. For if the Scriptures
were treated in such a way that they were only to be understood in terms
of past things, and were not also applied to our lives, what use could
that be? Then it would be cold, dead, and not even divine For you see
how puffing and living, indeed, how necessarily this passage intervenes
in our time; because others have either not dared to do this, or have
not understood it, what wonder is it if the teachers of theology have
remained unhated? It is certain to me that the word of God cannot be
acted upon correctly without hatred and danger of death, and that this
is the only sign that it has been acted upon correctly, if it arouses
anger, especially among the princes and most distinguished among the
people. It is a rock of offense against which the judges of the nations
shatter. Yes, the church cries out that princes persecute her, and
princes have crucified Christ\].

**Chapter 6, v. 1. Dear brothers, if a man is overtaken by a fault, help
him again with a gentle spirit, you who are spiritual. And take heed to
thyself, lest thou also be tempted.**

\(11\) The apostle 1) suddenly changes the number and says not in
accordance with the previous (continent): And look to yourselves, lest
you also be tempted. For a speech has greater power when it is addressed
to one person in particular, and to each one in particular. This is
certainly a very noteworthy doctrine, and the apostle has arranged it
with wonderful art, so that love may take shape in it.

\(12\) First, he calls them \"brethren,\" asking them more with a
friendly exhortation, as it were, as his comrades, than that he demands
by his reputation, as it were, as of subjects. Then he says, \"Such a
man,\" he does not say, Such a brother, as if to say, Such a brother as
should have fallen from human weakness, for we are men; showing by this
word with what eyes we are to regard the case of others, namely, with
cordial compassion, and so that we may be more disposed to diminish the
fault than to make it greater. For this is the work of the devil and of
abusers of honor, but that of the Holy Spirit (paracleti) and of
spiritual men.

13\. And he says: \"would be over-hasty,\" surprised, carelessly fallen
into, by which he likewise teaches that the sin of the brother should be
made less, for if he has not evidently sinned out of obdurate malice,
and without any prospect of amendment, it behooves us to ascribe it not
to malice, but to imprudence, or even to weakness, as St. Bernard taught
his own, that if one could in no way excuse the sin of a brother, he
should at least say that it was a great and insurmountable temptation,
by which he was surprised and more influenced (occupatus) than that he
had been

1\) In the first redaction there is the following beginning of this
paragraph: \"Read Erasmus, why the apostle suddenly changed the
numerus\" 2c.

1634 Lri. \"Li. Ill, 451-454. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 346-348. 1635

could have borne it. \"Of a fault,\" of some falling; for falling is
very easy. He does not say, Of any wickedness, and again uses a
diminutive word, for we cannot call sin less and more tender than a fall
or stumbling (casum), which he here calls a fault (delictum).

14\. \"You who are spiritual.\" A wonderful word, which at the same time
reminds them of their duty, and teaches duty. It teaches the duty that
they should be spiritual. If they are spiritual, they are to do what
spiritual people are to do. But what is \"being spiritual\" other than
being a child of the Holy Spirit and having the Holy Spirit? But the
Holy Spirit is our helper (paracletus), our intercessor, our comforter,
who, when our conscience accuses us before God, takes us into protection
and comforts us by giving our conscience a good testimony and confidence
in God\'s mercy, by excusing, reducing, and completely covering our
sins, and in turn magnifying our faith and good works. Those who follow
Him in the sins of men before men are spiritual people.

\(15\) Satan, on the other hand, is called the devil (diabolus), a
defiler of honor and slanderer, because he not only accuses us and
magnifies the evil conscience before God, but also speaks evil of the
good, slandering our merits and the faith of the conscience. This is
followed by those who, in the case of sins or also in the case of good
works of men, make the sins of men heavy, gross and great before men, in
turn belittle, accuse and blame their good works.

16 Therefore, St. Augustine says in this passage: Nothing makes a
spiritual man more recognizable than his conduct against the sin of
another, since he is more anxious to make him free than to mock him, and
more anxious to bring him help than to heap shame upon him. On the other
hand, you can recognize the carnal man by the fact that he deals with
other people\'s sin in such a way that he only judges and reproves, as
that Pharisee disgraced the tax collector, but had no mercy on him.

17 \"Restore him with a gentle spirit. For true is the saying of St.
Gregory: true justice has compassion, false indignation. So also Christ,
Luc. 9, 55. f., when John and Jacob wanted to call down fire from heaven
on the Samaritans after the example of Elijah, prevented them, saying:
\"Do you not know what children of the Spirit you are? The Son of Man
did not come to destroy the souls of men, but to preserve them\" 2c. So
we also should be careful, not how we corrupt the brother who sins, but
how we preserve him. As Paul treats this subject Rom. 15:1, he says,
\"But we who are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and
not to have pleasure in ourselves.\"

Notice how restrained and modest Paul\'s spirit is. He calls
\"infirmity\" and \"weakness\" what some arrogant work saint or heretic
(haereticae pravitatis inquisitor = an investigator of heretical
wickedness) would have called a heresy or crime against the Holy Roman
Church (as they are quick to condemn and burn people). For so they speak
when they speak of the greatest sins. But Paul, whatever sins they may
be, calls them \"infirmities\", and the sinners he calls \"weak ones\",
because he does not speak with the tongue of the devil, but with the
tongue of the Holy Spirit.

19\. finally \[Rom. 15, 3.\] he also adds an example: \"For even Christ
had no pleasure in himself, but, as it is written: \'The reproach of
them that revile thee is fallen upon me\' \[Ps. 69, 10.\], that is, as
Isaias says \[Cap. 53, 4.\], \'He bore our sin,\' let alone that He
should have left us with and in the same, accused and condemned, dealing
with us no otherwise than if He had Himself done that which we had
committed, and paid that which He had not robbed \[Ps. 69, 5.\].\" So he
also introduces the same example in Phil. 2, 5. ff. and says: \"Let
every man be of the same mind as Jesus Christ was. Who, though he was in
the form of God, did not consider it a robbery to be like God, but said

1636 cri- Kai. Ill, 454-456. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 6, 1. 2. IX, 348-350. 1637

and took upon him the form of a servant, being made like another man,
and found in his ways like a man\" 2c. Behold, Christ became like men,
that is, sinners and the weak. Neither doth he show any other manner
(habitum), nor any other form, but that of a man and a servant, not
despising us in his divine form, but taking our form, and bearing our
sins in his body. \[But this saying is too high (dignior) to be duly
treated in a few words, for even the masters of theology have no right
understanding of it. Let us postpone this for the time being\].

Therefore, Christ governs the church in this part 1) in such a way that,
just as he foretold in the Old Testament \[Deut. 15:11.In the same way,
in the New Testament, he always allows some sinners to remain and some
to fall, so that those who are stronger have cause to practice the
evangelical and Christian fraternity, so that love will not be idle and
even fall away. But since the hypocrites, the most perverse of all men,
do not understand this divine grace, they seize it to exercise their
spitefulness, take the case of their brothers into consideration, only
to accuse, to bite, to persecute, and can handle nothing else than what
Simon the leper did to Mary Magdalene \[Matth. 26, 6. ff,), and the
Pharisee to the tax collector \[Luc. 18, 11.\].

21 \[At last he adds:) \"Look to thyself, lest thou also be tempted.\"
Here, too, he speaks modestly. He does not say, \"Lest thou also fall,\"
as elsewhere (1 Cor. 10:12) he says, \"Let him that standeth take heed
lest he fall\"; but, \"Lest thou be tempted,\" calling its fall a
temptation, as if to say: If you have fallen, I would rather say that it
was a temptation than a fault (crimen) on your part. With the same
leniency, you also consider that, as often as

1\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar one and in the
Erlangen one: in Ks\" vita instead of: in Noe.

you see a fallen man, that it was a temptation, and do not persecute
your brother who has fallen with frightening names. Behold, the words of
the apostle are not only for teaching (documento), but at the same time
for example. (Among the speakers of the world it is considered something
exceedingly praiseworthy to place the words in such a way that one can
see from them that the matter itself is at the same time clearly stated
(observari) and vividly demonstrated (geri), which is peculiar to Paul,
yes, to the Holy Spirit).

Therefore, St. Gregory says very well: \"As often as we see sinners, it
is necessary that we first weep for ourselves in them, because we have
either already fallen into similar sins or can fall. For there is no sin
(says Augustine) that a man has done that another man could not also do
if God forsakes him. I also do not reject the little memorial verse that
someone has made about this matter: We are, or were, or can be, what
another is (Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse, quod hic est).
\[And yet, did God want the Thomists, Scotists, and the more recent
theologians (moderni) to refer to this their universal essence
(universale reale) and indiscriminate nature (naturam indifferentem).
Man is man, flesh is flesh; never has the flesh done anything that the
same flesh would not do if GOtt did not make a difference\].

**V. 2: Bear one another\'s burdens, and you will fulfill the law of
Christ.**

In a very beautiful and quite golden summa (epiphonemate), he concludes
the two doctrines previously discussed. There are some (he says) full of
false thinking (scrupulosi), who make no proper distinction between the
law of faith and the law of men; they must be borne and be absolutely
careful not to take offense at them. There are others who also sin
against the law of God; these, too, must not be despised in foolish zeal
for God, but both must be borne in Christian love; those must be
instructed, those must be set right, those must be told what they must
know, those what they must do, and they must be served in such a way
that they will not be offended.

1638 Kri. Osl. Ill, 456-458. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 350-352. 1639

their faith and their works gain the right form. For the former need the
teaching of faith, the latter the instruction of a right life. Thus love
finds everywhere what it should bear and what it should do. Love is the
law of Christ.

\(24\) To love is to do good to another from the heart, or to seek that
which is another\'s. Now if there were no one to err, no one to fall,
that is, no one in need of good, whom could you love? Whom could you
grant good? Whose best could you seek? Yes, love could not even exist if
there were not people who erred and sinned \[who are (as the
philosophers say) the proper and suitable object of love, or the
substance (materia) with which love has to deal\]. But the carnal being
or the love of evil desire (amor cupiditatis) seeks that others wish it
good, grant it what it desires, that is, it seeks its own, and the
object (materia) with which it has to do is a just, holy, godly, good
man 2c.

2ö. These, indeed, reverse this doctrine, because they want their burden
to be borne, and that they alone enjoy the services (commodis) of
others 1) and be borne, since they are such people who disdain it.
Unlearned, unprofitable, wrathful, silly, strange, sullen, to have as
their companions in life, but seek friendly, kind, calm, and holy
people; that is, they do not want to live on earth but in paradise, not
among sinners but among angels, not in the world but in heaven. For
these, we must also fear that they may also receive their reward here
and possess their kingdom of heaven in this life. For they do not want
to be with the bride \[Hohel. 2, 2. Vulg.\] \"as a lily among thorns,\"
nor dwell with Jerusalem in the midst of the Gentiles, nor reign with
Christ in the midst of their enemies \[Ps. 110, 2.\]. For they make void
in themselves the cross of Christ, and idle and snoring, and have a love
that is borne by the shoulders of others 2).

1\) Here we have followed the reading of the first redaction and
Weimar\'s, which offers üui instead of tsrri.

2\) In the editions of the first redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen
allis instead of alioruna.

\(26\) Therefore, those who flee the company of such people in order to
become good, accomplish nothing but to become the very worst. But they
do not believe this, because for the sake of love they flee the right
service of love, and for the sake of salvation they flee the right
compendium of salvation. For it has always been best for the Christian
church when it dwelt among the most wicked people, for by bearing the
burdens which these laid upon it, its love shone forth in a marvelous
manner, as the 68th Psalm \[v. 14. Vulg.\] says: \"Its back (posteriora
dorsi) gleams like gold,\" that is, the toleration (tolerantia) of the
Christian dove (which is signified by the back) is altogether supremely
brilliant in golden love. Otherwise, why did not Moses also leave the
people who had a hard neck? Why did not Elisha and the prophets leave
the idolatrous kings in Israel? \[From this it follows that the
separation of the Bohemians from the Roman church cannot be defended by
any excuse, indeed, that it is ungodly and contrary to all the laws of
Christ, because it violates the love in which all laws are conceived.
For the only thing they claim, that they fell away out of fear of God
and conscience, in order not to live under evil priests and bishops, is
what accuses them most of all. For if the bishops, the priests, or
whoever it may be, are evil, and you were burning with right love, you
would not flee, but, even if you were at the furthest seas, you would
run, weep, admonish, punish, and by all means do everything, and you
would know that, if you follow this teaching of the apostle, no
advantages will accrue to you from it, but you will have to bear
burdens. Therefore, it is obvious that all the glory of this Bohemian
love is a mere appearance and a light in which the angel of Satan
conceals himself. Do we too, who carry the burdens and truly
unmistakable abominations of the Roman Curia, flee and separate for the
sake of it? Far be it, far be it! We reproach them, we detest them, we
plead, we exhort, but for the sake of it we do not break the unity of
the spirit, we do not puff ourselves up against it, because we know that
the

1640 All. Kai. Ill, 4S8-461. shorter interpretation of Galatians 6, 2-4.
W. IX, 352-355. 1641

Love is higher than everything, not only higher than the damage of
physical goods, but also higher than all the abominations of sins. This
is a fictitious love, which can bear nothing but the benefit that flows
to it from another. Truly, our common people (as we see), as they stand
below in rank, so they stand above in love. For quite patiently it lets
itself be scraped and flayed to the bone by the shepherds. Again, those
who are in the highest position cannot spare even a penny of theirs,
much less bear to have a word or deed spoken against their privileges.
But thou, O Lord, art just, and thy judgment is right. So the last shall
be first, and the first last\].

**V. 3 But if anyone lets himself think that he is something when he is
nothing, he deceives himself.**

He gives a very beautiful and very powerful reason for both teachings,
which is this: We are all equal, and all are nothing. Why then does one
blow himself up against the other, and why do we not rather help one
another? If there is anything in us, it is not ours, but God\'s gift.
But if it is God\'s gift, then one owes it entirely to love, that is, to
the law of Christ. But if it is owed to love, then I must serve others
through it, not myself. Thus my learning is not mine, but belongs to the
unlearned, to whom I owe it. My chastity is not mine, but belongs to
those who sin according to the flesh, whom I must serve through it \[ by
offering the same good for them, by receiving them, excusing them, and
thus by my respectability covering their shame before God and men, as
Paul writes 1 Cor. 12, 23. that the dishonest members are covered by the
more honest ones. Thus my wisdom belongs to the foolish, my power to the
oppressed, my riches to the poor, my righteousness to sinners. For these
are divine forms, of which we must divest ourselves, so that servant
forms may be in us, because we stand before God with all these things
and must act as mediators for those who do not have them, as it were as
with

(not unlike a priest who offers sacrifice to those around him in holy
garments that do not belong to him); but we must also serve them before
men with the same love against those who speak evil of them or do them
violence. For so Christ also did against us. This is the furnace of the
Lord in Zion, the sweet mercy of the Father, who willed to unite us with
such unspeakable virtue. By this emblem, by this standard, by this
characteristic we Christians are distinguished from all other peoples,
so that we may be God\'s own and a priestly race and a royal priesthood
\[1 Pet 2:9\].

28 Jerome explains this passage in two ways. First: \"If someone lets
himself think that he is something, then he is nothing\", that is, since
we are all nothing before God, as it is said. Secondly: Whoever lets
himself think that he is something, and yet is nothing, deceives
himself, that is, whoever thinks that he is something, and is really
more excellent than another, and pleases himself in this, thinks highly
only of himself, looks only at his own, not as he serves others through
it, he deceives himself in truth, because by this his arrogant opinion
causes him to be nothing, because then God\'s gift to him is in vain,
and he is like him who has nothing, just as a miser, even if he has
something, does not have it, because he does not have it in the use to
which riches are given. Therefore, just as this rich man is not rich but
poor, so he who makes himself believe that he is something is nothing.

29\. this understanding is followed by St. Jerome, and by this
understanding, in another way, a reason is given for the previously
mentioned teachings, for if someone does not bear another\'s burden, but
is puffed up in his own sense, then he becomes nothing, and it is as if
he has nothing, yes, he has it to his detriment. Both of these things
please me well. But he adds and calls attention to the meaning of the
word \"he deceives himself,\" which in Greek means, he deceives his mind
*(φρεναπατα) because* he is another,

than he lets himself think.

**But let every man examine his own work, and then he shall have glory
in himself, and not in another.**

**\
**1642 Lri. Kai. Ill, 461-463. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 355-357. 1643

This is the way of vain honor, that it compares itself with those who
are not equal to it. From this comparison follows the contempt of the
inferior and the pomposity (vesica inflata) because of the good he has.
For vain honor does not rejoice so much that it is or has something as
that others are or have nothing. So that Pharisee did not boast so much
because of his holiness as because other people did not seem to be like
him, especially the tax collector. For he also did not like other people
to be better or to be like him. Therefore his glory \[is a glory\] in
another and apart from him, that is, in worse or inferior.

\(31\) This is malevolence, which is always the companion of vain honor,
which rejoices in the evil that others have in themselves and grieves
over the good that is found in others. The apostle forbids this, so that
no one may have this honor in another, which is and must be extremely
far from love.

32\. \"But he examines his own work, that is, he does not care about the
work of another, does not seek how evil he is, but how good he himself
is, and seeks to be found approved in good works, but not to become
secure and sleepy on account of \[the work of\] another, as if he should
therefore also be considered good before God because he is better than
this evil one, so that in such a way he regards himself more because of
the wickedness of the other than because of his work, without the
wickedness of the other. Your works are not made better by the
wickedness of another. Therefore, live and act in such a way that you
examine your work to see how far you can boast about yourself in your
conscience, as it says in 2 Cor. 1:12: \"For our glory is in the
testimony of our conscience,\" but not in the reputation of another\'s
work. But he examines his work when he admits how diligent he is in love
to bear the infirmities of others, and surely he who would take heed to
this would easily guard against sacrilegious judgments and slander,
since he would find that he either loves his neighbor or does not love
him.

**V. 5 For every man shall bear his own burden.**

This belongs to the previous in this way: Why do you seek glory in
another? Why are you puffed up because of the sin or infirmity of
another? Will you give account for him? or, as he says Rom. 14:4. in the
same sense, \"Who are you to judge a strange servant? He stands or falls
by his master.\" And v. 12 follows, \"Every man shall give account for
himself,\" which he has here called, according to the idiom of
Scripture, \"bearing his burden,\" and above \[Cap. 5:10\] \"bearing his
judgment.\" Therefore I would also like to take this word: \"But let
every man examine his own work,\" a little differently, on the same
stroke as he Rom. 14, 22. says: \"If thou hast faith, have it with
thyself before God,\" that is, that thou knowest that all things are
free, that is thy work; but in this boast thyself before God and in
thyself, not using this freedom by heart, that because of this thy faith
thou boast not in thy neighbor\'s infirmity, and care not whether he
take offense at it. But this general understanding cannot extend to all
offences, but only to those which take place at a human law s, as now,
as I said, the letters of confession and other favors (facultates),
which are sold to some for money, but reserved to others, so that
offence arises\].

**V. 6: But he who is taught (**catechisatur**) with the word, let him
impart all good things to him who teaches him (**catechisat**).**

Here the apostle prescribes another moral teaching, namely the last one,
namely, that they should give to the elders, who teach God\'s word and
sow the spiritual, also the physical and what is necessary for life.
\"For a laborer is worth his wages,\" says Christ \[Luc. 10, 7\], as
Paul elaborates in 1 Tim. 5, 18 and 1 Cor. 9, 9. But it is to be
wondered at that the Latin interpreter took pleasure in inserting whole
Greek words. *Κατηχίζω* be

means: I teach and instruct; hence the word catechumens, those who are
instructed in the Christian religion. Here Paul treats the Stoic
philosophy contemptuously, in that he calls that which is necessary for
the need

1644 Dri- 6ai. Ill, 463-46\". Shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 6, 6. W. IX, 3S7-359. 1645

of the body is called \"good\", while those word twisters, who force
words and do them violence, count nothing to the good but wisdom and
virtue (that is, the hopefulness, which is based on futile things \[de
vanitate\]). We know that everything God made was very good, and all
God\'s creatures are good. But if it is in evil use, it is evil, not
through its fault; in such use, wisdom and virtue (the Stoic goods) are
the most evil, because they only make one puffed up when love is
missing.

\(35\) Behold, how heavy these words are: To him who teaches with the
word, all good things are to be imparted. But to those who neither
practice nor teach the word, this teaching is of no concern. Truly, the
first and greatest work in the church is to practice the word, which the
Lord laid on Peter \[three times\] \[John 21:15-17\], and most strictly
required of all; but now this is the very last and most despised thing.
There are so many offices of lawyers, judges, officiants, so many chants
and ceremonies of priests and religious, but the voice of the preacher
in the wilderness \[Is. 40, 3.\] is rare, so much so that there is
almost nothing more unlike the church than the church itself.

And not for nothing he adds: \"With the word\" or (as the Greek text
has) \"the word\" (τόν λόγον). There are, there have been, and there
will be many, who have many things babbling out of their heads, or
opinions of men and statutes, as we see nowadays to our sorrow, but just
the word, which badly means the gospel of Christ. Dear, where does it
resound? Or if it resounds, polluted by the glosses of men, it must say
\[Ps. 69:4\], \"My throat is sore,\" so that even when it resounds, it
cannot be heard. Therefore, even these should not hope that the word,
\"Share with all good things,\" refers to them.

37 Further, notice that he says, \"He who shares. For now they are not
content to be told, though they do not teach the word, but claim that
all things should be put under their power and into their possession.

give. And now the one who is taught must almost go begging to the one
who teaches him. For the church has grown so much that it has also begun
to confer emperorships and to grant secular principalities. For what has
this to do with the word? Let us leave that to the brothers! \[And this
it is that my Silvester 1) says that the pope is a twofold emperor of
the whole world and a lord over all things. But it is also not to be
wondered at, for the apostle Paul did not know grammar, that when he
wanted to say: All shall give all their goods to the Roman Pontiff, and
make him emperor, the most pernicious little word came into his mouth,
so that he said, \"But he that is instructed by the word divideth with
all manner of good to him that instructeth him.\" But I believe that if
he had known that it was once to be understood in this way, that
\"sharing\" was a complete surrender, \"teaching\" was the power to
rule, and \"he who is taught\" was the whole world, he would undoubtedly
have concealed this teaching. - Are you biting 2) again? I do not bite,
but out of necessity, in order to interpret the Scriptures, I must point
to the customs of our time, so that we may see where the glory of the
Church has come to, and which is the true or the imaginary Church, and,
to put it bluntly, it is impossible that the Scriptures can be
interpreted clearly and that other Churches can be reformed, unless the
universal foundation (universale illud reale), the Roman court, is
reformed as soon as possible; for it cannot hear the Word of God, nor
maintain that it be taught purely. But if God\'s word is not taught, the
other churches cannot be helped either).

38 He says: \"All kinds of good things\". It is a great question what
the apostle wants (for here he seems to speak sylvestrascere), since he
commands that all kinds of goods are to be shared, only that he
attributes this (as I said) only to those who teach the word. Since then
these teachers are and have been innumerable, and all people belong to
one and the same

1\) Compare Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. X VIII, 343 and 411, and
ibidaselbst Introduction, p. I7d.

2\) Cf. Walch, St. Louis Edition, Vol. XVIII, 337.

1646 Lri. 6 \"I. Ill, 466-468. Interpretations on the Epistle to the
Galatians. W.IX, 359-361. 1647

If we have to give all kinds of good things (omnia bona = all goods) to
the people, then many worlds would have to be provided beforehand, so
that each one could take possession of all goods. But we want to let
this go. He calls \"all good things\" that which the teacher needs, that
is, that he should receive all the temporal goods of which he needs to
live, and which he cannot acquire by his own work because he has to deal
with the word, from him whom he teaches. By this word he at the same
time prevents the one who teaches from annoying the believer by
receiving goods from other sources than those he teaches, and the one
who is taught must not allow this to be necessary for the teacher, but
\"he shares with him all kinds of good things\" and gives from his own
all that the latter needs.

\(39\) If this rule is to be kept, then from one and the same people
nothing else will be given to the pope, nothing else to the bishops
standing in the middle, nothing else to the common parish priests. Then
the begging will be something else than what is offered here. But now
are different times. For at that time, when the pastors of the church
were not provided with income and riches, 1) this was commanded, and
this teaching of the Spirit would certainly be better than the custom
which now reigns. \[For now we see the word Proverbs 28:2 (Vulg.) before
our eyes: \"Because of the sin of the land, its princes are many.\" And
this great multitude is nowadays called the hierarchy and the division
(ordo) of the church downward and upward\].

**V. 7. Do not be deceived; God is not mocked.**

40 He punishes avarice, which always knows how to excuse itself
cleverly, as often as something has to be given. The apostle does not
list these excuses, but he could not tell all of them. St. Jerome
remembers many excuses. In the Old Testament, too, precautions are taken
with the same care, so that they do not become

1\) In the editions of the first Redaction, in the Weimar and Erlangen:
essend instead of: erant; likewise soon after: st neseio, an rnelior
tnerit instead of: et \"erde rnelior esset.

Levites, who had nothing but what they received from the people.

In addition, a teacher of the word necessarily causes offense and hatred
among many, so that this commandment of Paul is most necessary both for
the stingy and for those who hate him, but also for the sake of the
careless. For there are also such people who do not contribute for the
sake of it, because they think that this is done abundantly by others.
But Paul preempts these miserable evasions perfectly, and says that they
should not be mistaken, that God will not be mocked, even if they can
deceive and deceive a man.

**For whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.**

He applies 2) a general sentence to this particular matter; he also uses
the same saying in 2 Cor. 9, 6 as one he is familiar with, because it is
a kind of proverb and contains a beautiful image in itself. Those sow
the work of covetousness who refuse to give the teacher the goods,
therefore they will also reap the reward of covetousness; so it happens
in all other good and evil works. For with this general sentence he
concludes all moral commandments and also the epistle itself.

**V. 8 He who sows to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption. But
he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life
everlasting.**

\(43\) Here again, \"flesh\" must be understood not only as unchastity,
but according to the apostolic way of speaking, as the text itself
enforces, for everything that is not of the spirit, that is, for the
whole man. For the wrong understanding of the words gave the heretic
Tatianus cause to condemn from this passage of the apostle the union
(copulam) of man and woman. St. Jerome refutes him in a learned manner.
So the flesh and the spirit are represented by the apostle in this
picture as two fields; the two seeds are two works, one of which is the

2\) In the editions of the first redaction and in the Erlanger: adoxtut
instead of: uduptut.

1648 Lri. 6ai. Ill, 468-\^71. shorter interpretation of Galatians 6,
8-11. W. IX, 361-364. 1649

Love, which he has sufficiently described above \[Cap. 5, 22.\] in the
nine fruits, the other belongs to the flesh, which we have seen in the
works of the flesh \[Cap. 5, 19-21.\]; two harvests: corruption and
eternal life. \[Erasmus understands by \"corruption\" the fruit
subjected to corruption and perishing, which is as much as no fruit
after it is corrupted\].

44 \"To [his]{.underline} flesh\" seems to be added by the apostle on
purpose, and not: to his spirit, in order to prevent the thought, as if
he speaks of the insemination of a woman by the man, although it is true
that this is also a fruit subject to corruption, because it is a mortal
man, who is born of the seed of the man; but therefore it does not
follow that the sexual union is evil. But what is sown and harvested at
all on the whole earth that is not subject to corruption? Therefore, in
the apostle\'s image, \"sowing\" must be understood as nothing other
than doing works, as is clear from the following.

**V. 9 But let us do good and not grow weary, for in his time we will
also reap without ceasing.**

45 He himself explains his image. He does not say, \"Let us sow to the
Spirit,\" but, \"Let us do good,\" and yet he adds, \"In his time we
shall reap,\" retaining the second part of his figurative speech. He had
to take such great care that the heretics would not be given an
opportunity to blaspheme marriage.

Therefore, \"sowing to the Spirit\" is doing good works, \"sowing to the
flesh\" is doing evil works. He then continues this teaching and exhorts
us to persevere with the comfort of future retribution. For it is not he
who starts but he who perseveres who will be saved. It is easy to begin
a work, but it is difficult and subject to many obstacles, which resist
that one also completes it and perseveres. Such is the case (says
Jerome) that while sinners increase daily in evil works, we slacken in a
good work.

**V. 10: Now that we have time, let us do good to everyone, but most of
all to our fellow believers.**

\(47\) Then he stretches out the teaching in breadth, which is no less
difficult than the length. For we are to \"do good to everyone,\" to
Gentiles, Jews, the grateful, the ungrateful, friends, enemies, near
ones and strangers, in short, as it is said of love, so that no person
is regarded. Behold, how great is the breadth of Christian benevolence.
For it must be complete (rotunda), just as Christ also says Matt. 5:46:
\"For if you love those who love you, what reward will you have? Do not
the tax collectors do the same?\" However, \"comrades in faith\" he
gives a preference, because we are connected to them with a closer bond,
since they are from the same house and church, from the same house
fellowship of Christ, who have One Faith. One baptism, One hope, One
Lord, and in all things the same \[Eph. 4:4, 5\].

But St. Jerome means that the very teachers are understood, for whose
sake he had begun this teaching, in order to bring the teaching to a
conclusion in them, as if he wanted to be understood that \"comrades of
faith\" are the servants of Christ, who teach the faith in his house. He
also points out that the apostle says: \"Now that we have time,\" that
is, the present life is the time of sowing, as Christ also says \[John
9:4\]: \"Work while it is day; the night cometh, when no man can work,\"
which seems to contradict purgatory. For although the teachers say that
in it there is only a satisfaction or, in a new-found word, a
satisfaction suffering (satispassionem), I do not see how satisfaction
or satisfaction suffering should not be a good work. Therefore, I
understand that the apostle speaks of the works of this life, and that
his word does not speak of purgatory, as I have said elsewhere.

**V. i11. Behold, with how many words (**qualibus literis**) have I
written unto you with mine own hand.**

49 St. Jerome understands the words qualibus literis of large letters
(because the

1650 Lri. 0\^1. ill, 471-473. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 364-366. 1651

Greek word πηλίχοις indicates in such a way more to the size or the
quantity than to the nature), in that he means that another had written
the letter up to this place after the dictamen of Paul with smaller
letters, and Paul then completed it from this point to the end with
larger letters, so that they would clearly recognize his handwriting and
understand how great care he took for them, but at the same time also to
remove the suspicion as if it were a false letter brought by false
teachers in his name. For also in other letters he used to sign \[1 Cor.
16, 21. Col. 4, 18. 2 Thess. 3, 17.\]: \"I, Paul, greet you with my
hand.\" But I follow those 1) who hold that the whole letter was written
by the hand of Paul. By this he shows his great zeal, as if he wanted to
say: I never use to write with my own hand, but for the sake of your
salvation, - see how great a letter I have written with my own hand. I
have indeed written other, greater letters, but by a foreign hand \[Rom.
16, 22.\], so that you also may take the matter with such great
seriousness as I have shown in my letter. O an excellent apostolic man,
who has such great concern for souls!

**V. 12: Those who want to make themselves pleasing according to the
flesh force you to circumcise them, only so that they will not be
persecuted with the cross of Christ.**

50 He briefly repeats what he has written. For he said in the beginning
(Cap. 1, 10.\^ said, \"If I were still pleasing men, I would not be
Christ\'s servant. Or do I intend to be pleasing to men?\" For the Jews
greatly disliked this preaching of Christian liberty, since they
presumed to be justified by circumcision, as if it were necessary. To
avert their anger and appease them, they taught what they liked, namely,
that circumcision was necessary.

51 It is certain, then, that these false apostles did not belong to the
Jews, but to the Christians, because they shied away from the cross.

1\) In the first redaction, in the Weimar and in the Erlangen: Erasmum
instead of: eos.

for the sake of which they had confessed to suffer persecution, loving
their life and peace more than Christ. \"According to the flesh\" is set
in contrast to the spirit, and the word \"make themselves agreeable\"
(placere) is without any relation (absolute), as above, so that the
sense is: They want to make themselves agreeable according to the flesh,
that is, they want to be agreeable people in a carnal way, not in a
spiritual way; for as people agreeable in the flesh they please men, as
people agreeable in the spirit or spiritual way they please God. And
notice, \"They compel you to be circumcised.\" Circumcision in itself
did no harm, but that they made a compulsion and a necessity of it, as
if faith were insufficient for righteousness, was damnable. Thus he says
above \[Cap. 2, 14.\], \"Why do you compel the Gentiles to live
Jewishly?\"

52\. one would like to ask if the apostle is slandering and
sacrilegiously judging the false apostles, since he says that they
feared to be persecuted with the cross of Christ, and sought their honor
from the flesh of the Galatians (as he says below \[v. 13.\]). For who
told him that they were so fearful and so honor-seeking? For to suppose
sins in absentees, especially if they do not admit them, cannot be
without sin; perhaps they would have denied the same, and could not have
been remitted.

But the apostle, who is instructed in the spirit, knows that the man who
does not preach Christ rightly, or does not have the right mind, cannot
be without fear of the cross and without vain glory. It follows with
necessity that he who does not have Christ\'s spirit loves his life more
than Christ, then that he is puffed up by his knowledge follows just as
necessarily; so he must come to grief in adversities; in good days
(prosperis) he must exalt himself; in neither of these can he behave as
is right and just.

\(54\) Therefore, we can safely pass the general judgment on any man
when we see that he does not know Christ, that he is fearful in
adversity and puffed up (gloriosus) in happiness; quite downcast and
haughty at the wrong time. On the other hand, a true Christian raises
his head in opposition.

1652 Lri. Kai. Ill, 473-476. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 6, 12-14. W. IX, 366-369. 1653

He is confident in God, but is timid when things go well for him,
because he fears God. He is not despondent when he suffers, he does not
exalt himself when he is honored; everywhere he behaves as is right and
just.

**V. 13. For even they themselves who are circumcised do not keep the
law, but they want you to be circumcised, that they may boast of your
flesh.**

\(55\) He said the same thing above, Cap. 5:3, that the one who is
circumcised is still guilty of doing the whole law, because even though
they circumcise the flesh by heart, they do not fulfill this law of
circumcision or any other law, because they do everything, not in
gladness of spirit, but out of fear of the threats of the law.

\(56\) It has often been said that if one does not fulfill the law out
of a willing heart, it is just as much as if one did not fulfill it, but
pretended to do the works of the law. For what is not done willingly is
not done in the sight of God and in truth, but only appears to men as if
it were done.

\(57\) Again he confidently declares that all those are transgressors of
the law who allow themselves to be circumcised and do every possible law
out of their strength, again refuting our theologians who hold that
works done without the grace of the Spirit are morally good works and
fulfill the law according to the essence of the deed (quoad substantiam
facti), but not that they are sins, nor that they are done against the
law. But the judgment stands firm that the willingness and joyfulness of
the spirit, which can fulfill the law, cannot be obtained otherwise than
by faith in Christ; all others are haters of the law and therefore
guilty of transgression.

\(58\) \"That they may glory in your flesh,\" that is, that they may
glory in you carnally, that they have been your teachers, that they have
taught you good things, that they are wise and spiritual men. For it is
impossible that a teacher should not be glorious in any kind of
profession, unless he is well grounded in Christ, and

knows this from the heart \[Matth. 10, 20.\]: \"It is not you who are
speaking\", and \[Matth. 23, 8.\]: \"One is your master, Christ.\" So
tenacious is the desire for glory and honor, especially in spiritual
things and gifts, as there are sciences and virtues.

**V. 14. But let it be far from me to boast, but only of the cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, by which the world is crucified to me, and I to
the world.**

\(59\) The meaning is: Let them seek glory in their wisdom, virtue,
righteousness, works, doctrine, law, or also in you and all men: I boast
that I am foolish, a sinner, weak, that I suffer, and am found without
law, without works, without the righteousness that comes from the law,
finally without anything except Christ. I want it, and rejoice in it,
that before the world I am unwise, wicked, and guilty of all crimes, as
he says 2 Cor. 12:9: \"I will most gladly boast of my weakness, that the
power of Christ may dwell with me.\" For the cross of Christ has
condemned all that the world approves, even wisdom and righteousness, as
1 Cor. 1:19. says, \"I will bring to nothing the wisdom of the wise, and
the understanding of the prudent I will reject,\" and Christ says Matt.
5:11. says, \"Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall speak all manner of evil against you, for my sake. \"2c.

\(60\) Behold, this means not only to be crucified with Christ and to
share in His cross and suffering, but also to boast about it and to walk
happily with the apostles, because we are considered worthy to suffer
shame for His name \[Acts 5:41\]. But those who through the name of
Jesus seek and obtain honor, riches, pleasure, and then flee contempt,
poverty, and suffering, do they boast of the cross of Christ? Rather,
they boast of the world, but nevertheless, they reject the name of
Christ and make a mockery of it.

61: \"To be crucified to the world\" is therefore (as he said above Cap.
2, 19. 20.) that he now no longer lives himself, but Christ lives in
him, that he has crucified the flesh with its sins and subjected it to
the Spirit, who has not set his mind on what is in the world.

1654 Lri. Kai. Ill, 476-478. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. . W. IX, 369-372. 1655

He boasts that he does not have any of these things and is not moved by
them, because the certain assurance of salvation is based on Christ
alone. That the world is crucified to him means that not Christ but the
world lives in man, that they have the flesh which flourishes in vices
and reigns in sins, that they, with the apostle, do not seek the things
that are above, but boast that they have superfluous enough in this
world, attain riches and set their hope on men. Therefore neither Paul
does what pleases the world, nor is he so minded, nor does the world do
what pleases Paul, nor is it so minded: both are dead to each other,
crucified, despised and abhorred.

**V. 15. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor foreskin counts
for anything, but a new creature.**

62 This has been sufficiently interpreted in chapter 5, namely, that
both are permitted, but neither is necessary for salvation, and
therefore it does not matter, neither foreskin nor circumcision, no more
than wealth or poverty.

A new creature\" is \"a new man, created according to God in
righteousness and holiness\" (Eph. 4:24), as it is said in the 51st
Psalm, v. 12: \"Create in me, God, a clean heart,\" and note that
righteousness belongs to the spirit, but righteous holiness to the
purity of the flesh, so that he who is righteous in the spirit through
faith also lives purely in the flesh through chastity. For \"righteous\"
righteousness and holiness he says in contrast to the apparent and
pretended, which comes from the law, and does not make a new man, and
any man of this kind does not live according to God and is not formed
according to Him, but according to man. Thus it is said in Jac. 1, 18:
\"He begat us according to His will, by the word of truth, that we
should be the firstfruits of His creatures.\"

**V.16. And as many as walk according to this rule, upon them be peace
and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.**

64\. \"Going in\" (secuti fuerint \[\<rro\^σουσω\]) is the same verbum
as above \[Cap. 5, 25.\] \"walking\" (ambulemus \[στ \"χώ/ζε\>\]).

\"Follow this rule\" (secuti fuerint), that is, go along according to
this rule. According to what rule? Namely, that they may be a new
creature in Christ, shining in righteousness and holiness (which comes
from faith), not deceiving themselves and others with feigned
righteousness and holiness (which comes from the law), on whom will come
wrath and tribulation, but on whom will rest peace and mercy.

He adds: \"About the Israel of God\", distinguishing it from the
\"Israel according to the flesh\", as he calls in the first letter to
the Corinthians \[Cap. 10, 18.\] those who belong to the physical Israel
(Israel carnis), 1) not to the Israel of God. Therefore peace is over
Gentiles and Jews, if they only walk according to the rule of faith and
the spirit.

**V. 17. Henceforth no man troubleth me any more: for I bear the marks
of the Lord JEsu in my body.**

According to the Greek, it means: \"Henceforth, let no one trouble me
further,\" 2) which St. Jerome understands in a twofold way; first, that
Paul was worried that they would trouble him again by having him set the
Galatians straight anew (reformandis); second, that he wanted to avoid
the vehemence of those who wanted to contradict, as if he wanted to say:
I have said what is right and true. But if anyone who is not satisfied
with the truth seeks only what he may answer, and is more bent on
arguing than on being taught, let him know that he is worthy of no
answer, as he also writes to the Corinthians \[1 Cor. 11:16.\], \"But if
there be any among you who have air to quarrel with, let him know that
we have no such manner, neither have the mean ones of God.\" This mind
pleases me, because also St. Augu-.

1\) The Erlangen edition has the words: qui suyt Israel earnis as a
citation from I Cor. 10, 18. as we believe, incorrectly; because the
words there read in the Vulgate: Videte Israel seeundum carnem.

2\) Instead (labores exliideat) has the

Vulgate: molestus sit.

[1656 Ari- ttru. Ill, 478-480. shorter interpretation of the Epistle to
the Galatians 6, 17. 18. W. IX, 372-374. 1657]{.underline}

stinus teaches that one should let the quarrelsome go, who also
announces in his books de civitate Dei that he does not want to answer
the completely useless gossip anymore.

67 The apostle also does not want to have anything to do with the
\"strifeful\", so that he does not struggle with them in vain, because
in truth they do not produce fruit, but only cause trouble. But let this
mind also not be unsuitable: Let no one bring the law to my mind again,
whereby foolish toil in works is caused, and yet nothing but sins, as it
is said in Ps. 10, 7: \"His tongue causes toil and labor.\" These
\[people burdened with the law\] 1) Christ calls to Himself, since He
says (Matth. 11, 28.): \"Come unto Me all ye that labor\" (laboratis).
The hard labors of the children of Israel in Egypt modeled this toil
(labores). \[But I pass over this.\]

68 \"The marks\" (stigmata), which in Latin means an imprinted mark,
could certainly be taken here for the various sufferings of Paul, but he
takes it, because he likes to use such images and figurative expressions
(metaphoris), which are taken from warfare, in general for the insignia
of the Christian life, namely the crucifixion and subjugation of the
flesh, then also the fruits of the spirit. For just as servants wear the
badges of honor and emblems (arma) and colors of their masters, so Paul
and every Christian wears the cross of his lusts and desires on his
body, admittedly not in the way that the badges of honor of Christ,
collected on a shield, are now painted on the walls, or on pictures and
in books, but on the body, not of another, but on my own body. For what
good would it do if you were to wear not only the insignia in gold and
emerald, but also the nails themselves, even the wounds and blood of
Christ himself, and never express the living image in your body?

69\. furthermore, the marks (stigmata) of moses and the bishops and the
emperors are the be-

1\) Added by us.

The emperor, with all his nobles, hardly has so many kinds of coats of
arms (insignium).

**V. 18. May the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit,
dear brothers! Amen.**

70 For this is the way of the apostles to close their epistles, where
men say, Farewell. \"The grace of our Lord\", he says; not: The wrath of
the law, not: The bondage of the law, which was given through the
servant Moses, but the grace and truth, which became through JEsum
Christum \[Joh. 1, 17.\]. 2)

**\[Afterword by Luther.\]**

71 \[The following for resolution. I am sure that those who hate my
disposition like death will also highly detest what has gone out of my
mouth, because I have treated everything too freely, and this epistle
quite differently than according to their sense; and where I have
complained about the burdens and aversions of the papal laws, they will
imagine that I am a rebel against the church; where I have preferred the
Gospel to the decrees, they will gossip that I have condemned the
decrees; where I have subjected the power and dignity of the pope to the
love and need of the brother, they will cry out that I am a blasphemer
and multiple heretic. I ask them for the sake of Jesus Christ, who is
our common Lord, that they, if they cannot refrain from it, call me by
the name of a proud, sacrilegious, arrogant, dishonorable, angry,
rebellious, bloodthirsty, apostate, bloodthirsty, apostate, and with any
other name that has pleased them so far, they may still do so, and if I
do not forgive them with all my heart, then may the Lord Jesus not
acknowledge me for eternity. For if the purity of the doctrine I have
presented could be out of danger, I would gladly and willingly accept
the ignominy of the doctrine.

2\) What follows to the end is found only in the first redaction.

1658 Quay. Ill, 480-183. interpretations on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 374-377. 1659\'

bear the full name of a heretic. Yes, curse the name of Martin, curse
the honor of Martin, so that the name of our Father alone may be
sanctified, who is in heaven, amen).

For I fear, as an exceedingly haughty despiser, that I, puffed up by
these exceedingly evil names, would rejoice more over my gain than
grieve over their evil. However, they may do me, and even themselves, a
favor by setting aside the exceedingly hateful larva of Martin a little
and looking at the apostle Paul freely and alone, and then comparing him
with the appearance of the church, which is exceedingly pitiful today,
because I do not consider them to be so incomprehensible that they
should not finally notice what the great amount of laws has done today.
For how many souls are strangled and lost every day because of this One
Man Statute, which forbids all priests to marry without any distinction?
It is appalling to consider both the aggravations and the dangers of
this One Law. Many others are equal to it, which only serve to sin,
death and hell, not to mention the damage that the sincere godliness
suffers, which is gradually extinguished under the tyranny of these
laws).

\(73\) If you consider this a thing worthy of shedding so many tears,
that because of the will of one emperor the blood of so many thousands
should be shed, what do you think it is (open your eyes), that because
of the will of one man or of the one Roman church so many thousands of
souls should be eternally lost? Yes, if we consider the meaning (vim) of
love, it is easy to see that this brazen procedure (fiduciam) in giving
new laws is a force not for edification, but for the destruction of the
whole church. The fewer laws a community is governed with, the happier
it is. But our church system, to which only the one law of love was
given, so that it should be the most blissful, - out of how great an
anger of the almighty God it must now, instead of this one, which is now
extinct, bear whole clouds, forests and seas of laws, so that you can
hardly be able to learn even their titles!

Yes, as if this were too little, even now they strive to oppose sin by
no other means than by making much of the new laws, heaping sin upon
sin, and, as the prophet (Hab. 2:6.) says, only heaping much mud upon
themselves\].

Others may think differently, but I consider these human laws to be the
most harmful of all the Turks, and no other people had to be struck with
the plague of God\'s unbearable wrath than the very people who are
God\'s own property, since their great ingratitude before other peoples
of the earth also deserved such a punishment before all peoples of the
earth, which is by far the most terrifying. For there is also no nation
on the whole earth whose misery in this plague could be compared with
us. O GOD, how long will you close your mercy to wrath? (Ps. 77, 10.)
But I will conclude with the sighing and weeping Isaiah (Is. 63, 14. ff.
64, 1. 2. 5-12.): \"O Lord, you have led your people, that you might
make for yourself a glorious name. Look therefore from heaven, and
behold from thy holy glorious habitation. Where then is thy zeal, thy
power? Thy great tender mercies are hard upon me. For thou art our
father. For Abraham knoweth not of us, and Israel knoweth us not. But
thou, O Lord, art our Father and our Redeemer: from of old is thy name.
Why hast thou caused us, O LORD, to err from thy ways, and hardened our
hearts, that we fear not thee? Return, for thy servants\' sake, for the
tribes of thine inheritance. They almost possess thy holy people; thine
adversaries tread down thy sanctuary. We are like before, when thou
didst not reign over us, and we were not called by thy name. Oh that
thou wouldest rend the heavens, and bring down the mountains to melt
before thee, as hot waters boiled with fierce fire; that thy name might
be known among thine enemies, and that the heathen might tremble before
thee. Behold, thou wast angry with us, because we sinned, and remained
long within: but we were saved. But now we are all like the unclean, and
all our righteousness is like an insolent garment. We are all withered
like the leaves; and our

1660 Lri. tisl. Ill, 483. Luther\'s afterword to the Epistle to the
Galatians. W. IX, 377-37S. 1661

Sins lead us there like a wind. No one calls on your name, or sets out
to keep you. For thou hidest thy face from us, and letest us languish in
our sins. But now, O Lord, thou art our Father, we are clay; thou art
our potter, and we are all the work of thy hands. O Lord, be not angry
with us, and remember not our sins for ever. Behold that we are all thy
people. The cities of thy sanctuary are become desolate; Zion is become
desolate; Jerusalem lieth in ruins. The house of

our holiness and glory, wherein our fathers praised thee, is burned with
fire; and all that we had of beauty is put to shame. O Lord, wilt thou
be so hard unto such, and hold our peace, and smite us down so much?\"
This is what Isaiah says in the 63rd and 64th chapters. In this prayer
he has painted the appearance of the church today in such a way that it
cannot be painted more skillfully. And would that God would instill this
fervent prayer into our hearts, so that we might quench His wrath as
soon as possible\].

**End.**

**\
**

**\
Appendix.**

**D. Martin Luther\'s marginal glosses on the Bible Old and New
Testament. \*)**

According to the last edition ordered by Luther himself in 1545.

**The first book of Moses.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 2 Spirit. Wind did not exist at that time, therefore it must mean the
Holy Spirit.

V. 4.^1^ ) good. That is: useful, to be and delicious.

V. 14. Times. Spring, summer, autumn, winter.

V. 28. Servant. Whatever you build and work on the land shall be your
own, and the earth shall serve, sustain and give you in it. 2)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 11. Pison is the great water in Jndia, which is called Ganges, for
Hevila is Jndia land.

V. 13. Gihon is the water in Egypt called the Nile.

V. 14: Hid ekel is the water in Assyria called the Tigris. But Phrath is
the nearest water in Syria, which is called Euphrates.

1\) \"V. 4.\" is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Missing 1524.

V. 20. to be around him. That is: no animal took on man to be him, which
would multiply and nourish him 2c.

V. 25. were not ashamed, i. e. were not allowed to be ashamed.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 8. day was cool. This was about evening, when the heat had passed.
Means that after a sin has been committed, the conscience suffers
anguish until God\'s gracious voice comes and cools and refreshes the
heart again; even though the stupid nature is terrified and shies away
from the gospel, because it teaches the cross and dying.

Adam. Adam means man in Hebrew; therefore one may say man where Adam
stands, and again.

V. 15. The same. This is the first gospel and promise of Christ, which
came to pass on earth, that he should overcome sin, death and hell, and
save us from the power of the serpent. Adam believed this with all his
descendants, because he became a Christian and was saved from his fall.

\*) In the various editions of the Bible, the marginal glosses have
undergone many changes. From 1522, when the first edition of the New
Testament was published, until the last edition of the entire Holy
Scripture, which Luther himself edited in 1545, he made changes to the
marginal notes. After Luther\'s death, however, the number of changes
increased. As early as 1546, Georg Rörer added many new marginal glosses
to an edition of the Bible, for which he could claim that he had heard
them from Luther\'s mouth on the occasion of the translation of the
Bible and had distinguished them. Mathesius (Luthers Leben, St. Louis
Edition, p. 241) reports about this: \"Wonderful and instructive
speeches are said to have fallen during this work on the translation of
the Bible, of which ül. Georg Rörer, and which are subsequently printed
as small glosses and interpretations in the margin of the text.\" Later,
some marginal glosses were omitted because it was thought that they did
not come from Luther; others were changed because it was thought that
they were not in accordance with the original language or otherwise not
correct in some other respect. At the beginning of the eighteenth
century, there were even disputes about this.

1666 **Erl. 64, 2 f. Addendum. W. XXI, 389\*-4V1\*.** 1667

prick. Plague, crucify and torture. For so it goes; Christ bruises the
devil\'s head, that is, his kingdom of death, sin and hell, so the devil
stabs him in the heel, that is, he kills and tortures him and his own
bodily.

V. 20. Heva. Hai means life, hence Heva or Hava, life or living.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. Praise God, I have the Lord, the man, the seed, who will crush the
head of Satan or the serpent. He will do it.

1541.^1^ ) gets. Cain means that one gets or overcomes. But Heva thought
that he should be the seed, since the Lord had said that he would crush
the serpent\'s head.

V. 7. door. In Hebrew, door means to stand open or to be opened, Marc.
7, 34: \"Hephatha, open yourself\" 2c., and is the opinion: Sin lies and
rests, as an ox lies and rests; but it lies in the door, that is, it
will stand open or be revealed, whether the sinner goes there safely for
a while, as if sin were asleep or dead.

1524\. to the revelation. 2) That is, even though sin lies silent at
this time and remains unpunished, it does not last longer than until
God\'s judgment, when everything must be revealed and recompensed;
therefore no hypocrisy nor salvation of sin helps.

1\) This gloss is already found in 1524 for the word: \"überkommen\".

2\) The text in the 1524 edition reads, \"Thus sin will lie for
revelation.\"

V. 8: He talked with Habel. That is, because of his shame he had to
present himself outwardly and talk to his brother because he was
punished, even though he intended to kill him in his heart. So Cain is
the father of all hypocrites and false saints.

V. 26 began. Not that God\'s name had not been preached before, but
after Cain\'s wickedness had caused the service to fall, it was rebuilt,
and some altar was built, where they gathered to hear God\'s word and to
pray.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 24. Divine life. That is, he will have diligently handled God\'s word
before others and will have been a prophet who preached the fear of God
to the people everywhere and proclaimed the punishment (which the flood
of sin did afterwards), and suffered and did much about it.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 2. children of God. These were the children of the holy fathers, who
were raised in the fear of God, and then became worse than the others,
under the name of God, just as the worst tyrants and the most perverse
have always been the descendants of the saints.

V. 3. My spirit. This means that what I preach, say and punish them by
my Spirit is in vain; they have become too carnal, despising and
blaspheming my Spirit\'s word. Therefore let him cease, and I will send
them away, and quarrel with them no more, neither will I punish them.

3\) 1524: instead of \"the saints\' offspring\", \"the clergy\".

The marginal glosses are found in a Bible published by Reineccins in
Leipzig in 1708. In the complete editions of Luther\'s writings, the
marginal glosses are found only in Walch, Vol. XXI, 396\* and in the
Erlanger, B. 64, p. 1. Walch followed the edition that Nicolaus Hase had
published in Leipzig in 1733, in which the glosses are printed with the
relevant verses, and those originating from Luther are marked with an
L., but the others are without a special designation. Walch also noted
the variants of the 1524 and 1535 editions. We have followed the
Erlanger Ausgabe, which reproduces the marginal glosses according to the
last edition ordered by Luther in 1545. The Erlangen edition has, as it
states in the preface to the 64th volume, \"at the same time also placed
the deviations of the New Testament of 1522 and the Old Testament of
1523 (Nuremberg edition 1524) next to it\". The Nuremberg edition of
1524 (Erlanger Ausg., Vol. 63, p. 2, No. 4) does not yet contain the
translation of the prophets and the apocryphal books. Only in 1532 the
last part of the books of the Old Testament appeared. Therefore, the
note, which is very often repeated in the marginal glosses of the
preceding books: \"Missing 1524\", is no longer added to the prophet
Isaiah (vol. 64, p. 118) and the following Old Testament books. We have
not indicated some quite insignificant variants of the 1524 edition, but
have improved many errors (some of them very gross) of the Erlangen
edition. A large number of these errors have been transferred from
Walch\'s old edition to the Erlangen edition. Compare the marginal
glosses to Gen. 8, 7. 25, 30. 45, 20. 26. 2 Gen. 32, 25. and others. In
many cases, we have added the text words to which the glosses refer, and
we have also translated the Latin words.

1668 srl. 64, 4-6. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 1st book of Moses. W.
m. 401\^-405\*. 1669

**Chapter 8.**

1524 V. 7. and came again. That is: He made it so long with his coming
again, until everything was dry 1); that is so much said: He shall come
again yet.

V. 11. Oil leaf. The leaf means the gospel that the Holy Spirit has
caused to be preached to Christendom. For oil means mercy and peace, of
which the gospel teaches.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 6. by men. Here the secular sword is used to kill the murderers.

1524\. v. 23. father\'s shame. Many interpret this story to mean that
prelates should not be punished for their vices, which is what Christ
2c. did to all the apostles. But interpret it rightly, that Noah is
Christ and all believers; the drunkenness is love and faith in the Holy
Spirit; the nakedness is the cross and suffering before the world; Ham
are the false works saints and glorifiers, who mock Christ and his own,
and take pleasure in their suffering; Shem and Japheth are the pious
Christians who praise and honor such suffering.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 25. peleg. In German, a certification.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 9. Babel. In German, a mingling or confusion.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 18. Carried bread. Not that he offered it, but that he fed and
honored the guests. By this is meant Christ, who feeds the world with
the gospel.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 11. Birds. The birds and the smoking furnace and the fiery fire mean
the Egyptians who were to persecute Abram\'s children. But Abram scares
them away, that is, God delivers them for the sake of the promise
promised to Abram. But that after the sun

1\) Erlanger: \"drunk\".

The word \"perishing\" means that God wanted to leave His seed for a
time, that they would be persecuted, as the Lord Himself indicates here.
In the same way it happens to all believers that they are abandoned and
yet are redeemed.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 2. Build. That is, to have children. Ps. 127. Ex. 2.^2^ )

V. 11. Ishmael. Ishmael means: God hears.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 5 Abram is called high father. Abraham is called the heap father,
although the heap is only indicated by one letter in his name, not
without cause.

V. 7. descendants. Ledorotham, that is, as long as their thing shall
last. For by this Moses signifies that their thing shall at last cease,
and another shall come.

**Chapter 18.**

V. 2. He falls down before one, and also speaks as with one, and yet
with three. There the trinity in God is indicated.

V. 10. as I live. God speaks as a human being. Gen. 3, 9: \"Adam, where
are you?\" item Gen. 11, 7: \"I will go down and see\"; Gen. 18, 26: \"I
will see if it is so.\" For this word, \"if I live,\" place it where you
will, yet it is not as if he would say of the fruit or parents, You
shall have a son if he lives, or if you live. Do you think he does not
know whether the son or the parents will live? Yes, if they would not
surely live, what would be the promise?

> **The 19th chapter.**

V. 22. Zoar means small.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 10. Because you are a prophet, you may have seen something that I
have earned with my sins.

V. 13. Wander. God let me go astray, as if they were many and yet One
God.

2\) Missing 1524.

1670 **Erl. 04, 6-8. app. W. XXI, E-409\*.** 1671

V. 16. Their punishment. The saints are punished cleanly and with
profit, as here Sarah is punished because she had called Abraham
brother, and gets great benefit. 1)

**Chapter 21.**

V. 17: Hagar. Note here Hagar, as she is of the law and faithless works,
Gal. 4, and yet God rewards her temporally and makes her great on earth.

V. 31 Bersaba is the German word for Schwörbrunn or Eidbrunn; it may
also be called Siebenbrunn.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 2. Moriah. Moriah means fear of God, reverentia Dei, cultus Deii,
because the ancient fathers, Adam, Noah, Shem, honored, feared and
served God on the same mountain. We Germans perhaps called it the Holy
Mountain, or serving God with praise, prayer and thanksgiving.

1524\. Moria is called a presentation, and is the mountain where Solomon
afterwards built the temple in Jerusalem, and is called the mountain of
the presentation, that there the ram was presented to Abraham, and after
that the right ram was presented to Christ and was to be revealed 2) by
God the Lord.

V. 8. God sees and knows where the sheep is, let him take care of it, he
is better off than we are.

V. 14. see. Ebraei dicunt; Dominus videbitur, sed nos, Hieronymum
secuti, Rab- binos grammaticos cum suis punctis et Ka- mez hoc loco
negligimus, et sine punctis dicimus: \"The Lord sees\", that is: God
takes care of everything and watches. Etiamsi sensus ille: Dominus
videbitur, sit pius valde, quod Deus apparet, ubi verbum ejus docetur,
quod Rab- bini grammatici non intelligunt. sThe Hebrews say: the LORD
will be seen, but we, who have followed Jerome, do not care here for the
rabbis, who pay attention only to grammar, with its points and camez,
and we say without points: \"The Lord sees\", that is, God takes care of
everything and watches. Although that mind: \"The Lord will be seen\",
is very godly,

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Erlanger: apparently.

because GOD appears where his word is taught, yet the rabbis do not
understand this, dealing only with grammar).

V. 18. Here Abraham is not justified by his faith for himself, but
deserves such glory of his seed, because he is justified before, ut
supra.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 2. Hebron. Hebron is KiriathArba (says Moses), which is the four
city; for the high capitals of old were all Arba, that is, divided into
four parts, Rome, Jerusalem, and Babylon also, Gen. 10.

V. 16: Seckel. Seckel is a weight on the coin, a place of a guilder,
because in former times money was weighed in the same way as gold is
weighed now.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 22. Clasp. This golden barrette has become a half circle on the
forehead up to both ears, therefore it is now called an earring, now a
forehead barrette, and it appears that both man and woman have worn it
for adornment, ut infra cap. 35. Proverbs 11, 22.: s \"A beautiful woman
without breeding is like a sow with a golden hairband.\") Circulus
aureus in naribus suis. There we Germans say: The sow crowned. Inde
diadema regum et lamina summi sacerdotis in fronte etc. \[Hence comes
the diadem of the kings and the clasps of the high priest on the
forehead 2c.).

V. 49. Tell me. He first bargains with his mother and brothers for the
bride, from which it can be seen that a secret betrothal is not right
without the knowledge of the parents.

V. 53. seasoning. Delicious fruit.

V. 57. Prostitute. The bride should be freely given in marriage by her
parents, and should also be asked for her will.

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 18. He fell. There are many interpretations here. Mine is this: that
Ishmael was a glorious man, that all his brothers and friends came to
his end, and that he died honestly and honorably before them. 3)

V. 30. Edom means reddish. 4)

3\) Missing 1524.

4\) Erlanger: \"honest\".

1672 Erl. 64, 8-10. L.\'s marginal glosses on Genesis 1. W. XXI,
4V9\*-414\*. 1673

**Chapter 26.**

V. 20. Esek means wrong, 1) when one does violence and injustice to
someone.

Sitna means resistance, therefore the devil is called Satan, an
adversary.

V. 22. Rehoboth means space or width, which is not narrow.

V. 33. 2) Seba means an oath or vow or the fullness. 3) But Ber means a
fountain.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 36. Underfoot. Mob means one who treads under foot. Hence Jacob or
jacob, a tramp, or one who treads under foot; and means all believers
who by the gospel tread under the world, the flesh, and the devil with
sin and death, through Christ 2c.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 14. Your seed. Here the third patriarch is promised Christ, the
Savior of all the earth; and to preach the future gospel of Christ in
all lands, prefigured by the angels on the ladder.

V. 17. Holy. Holy is called here metuendus, terribilis, nota, since one
should fear and honor God, as he wants to be feared and honored there.
Therefore also the same mountain Morija, timor, reverentia, cultus Dei
is called sub cap. 22 For the fear of God is the highest worship, and is
indicated here: Where God\'s word is, as Jacob hears here, there is
God\'s house. There heaven is open with all graces 2c.

V. 21. To be my God. Not that he was not his God before, but he vows to
establish a service of preaching and prayer. Then he will give tithes to
preachers, as Abraham gave tithes to Melchizedek.

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 32. Reuben is called a show child.

V. 33. Simeon is called a hearer.

1\) In the 1524 editions: \"reward\" instead of: \"injustice. Cf. Jena
edition (1566), vol. IV, p. 142k. The former reading seems to be the
more correct; cf. Erl. Ausg., vol. 34, p. 92: \"Esek, that is,
Hohnbrunn.\"

2\) 1524: Saba.

3\) \"or the fullness\" is missing in 1524.

V. 34. Levi is called \"to\".

V. 35. Judah is called a confessor or thanksgiver.

**The 30. Chapter.**

V. 6. Dan means judgment. 4)

Naphtali means confused, turned back, reversed, if one does the
antitype, Psalm 18 \[v. 27.\], \"With the perverse thou dost consort.\"

V. 11. Gad means ready for battle.

V. 13, Asser means blessed.

V. 14. Dudaim. Ask thyself what dudaim are; they are said to be lilies,
they are said to be berries, and no one knows what they are. They are
called some Jewish cherries, which are ripe in the wheat harvest 2c. 5)

V. 18. Isa schar means reward.

V. 20. Sebulon means attendance.

V. 21. Dina means a thing or court.

V. 24. Joseph means increase.

V. 30. my foot. That is: I had to walk and run through thick and thin,
so that you would become so rich; my foot had to do it. Inde pedes
evangelisantium pacem et cursus verbi seu ministerii.

V. 32 Goats. You must not be mistaken here that Moses calls the small
cattle now goats, now lambs, now rams, as is the way of this language,
because he wants to say that Jacob kept all the white cattle and gave
all the colored and black cattle to Laban. Now whatever colorful cattle
came from the plain cattle was to be his reward. Laban was glad of this,
and had nature in his favor, that not much colored cattle would
naturally come from the single-colored ones. But Jacob helped nature
with art, so that the single-colored ones bore much color.

In the editions of 1524 and 1535 is added: By this history it is meant
that through the gospel the souls are led away from the law and works
saints, in which they are colorful, sparkling 6) and spotted, that is,
adorned with various gifts of the spirit, Rom. 12, 6. and 1 Cor. 12, 4.
that only the unrighteous remain under the law and works. For Laban
means white or glittering, and the glittering heap in the beautiful
works also means divine law.

4)1524. Dan means judge.

5\) Missing 1524.

6\) Erlanger: buntsprenklicht.

1674 **Erl. 64, 10-12. appendix. W. XXI, 414\*-418\*.** 1675

> **The 31st chapter.**

V. 20. Stole the heart. Stealing the heart is Hebrew for doing something
behind another\'s knowledge.

Addition 1524: means that the believers grasp the right core of God\'s
word, of which the works saints are never aware.

V. 42. Fear. Jacob here calls God \"Isaac\'s fear\" because Isaac was
godly and God\'s servant.

V. 48. Gilead. Gilead means a cluster of witnesses,0 and means the
Scriptures, since many testimonies of God are often inside.

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 2. Mahanaim means army camp.

V. 24. wrestled. In Hebrew, wrestle comes from dust, as when two wrestle
with each other, so that the dust rises and becomes thick around them,
and reads as much: A man stumbles with him, that is, a fierce fight it
was. No one shall understand this but experience.

V. 28. Israel. Israel comes from Sarah, which means to fight or
overcome, hence Sar is also called a prince or lord, and Sarah a
princess or wife, and Israel a prince or fighter of God, that is, one
who wrestles and contends with God. This is done through faith, which
holds fast to God\'s word until it overcomes God\'s wrath, and attains
God\'s own to the gracious Father.

V. 30. Pniel. Pniel or Pnuel means God\'s face or knowledge. For through
faith in the controversy of the cross one learns to know and experience
God rightly, so there is no more need for the sun to rise.

**The 33rd chapter.**

2\) Notice that the orthodox and the works saints cannot walk with one
another, for the faithful walk in a quiet spirit, but the works saints
walk strongly in the presumption of their works in God\'s laws.

V. 19. pennies or sheep.

**The 34th chapter.**

1524\. v. 1. daughters of the land. What to do apart from God\'s word by
reason and

1\) Erlanger: \"Witness Haufe\".

2\) Erlanger: Meihlich.

The one who seeks human wisdom certainly corrupts the spirit and faith.
Therefore, no addition of human doctrine and works should be made to
God\'s word.

**The 35th chapter.**

V. 4. ear clips. Lunülas\" which is called a golden hair band; now it
has become a pearl braid, Proverbs 11, 22: Circulus aureus in naribus
suis, ut supra cap. 24, 22.

V. 7. El Bethel. 4) This is GOD to Bethel. 5)

V. 14. libation. This was wine, as is sufficiently seen in the following
books.

V. 18. Benoni. Benoni means the son of my pain. Benjamin is called the
son of the right. 6)

**The 37th chapter.**

1524\. v. 3. colored skirt. Joseph\'s coat of many colors was woven of
thread, and signifies the many graces and gifts of the one Spirit in
Christ and his Christians.

V. 35. Father, this was Isaac.

**The 38th chapter.**

V. 12. shepherds. May also mean friend, after which the puncta in Hebrew
are placed. For Judas had to have pasture, perhaps he did not have a
friend. Puncta can both be missing and hit, ut Is. 7. et saepe alias.

V. 29. Perez. Perez, a ripper.

V. 30. Serah means exit.

Addition 1524: Here it is meant that the works saints put themselves
outwardly as if they wanted to come forth and be the first, and become
the last; about this a great tearing arises among the people of God; but
the red thread around the hand is that they work carnal holiness, and
persecute the right saints.

3\) i.e. small crescents.

4\) Erlanger: El-Beth El.

5\) Missing 1524.

6\) The Hirschberg Bible refers here to Ps. 80, 16; the Weimar Bible
(1686) explains it by: the son of his dearest wife. Luther himself (Alte
Ausg., Vol. Ill, 811, §14.) interprets it: \"Son of the right hand, that
is, his very dearest son.\"

[1676 Erl. \"4, 12-14. L.\'s marginal glosses on Genesis 1. W. LXl,
418\*-422\*. 1677]{.underline}

**The 39th chapter.**

V. 9. in that you. Otherwise he had to take care of the wife as well as
the whole house, without not sleeping with her.

**The 41st chapter.**

V. 16. Not with me. Meaning: I am not the one who interpreted the
dreams, or could. It is God who has done it through me, can do it to
you: Dat gloriam Deo, nec tamen negat ministerium suum. sHe gives glory
to God, yet offers to serve the kingZ

V. 43 Ab rech. What Abrech means, we leave the quarrelsome to search
until the last day, meanwhile we want to understand it as it is German
\[namely: \"He is the father of the country\"\].

1524\. v. 45. zaphnath panea 1) is spoken Egyptian, and still unaware
what it is, without that, as much as one can feel, it is called, as one
speaks in German: Der heimliche nächste Rath.

V. 51. Manasseh means forgotten.

V. 51. Ephraim is called grown.

**The 43rd chapter.**

V. 11. These names of the fruits are still uncertain, even among the
Jews themselves.

**The 45th chapter.**

1524 V. 4. to me. These are the sweet words of the gospel; thus Christ
speaks to the soul in faith, after it has been well humbled and troubled
by the law and conscience of sin.

V. 20. And do not look at your household goods. 2) Go to Egypt, do not
let your household goods hinder you; what you cannot sell in such a dear
time, leave behind you.

V. 26. 128 actually means to do otherwise, to become otherwise,
Lamentations 2 \[v. 18.\] and 3 \[v. 49.\], \"I cannot do otherwise.\"
Fleto, et non des προ^3^ ) tibi, neque quiescat pupilla

1\) Erlanger: Parnea. Hebrew: XXXX, which the old editions write
\"Paenea\". (Wittenberger V, 187b.; Jenaer IV, 209 b.)

2\) The Erlanger has the words: \"Ziehet in Egypten\" as text.

3\) Bulgata: non des re\^uiem. Erlanger: \"dssxuANtÜ.\"

oculi tui. Weep, and let your eyes do nothing else. Lex XXX Habak. 1
\[V. 4.\]: \"It goes otherwise than right\"; right goes otherwise,
counts for nothing. 4) Sic Jacob longe aliud sentit quam illi narrant.

**The 47th chapter.**

V, 4. dwell. To lodge, to be a guest, to be a stranger. Non cives aut
domestici hujus mundi.

V. 12. children. Quia nos senes mali propter pueros omnibus bonis
fruimur. We old fools eat with the children, not they with us. Ipsi
domini, nos procuratores.

V. 31. He was sick in bed, but he got up, bowed his head, prayed and
thanked God. Meanwhile Joseph took the oath.

1524 Then Israel knelt against the bed at the head. The old books in
Greek and Latin have it thus: And he worshipped at the head of his
scepter, as the epistle Hebrews 11 \[v. 21\] reports, so Jacob
worshipped the scepter of Joseph. But in Hebrew it is as it says here.

**The 48th chapter.**

V. 22. The Hebrew word for piece is Shechem. And the same city he means
here. 5)

**The 49th chapter.**

V. 4 Reuben was to have the firstborn dignity, namely the priesthood and
the kingdom. But now both are taken from him, and Levi is given the
priesthood, and Judah the kingdom. This is the synagogue that defiled
the bed of Jacob, that is, the Scriptures, with false doctrine, so that
it lost the priesthood and the kingdom.

V. 10. Scepter. Here begins the blessing of Christ, who was to be born
of Judah. And he is called Shiloh, that is, one who should be blessed
and freshly imbued with spirit and faith, which before was sour and
wretched by works. Therefore we call Silo: a hero. For the preceding
part of this blessing concerns King David, and is otherwise

4\) The Erlanger has here wrongly interpungirt: \"recht gehet, anders
gilt nichts\". The word \"Recht\" is a noun, translation of rw\'M, which
is rendered above by I.sx.

5\) Missing 1524.

1678 **Erl. 84, 14-17. appendix. W. XXI, 422\*-427\*.** 1679

In all the blessings there is no more of Christ, but all the rest is of
the temporal salvation given to the children of Israel, as that Zebulun
should dwell by the sea unto Sidon, and Jesheshar in the midst of the
land of the sea, and yet be interestable to the kings of Assyria.

V. 16: Samson fulfilled the blessing of Dan. 13, 24. 25.

V. 19. Gad directed his blessing when they reigned before Israel, Jos.
1, 14.

V. 20. Asher held good grain land.

V. 21. Naphtali blessing is fulfilled through Deborah and Barak, Judges.
5, 1.

V.26. The blessing of Joseph is upon the kingdom of Israel, and it is
all said of physical government, that the daughters (that is, the cities
of the land) were well governed, and had many prophets and great men for
cornerstones. And though they were often challenged, yet they prevailed.
And this kingdom was in the lineage of Ephraim. So the spiritual
blessing and kingdom remain on Judah, and the physical kingdom on
Ephraim.

1524\. v. 27. Benjamin\'s blessing fulfilled S. Paul \[Phil. 3, 5.\], or
King Saul and the citizens of Gaba, Judg. 20, 25.

**The second book of Moses.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 10. Moses. Masa means to pull, hence \"Moses\" pulled, namely out of
the water.

V. 22. Gershom means a stranger or foreigner.

Eli it is called: God my helper.

**Chapter 3.**

1524 V. 14. I will be. The name of God, \"I will be,\" indicates how one
must come to God with faith, and He to us; for faith tells what God will
be and do with us, namely, grace and help. When you come there, I will
be with you and show myself in such a way that you will know that it is
me.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 25. Blood bridegroom. That is: She was angry and said: It costs blood
that

you are my husband, and must circumcise my child, which she did
unwillingly, as this was a disgrace among the Gentiles. Means the people
of the law, who would gladly have God, but will not suffer the cross,
nor circumcise the old Adam, until he must.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 16. and your people must be sinners. That is, your poor people must
be wrong and sinners; guilt is sought to your people.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 3. Not revealed. The patriarchs well knew God; but such a public
common preaching had not yet gone out from God at that time, as happened
through Moses and Christ.

V. 8. have my hand. This is sworn, as above Gen. 22, 16. 1)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 3. frogs or toads.

V. 21. vermin. The Greeks call χυνομυια all evil worms that do harm in
the field, caterpillars, flies, butterflies, ants, beetles, burners, 2)
and similar creatures that ruin trees and plants.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 12: The locusts are not called Hagab in Hebrew, as in some places,
but Arbe. They are four-footed flying animals, and pure to eat, like
Hagab 3 Mos. 11, 22, but unknown to us, without being like locusts.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 3. Great man. He says this because it is a miracle that he was not
killed by the Egyptians. They had to be afraid of an anger and
rebellion.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 3. What the paschal lamb means is taught by S. Paul in 1 Cor. 5, when
he says: Our paschal lamb is Christ, who was sacrificed for us.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) \"Burner\" perhaps aphids.

1680 Erl. 84, 17-19. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 2nd book of Moses. W.
XXI, 427\*-43i\*. 1681

V. 16. That is, they were to preach, pray the benedicite and gratias for
the Passover and deliverance from Egypt; therefore he uses the word
*kara,* which means to preach, to read in the assembly.

V. 43 Passover. Passover is called a walk because the Lord passed
through the land of Egypt by night, and smote all the firstborn dead.
But if Christ died and rose again, that he might depart from this world,
and in it smote sin, death, and the devil, and brought us up out of the
right hand of Egypt unto the Father, this is our Passover or Easter.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 4. Abib. Abib is the moon, which we call April. For the Hebrews raise
their New Year after nature, when all things green again and grow and
chasten themselves. Therefore it is also called mensis novorum, since
everything becomes new.

V. 7. Unleavened. This is how hard leaven is forbidden, so that one
should preach the pure gospel and God\'s grace, not our work and law
after the resurrection of Christ, as S. Paul 1 Cor. 5 also shows, and
such food is nothing else than faith in Christ.

V. 18. Reed Sea. The Greeks call it the Red Sea, from the red sand and
soil. But the Hebrews call it the Sea of Reeds, from the reeds. Addition
1524: and signifies the world with its splendor, through which the
saints must pass with much suffering.

Armed. The Hebrew for \"five,\" which we leave to others to search for,
whether it be that they were drawn by five piles, or that they walked by
five beside \[one\] another, or what such five is. For we do not
understand anything about the fifth rib, which is the harness on the
body (as the Jews call it here).

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 15: What are you crying out for? Notice here an excellent example of
how faith struggles, wriggles and cries out in hardships and peril, and
how it clings to God\'s word alone, and receives comfort from God and
overcomes.

V. 20. Illuminated. That is: there was a weather glow in the thick
cloud. 1)

1\) Missing 1524.

> **The 15th chapter.**

V. 23. Mara means bitter, and signifies suffering and affliction, which
also become sweet through the cross of Christ in faith, Matt. 11 \[v.
30.\], \"My yoke is sweet.\"

**Chapter 16.**

V. 15. man in Hebrew is called a gift, meaning that the gospel is given
to us from heaven without our merit or thought, out of pure grace, just
as this man was also given.

V. 34. Testimony. That is: In the place where they sacrificed and
prayed, and the preaching seat was before the tents were made. 2)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 7. Massa means temptation.

Meriba means quarrel.

1524.^3^ ) V. 12. Certainly. This is: faithfully, that they neither
lacked nor desisted, as a faithless deserter, but signifies how the
works of the law are inerrant and unprofitable, where they are not
maintained by Christ in faith.

V. 15. Nissi, which means my banner. 1524: Nissi is called my sign, as a
banner, coat of arms or ensign is in battle. Means the gospel, which is
raised up as a sign against sin, the flesh, death and the devil.

**Chapter 18.**

Of course, reason is wiser to act in worldly matters than the holy
people, as Christ also says in Luke 16 that the children of this world
are wiser than the children of light. Therefore, what reason can master,
God gives no law, but lets reason act as his creature (ordained for this
in Genesis 1).

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 9. All your things, that is what you have to do.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 8. Judges are called gods because they act in God\'s stead, according
to God\'s law, and

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) The 1524 edition has in the text, \"So his hands became sure.\"

1682 **Erl. 64, 19-21. appendix. W. XXI, 43i\*-435\*.** 1683

Word, not to judge and rule according to their own conceit, as Christ
testifies, John 10 \[v. 35\].

V. 25. Penetrate. Forcing and usury are two different things. To force
is to force your neighbor to pay, with your advantage and his
disadvantage. Usury is well known for what it is.

V. 29: He calls all hard fruits, such as grain, barley, apples and
pears, which are used to make food.

Tears is the name given to all soft fruits used to make juice and drink,
such as grapes and oil.

Addition 1524: but means the gospel, which feeds and waters spiritually.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 13. Remember. You shall preach of no saints but gods who help you,
nor give thanks for them, but to God alone. For to remember here means
as much as to preach, to praise, to give thanks, to worship, ut: Hoc
facite in mei commemorationem \[as: \"Do these things in my memory\"\].

V. 14. Three times. This is Easter in April, Pentecost in Brochmand, and
the feast of tabernacles in the wine moon, read about it in the 23rd
chapter of the 3rd book.

V. 16: He calls the end of the year the moon of wine, so that the
growing and gathering of fruit is over.

V. 18. the blood 2c. That is: You shall not sacrifice the paschal lamb
before all the leavened bread comes out of your house.

1524: signifies that Christ suffers blood not apart from Himself own
doctrines of men and works, Matt. 16 \[v. 6.\], \"Beware of the leaven
of the Pharisees.\"

1524\. v. 19. the little goat. That is: The weak believers and the young
Christians you shall not vex nor burden with strong doctrine and works.

**Chapter 24.**

1524 V. 3. one voice. The law outwardly compels us to say or pledge one
thing, but the heart is not there; therefore the people here may be one
voice, but they have no heart.

V. 11. His hand. He does not frighten them with thunder and lightning as
the people were frightened before, Cap. 20, 18. 1)

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 9, Example. This is one of the main sayings of Moses, in which he
testifies that his rule should cease, and not be the proper finite
being, but a model and prelude of the kingdom of Christ. And without a
doubt Christ spoke of this with the two disciples to Emaus, Luc. 24.

V. 22. Testify to you. That is, by a certain sign and testimony, I will
let you know that I am present, that I will speak there. 2c.

1524: but means Christ in mankind, Rom. 3.

V. 39. centner. 30 pounds of gold.

V. 40. He repeats here for the second time what he said earlier in this
chapter, that everything should be a model and figure with Moses, so
that it may be believed. Twice said, yes, certainly believed.

**Chapter 26.**

1524\. v. 1. gel silks. Many call this color blue, or sky-colored,
although both the Greek and Latin Bibles say hyacinth color. Now
hyacinth, both the flower and the stone, is yellow or gold-colored;
therefore, it is to be feared that here the language is decayed and
uncertain.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 2. horns. That is, erect small columns above with knobs or flowers.
1)

V. 21. Moed. The Hebrew word Moed is not known to us in any other way,
nor do we want to know it in German. It is supposed to mean a certain
place, such as a parish church or monastery, where the people of Israel
were to come and hear God\'s word, so that they would not run after
their own devotion to sacrifice to God on mountains, in grounds and in
other places. ^1^)

**The 28th chapter.**

1524\. v. 15. of the right. 2) By the word he indicates what the bib
means, viz,

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Instead of \"Das Amtschildlein\" the 1524 edition has: \"Den
Brustlatz des Rechts\".

1684 **Erl. \"4, 21-24.** L.\'s marginal glosses on the 2nd book of
Moses. **W. XXI, 435\*-439\*.** 1685

That in Christ, the high priest, is the power to interpret and govern
the law according to the occasion of things and the need of consciences,
as Christ does Matthew 12 with the Sabbath.

V. 30. light. What that had been, one does not know now any more. In
Hebrew it is called Urim and Thummim.

1524 In Hebrew these words are called Urim and Thummim; Urim means
lights or shines, Thummim means completely and without change. What this
means in the flesh is no longer known, but it undoubtedly means that
Christ\'s teaching is and will be kept pure, bright and without change
in the hearts of the preachers, as Paul instructs Tito to keep the word
holy, honest and blameless, and Timothy commands him to keep a good
secret. This also means here, to carry the right of the children of
Israel on Aaron\'s heart.

V. 41. Fill. This filling is a Hebrew language to which one must become
accustomed. And was that, as it is written in the following chapter,
that in the consecration the hands of the priests were filled with
sacrifices, brought before the Lord.

Zufatz 1524: means that preachers should be full of good works before
all, as Christ teaches Matt. 5: \"Let your good works shine before
men.\"

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 18. A fire of the Lord. Moses uses the word \"a fire of the Lord\" a
lot, and we should get used to it, that it means as much as a sacrifice
of the Lord. As if you saw a fire from afar and asked, \"What is this?
What is this? they would say, \"It is the fire of God. That is, one
sacrifices there to God, per synecdochen vel aliam figuram.

V. 36. Absolve. That is, absolve and absolve, like Psalm 51: Asperges me
ysopo, that is, absolve and absolve me with ysopen.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 1. Altar of incense. This altar stood outside the curtain in the Holy
Place, not behind the curtain in the Holy of Holies.

V. 13. Gera is considered by us to be three lion\'s pennies or a three
lion\'s tears. 1)

1\) Missing 1524.

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 1. fled. Moses speaks in one word as if he had left the people in
disgrace and fled, so that they do not know what to do now. Just as when
God leaves us for a little while, we think that he has left us in
disgrace and must seek help elsewhere; then such a calf becomes our God.

V. 4. That is, he drew it before them, what kind of image they should
make. This means that men model doctrine 2) to the people what works
they should do to serve God. For here you see that those in this calf
thought they were serving the right God, because Aaron called out, \"It
is the feast of the LORD, and build Him an altar.

V. 25. had been set free. The word phrea is almost the same as the
German word: frei. Thus Aaron had set the people free from God\'s word
and obedience. As the doctrine of men does, it makes the people wild,
free, loose and ready for all idolatry, and yet it pretends to help the
people and make them better. And yet it is a sham, a hearing or a
chatter, since there is nothing behind it.

1524\. bared. 4) This nakedness is of the head, when the head is without
covering and adornment, and is the opinion that Aaron had withdrawn the
people from God, that he no longer ruled over them, but went bareheaded
in his own works. For this history is an example of all who walk without
faith in their own works, which disgrace the priests with the doctrine
of men, and yet think to raise up the people with it, and well to help.

V. 34. I will surely visit their sin. Nemo evadet poenam peccati sui.
\[No one will escape the punishment of his sin\].

**The 33rd chapter.**

V. 8. looked after him. The back of Moses is seen by all the works
saints who do not understand the law, yet come under eyes.

V. 14. Face here is called the cloud, and

2\) Erlanger: Menschenlehre.

3\) Erlanger: \"mere\".

4\) The 1524 edition has \"entblößet\" instead of: \"losgemacht\" in the
text.

1686 **Erl. 64, 24-26. appendix. W. XXI, E-4E.** 1687

fiery pillar in which God was present. 1)

V. 20. My face. Here God\'s face is not called the cloud or the pillar,
but He Himself, as He says: \"Man shall not live if he sees Me. But all
is said of Christ, who shall appear in mankind hereafter, when Moses\'
kingdom shall have an end. However, Moses shall stand in the rock \[v.
22\] and see and preach the promised Christ until he comes, so that
Israel will always have God\'s word until Christ 2c. 1524: All this is
said of Christ, how he should live, preach, die, and rise again among
the people of Most, and they should not see his face, but look behind
him, that is, they should see Christ in the faith of his humanity, and
not yet in the Godhead. And this is the space and the rock on which all
believers stand in this life. But this is all God\'s gift, without our
merit; therefore He says: \"To whom I am gracious, I am gracious\" 2c.

**The 34th chapter.**

V. 5. Moses describes the mystery that Christ is the Lord, who will go
over before him (that is, before the people of the law) and preach that
all the world is sinful and must be saved by grace alone - as he says
above Cap. 33 \[v. 19\]: \"To whom I am gracious, I am gracious\", that
is, no one is to earn it from me by works, it is to be grace and nothing
else, as the Gospel teaches in the same way.

**The 35th chapter.**

V. 4: What God commanded Moses to do with the tabernacle and all its
utensils from the 25th chapter to the 32nd chapter, Moses sets before
the people in this chapter 2c.

V. 22. To weave. \"Lifting\", \"weaving\", these two words lifting and
weaving we must learn to use and understand; for a sacrifice or offering
for worship is called a lifting or lifting offering because it was
lifted up straight to the Lord; but weaving is called pulling it back
and forth in four places, morning, evening, noon and midnight.

1\) Missing 1524.

Addition 1524: means all the evangelical being, which first lifts itself
up against God with right faith, and then spreads out into all the
world, by preaching and confessing the faith, to teach also the
neighbor.

**The 37th chapter.**

1524\. v. 19. almond. 2) That is, these heads or cups were buckled or
gnarled on the outside, as if golden nutshells were set around them.

**The 38th chapter.**

V. 8. wives. These women were the devout widows and wives who served
with fasting and praying before the tabernacle of God, as 1 Sam. 2, 22.
testifies and Paul 1 Tim. 5, 5. describes. As also S. Lucas praises the
holy prophetess Hannah Luc. 2, 37.

Addition 1524: But here Jews speak of women\'s mirrors, which should
have been at the handgrip; we let them have their way. But it means
spiritually the histories of the Old Testament, which are preached
through the Gospel, which fight quite chivalrously to prove the faith in
Christ, against the works saints 2c.

**The third book of Moses.**

**Chapter 3.**

1524 V. 1. dead sacrifice here is not to be called a dead sacrifice 3)
that does not live, but one that kills and strangles, and puts an end to
the thing, completes it. For it means the sacrifice that Paul (Romans
12) and Peter (1 Peter 2) teach that we should, by faith, put to death
and finish our bodies and their lusts, so that there may be peace
between spirit and flesh, and that it, like the others, lasts all our
lives.

V. 11. food that is eaten by fire. 4)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3. angered, that is, with teachings or life approximately gave cause
to sin and guilt. 4)

2\) The 1524 edition has in the text, \"Three heads like the almond
nuts.\"

3\) Erlanger: \"Todtopfer\".

4\) Missing 1524.

1688 Erl. 6t,S6-S8. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 3rd book of Moses.
W.XXI, 442\*-447\*. 1689

**Chapter 6.**

V. 30. But all of these. Here you see that Moses clearly sets two kinds
of sin offerings or two kinds of custom of the sin offering. One is not
to bring the blood into the holy place to make atonement, but to eat it.
The other, when the blood was brought into the holy place to make
atonement, they did not eat it, but burned everything outside the camp,
as described in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 13, 11: Quorum
animalium sanguis, et supra cap. 4 \[3 Mos. 4, 5.\] 1)

**Chapter 7.**

V. 12. Praise offering, thank offering. Thesetwo sacrifices are reckoned
in One Sacrifice. Thank offering is when they have slaughtered sheep,
oxen 2c. The sacrifice of praise is when they have added patties and
cakes (like a grain offering). And so call one thing another, that it is
called \[v. 15.\], \"meat of the sacrifice of praise,\" that is, beside
the sacrifice of praise. Item \[v. 13.\], \"sacrifice of praise of the
sacrifice of thanksgiving.\" 1)

**The 1ü. Chapter.**

V. 18. His blood. Because his blood was not brought into the holy place,
it was not to be burned but eaten. But the blood that was brought in was
not to be eaten, but all was to be burned. Sup. 4. et 6. etc. inf.
16.^1^ )

**Chapter 11.**

V. 22. These four animals are not in our country, although Arbe and
Hagab are commonly taken for locusts, which are also four-footed birds.
But it is more proper to use these Hebrew names, as we do with
Hallelujah and other foreign language names.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 4-6. Here it is evident that Moses\' name for leprosy is all kinds of
sores and blisters, or leprosy, or leprosy like.

Addition 1524: Leprosy, however, actually means the teaching of men
apart from the teaching of the divine Word. It flourishes and grows
green before the people and eats away at them; therefore the priests are
commanded to be diligent here.

1\) Missing 1524.

V. 12.^2^ ) the whole skin. This leprosy is called clean, because it is
a healthy body, which thus cleanses itself, as happens with smallpox,
measles and scabies, since through the whole body the evil beats out, as
we Germans say it is healthy 2c.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 10. Log. Log is a small measure, so called in Hebrew, but still
uncertain how.

1524\. V. 1-32. Just as leprosy means false doctrine, false faith and
false holy living, especially that which is based on one\'s own works
and not on the grace of God alone: So this cleansing means how to drive
out heresy and such false teaching; namely, that the preachers should
have the oil in their hand, and act with the finger, that is, they
should prove the word of God of grace in life, and preach in spirit
power, so that the people will obey and grasp with the hand and follow,
that this blasting before the Lord and anointing the people is nothing
else than preaching the gospel before God, and thus leading the people
from error. For fire does not destroy heresy, but only God\'s word
guided in the spirit.

**The 16th chapter.**

V. 16. Unclean. That is, all Israel is unclean and in sins, yet God
dwells in the midst of all sinners and sanctifies them. That is, they
enjoy His holiness, and are called holy for His sake, otherwise it is
all unclean and sin with them. This is Christ in his people rc. 3)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 4. There you see that he does not want to have his own and
self-chosen worship, except for his ordered worship. Therefore he calls
such a sacrificer a murderer, as Isa 66 does. 3)

V. 5. priests, not they themselves by their own choice and devotion. 3)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 21. Molech was an idol to whom they burned their own children for
service, as Ma-.

2\) Erlanger: \"V. 13.\"

3\) Missing 1524.

1690 **Erl. 64, Ä8-3I. App. W. XXI, 447\*-4SI\*.** 1691

wet that, the king of Judah, and thought to serve God with it, as
Abraham did when he sacrificed his son to Isaac. But because God had not
commanded them to do so, as Abraham had, it was wrong. Therefore, God
says that His name be profaned by it, for it was done under God\'s name,
and yet it was devilish. Just as now the monastic vows and other human
essays corrupt many people under God\'s name, as if it were God\'s
service.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 5. might please. That is, do as he commands, not as you think best or
like according to your own devotion. For he does not want to have a way
of his own choosing, nor a way of his own thinking. Therefore see to it
that you sacrifice in such a way that it pleases him, and that you are
not further angered by your own way. 1)

1524 V. 20. Crazy. This law speaks of such a woman, who has previously
slept with someone and yet is not taken in marriage, as it should be
according to the law, in the 21st chapter of the other book. Perhaps her
husband did not want to give her to him, and now she is like a widow,
and is made love to again, which is neither adultery nor fornication,
but it is a sin that is reprehensible.

V. 23. circumcising the foreskin is here as much as waiting three years,
as he himself interprets and says: three years you shall consider them
uncircumcised 2c.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 2. His seed, that is, his children.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 12. crown, in Hebrew nezer, from which the Nazarites are called, that
they abstained and separated themselves from some food, Deut. 6. and
Samson is called a Nazarite from his mother\'s womb. Judg. 13 And our
Lord Christ is also called the right Nazarene, of Nazareth, Matt. 2, as
he is pure and holy from all sin, and there is nothing unholy or
unconsecrated about him. Although the Jews, out of envy and malice, do
not call him Nazri, but Nozri, that is, the corrupt, or disturbed one,
like an avenger, yet they themselves call the true Nazarene.

1\) Missing 1524.

Nozrim, dispersed and rejected in all the world. And methinks that Paul
Rom. 1 calls himself a Nazarene, since he boasts of being set apart for
the gospel of the law 2c. 2)

V. 18. Unusual and strange. These are all kinds of oddities, such as the
nose being too big, too small, too crooked, wide, item, the mouth
crooked, crooked, blecket 3) 2c. which disguises one from another. 4)

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 2. This is: How the Nazarites holily abstain and avoid (\[Shebrew:\]
nasaru) 2c., namely, that they should not eat of the sacrifice, because
they are completely pure and holy. 4)

V. 20. Malachi, Cap. 1, complains very harshly about this piece. For
that which is not fit nor good is given to God and his servants, and
there they want to save it, but here he condemns it as unpleasant. For
he loves a cheerful giver. 4)

V. 23. mutable, as having only one ear or none, one eye or none, lacking
one or more feet, or otherwise shapeless and uncreated. It is said: He
who wants to give, let him give something good, or let it stand. 4)

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 7. service work. These are the works that one does on work days,
seeking food, since one needs servants and livestock. But household
business and worship is not forbidden, as cooking, sweeping, clothing.
4)

V. 24: Blowing in remembrance. Such blowing with a horn was done to
remember God and his miracles, how he had redeemed them, and to preach
and give thanks. Just as Christ and His redemption are remembered and
preached in our gospel. 4)

1524\. v. 36. tax. That is, the collection or gathering together and
giving to the poor as into a common bag.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 7. These are the shewbreads, which here are called cakes because they
were as wide as cakes. And are Denkbrode

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) blecket - with lips too short, so that the teeth show.

4\) Missing 1524.

1692 **Erl. 64, 31-33. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 3rd book of Moses.
W. XXI, 4S1\*-45S\*.** 1693

so that they may commemorate God and preach about Him. Just as Christ
commands us to remember him, that is, to proclaim and preach his death.
1)

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 7. food, that is, to be mean, and not to collect, nor to pour out rc.
1)

V. 37: Usury. It is called usury when it is done with money. Uebersatz,
when the poor man must buy or accept the daily commodity, as\' expensive
as the miser wants, because he must have it for necessity. 1)

**The 26th chapter.**

V. 37. over the other, as it happens in flight, fear and terror. 1)

V. 41. That is, just as they were pleased with their sins and disgusted
with my rights, so they will again be pleased with the punishment and
say, \"Oh, how right it has been for us. Thanks be to our cursed sin,
that is what we have now. Oh right, dear God! Oh right! And these are
the thoughts and words of an earnest repentance and penitence, which
teaches one to hate and spit at oneself from the bottom of one\'s heart:
Fie on you, what have I done! This pleases God, so that he will be
merciful again. That is why we have translated the word \"iniquity\",
\"the punishment of iniquity\", to give such understanding. Otherwise it
would read as if they were to have pleasure in the iniquity. This is
exactly how it is to be understood: The country likes its celebration,
that is, it says: God is right in the punishment, that it must lie
desolate for the sake of the people, for whom it longs. This is also
what Isaiah says, Cap. 40, 2.: Dimissa est iniquitas, id est, placita et
accepta poena pro iniquitate ejus, id est, per Christum est satisfactum
pro ea. 1) \[\"Her iniquity is forgiven,\" that is, the punishment for
her iniquity is pleasing and agreeable to her, that is, through Christum
enough is done for the same\].

**The fourth book of Moses.**

**Chapter 4.**

V. 6. yellow ceiling. From this it appears that the innermost carpets
are not colored;

1\) Missing 1524.

but each \[blanket\] has had its own color alone; whichever is yellow
has been all yellow, and whichever is white, all white rc. 2)

**Chapter 6.**

V. 2. A special vow. In Hebrew this is called Neser; and he who keeps
them is called Nazir. According to which our Lord Jesus Christ is also
called Nazarene, and is the right Nazarite. - 1524: In Hebrew this
discipline is called Neser 2c. Addition 1524 at the end: Because we have
no German word for it, we must call it Zucht and Nasir. For in German we
say of such people: So he breeds theuer 3) 2c.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 14. spoon or a head, or otherwise round inside, like the salty oak.
4)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 2. Forward, that is, the points or snouts on the lamps are to be
directed toward the curtain, so that there is light in front of the
lampstand or between the lampstand and the curtain. 4)

V. 7. water of sin. To absolve is as much as to absolve or absolve,
therefore the water so that they were absolved is called sin water.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 21. set up. While the Kohathites carried the sanctuary, the
Gershonites and Merarites were there before, setting up the tabernacle
so that the Kohathites found it ready with the ark. 4)

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 3. afflicted. Wretched man who suffered much. Pf. 132, 1: \"Remember
David and all his sufferings.\" Ps. 18, 28. Proverbs 18, 12: Ante
gloriam passio \[\"Before one comes to honor, one must first suffer\"\].
4)

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 25. Escol means a bunch of grapes, from which becomes the grape
brook. 1524: from this becomes the name Traubenbach.

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) That is, he keeps such strict discipline.

4\) Missing 1524.

1694 **Erl. St, 33-35. appendix, W. XXI, t55\*-4SS\*.** 1695

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 30. This is the sin that does not want to be sin, but to be right.
Like the heretics and the rotten sin, which changes God\'s word and laws
and interprets them according to their will. 1)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 19. An immutable covenant. In Hebrew it means a covenant of salt,
that as the salt preserves the flesh incorruptible, so also this
covenant shall be incorruptible. Thus the Scripture also speaks 2 Chron.
13, 5.: \"God gave the kingdom to David and to his own with a covenant
of salt.\"

V. 27. abundance, that is, must, wine, oil and the like. 1)

V. 29. Best. In Hebrew it means the fat, therefore also the rich are
called the fat, that is, the best among the people. Psalm 17:10, 22, 13,
30. 1)

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 11. twice. Quia debuit semel percutere. \[For he should strike
once.\^

V. 12. Dubitatio est peccatum, sed significat mysterium, quod populus
legis non potest per suum doctorem salvus fieri, et quod sub Christi
tempus Moses incredulus, id est, populus corruit. \[Two is a sin, but it
signifies the mystery that the people of the law cannot be saved by
their teacher, and that at the time of Christ the unbelieving Moses,
that is the people of the law, is due to die.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 3. Harma means a ban.

V. 6. fiery ones. Therefore they are called fiery ones, because the
people, bitten by them, became red as fire by their poison and died of
heat, as of pestilence or carbuncle rc. 1).

V. 13. Arnon is the same high rock that stands in Besupha, that is, in
clouds, winds and weather; streams flow below, and it, along the same
its streams, continues to Ar. 1)

V. 18. Here, staffs may be called the rulers themselves, as in Isaiah
the king in Egypt.

1\) Missing 1524.

A staff means that they rule the people as a shepherd rules the cattle
with his staff. 2)

V. 25. daughters. That is, the villages and towns surrounding the city.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 5. beor. Id Peter dicit et Bosor. \[Peter also calls it Bosor\]; 2
Petr. 2, 15. 2)

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 3. Here Balaam leans to go to the Lord, who had already told him not
to curse, but he goes to his sorcerers under the name of the Lord. 2)

V. 7. saying here is called oracle, that is, such words as he spoke not
from himself, but which God put into his mouth, as when an ungodly man
speaks the text of the word of God, which is against himself and his
own. 2)

V. 19. Men lie, and must also at times miss that they cannot keep, for
they themselves are uncertain of their life. 2)

V. 21. The Scriptures call toil and labor idolatry, or false worship and
that which is done without faith. Ps. 10:7: \"Under his tongue is toil
and labor.\" - Instead, the 1524 edition offers: Toil and labor is the
Scripture\'s name for great good works done without faith. Psalm 10:7,
\"Under his tongue is toil and labor.\" For such doctrine and work make
evil heavy consciences, which faith makes light and joyful.

The king\'s trumpets, that is, the bodily trumpets of God, their king,
who had commanded them to be made, so that they were invincible in
battle. May also be called the word of God, which was taught loudly and
publicly among this people. Addition 1524: means the gospel in
Christianity.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 1. as before after the sorcerers. From this it can be seen that
Balaam always went to sorcery under God\'s name, but the Lord always met
him and prevented the sorcery from taking place.

2\) Missing 1524.

[1696 Erl. 64, 35-37. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 4th book of Moses.
W. XXI, 459\*-463\*. 1697]{.underline}

must grasp the right word of God instead of sorcery.

1524 V. 17. This star is David, who brought such people and countries
under him. For Balaam speaks nothing of Christ, but only of the physical
kingdom of the people of Israel, even though Christ is meant everywhere.

V. 20. Amalek was the first among the nations to attack the children of
Israel, Ex 17:8, but was destroyed by Saul, 1 Sam 15:7.

V. 24. Chittim are those from Europe, as the great Alexander and Romans,
who also perish at last. And here the prophecy shows that all kingdoms
on earth must perish one after the other, besides the people of Israel,
who remain forever for Christ\'s sake. 1524. This saying has hitherto
been interpreted to mean the Romans; but the text reads as if the great
Alexander were meant by it.

**Chapter 26.**

V. 10 Sign. A warning sign that they would remember and beware of the
same sin. 1)

**Chapter 27.**

V. 20. Your glory. This may have been a special way that Moses laid the
staff or hand on Joshua\'s head. Just as kings are anointed, or as
fiefdoms are received, all these things must have a manner and splendor.

1524 And praise. 2) That is: Praise him and say many good things about
him, so that you make him honest and pleasing to the people. S. Paul
interprets this from Rom. 3, 21. where he says: \"God\'s
righteousness\", which is Christ, \"is 3) testified by the law and the
prophets.\"

V. 21. of light. This is the light on the chest of the high priest, Ex.
28, 30. Therefore some say: If God answered the priest\'s question that
it should be yes, then the light gave off its brilliance. But after that
the kings

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) The 1524 edition has in the text, \"And praise him with your
praise.\"

3\) Original: be.

so used when they asked God for advice, as 1 Sam. 28, 6. and 30, 7. 4)

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 7. wine. Wine here is sicera, sicera, hoc est inebriativum, id est,
purum, non dilutum, sed merum et efficax: quia verbum purum inebriat
vere animas etc. \[that is, an intoxicating drink, that is, pure, not
diluted, but loud and powerful, for the pure word in truth makes souls
drunk 2c.\]

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 35. ezereth. Assembly, as gathered in the churchyard and resolved ut
liceat audire maledictiones etc. \[that the people might hear the curse
2c. Hearing, Deut. 28.

1524 has in the text: \"On the eighth day you shall do tax\", with the
marginal gloss: This tax was that one carried to heap for the poor a
common good of all that God had given.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 5. Her soul. That is, when it binds itself to fast, or to do anything
else with its body, to serve God, that soul is called so much as the
living body, as the Scriptures everywhere require.

**The 35th chapter.**

V. 5. Measure. This is spoken geometrica proportione. Namely, the suburb
shall be a thousand cubits wide around the city, and each side of the
city two thousand cubits long, that is, in German, the suburb shall be
half as wide as one side of the city is long, be it square, round,
triangular, or as it may, so it shall be measured and divided into four
sides, and according as it is large or small, the suburb shall also be
large or small, ut sic:^5^ ).

![image1](images/john-acts-1cor/image1.png)

4\) In 1524 the last words are missing: Es haben\'s aber hernach 2c.

5\) Missing 1524.

City

1698 **Erl. Ü4, 37-39, appendix. W. XLI, 463\*-467\*.** 1699

**The fifth Also Moses.**

**Chapter 3.**

V. 29. Home. Church or temple. 1)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 2. Preserve, for the doctrine of men hinders God\'s commandment and
leads away from the truth, Tit. 1:14. 1)

V. 34. For you, that is, for your sake.

V. 37. with his face, faciebus suis, scilicet nube et columna \[namely,
with the cloud and the pillar).

**Chapter 6.**

V. 7. Sharpen them, always practice them, so that they do not become
rusty or darken, but always remain in memory and word as new and bright.
For the more one acts on God\'s word, the brighter and newer it becomes,
and is called: the longer the better; but where it is not practiced, it
is soon forgotten and becomes ineffective 2c. 1)

**Chapter 11.**

V. 6. acquired in pedibus eorum \[with their feet). I have run and run,
that I got it together, non steti, nec otiosus fui (I have not stood
still, nor have I been idle), has become sour to me; erjagt, errannt, 2)
erlaufen.

**The 12th chapter.**

1524\. v. 21. so sacrifice. 3) How shall they sacrifice and yet not
sacrifice? Item: How shall they eat of the tithes, 2c. if they had to
give them to the Levites and priests? Answer: In the 14th chapter (v. 24
ff.), afterwards, he interprets it as follows: If the place was too far
away, they should freely eat or sell the tithes and everything that was
to be sacrificed, and make it money, and bring it to the place, and buy
and sacrifice other things as much, and give it to the priests.
Therefore the word \"sacrifice\" here must mean as much as \"to eat the
sacrifice\" or to compare it with money,

1\) Missing 1824.

2\) The Weimar Bible (1686) has instead of: \"errannt\" erarnt, i.e.
acquired.

3\) The 1524 edition has in the text: \"so opfere\" instead of: \"so
schlachte\".

and \"eat\" from the tithes or vows as much as \"let eat\", namely the
priests. But with such words it is also indicated that all the people
are priests before God, as he says in Exodus 19.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 2. This prophet teaches against the old and confirmed doctrine and
does not want to let the first doctrine remain (as he says, other gods):
he is not to be believed, even if he performs signs. But in chapter 18
\[v. 22\] the prophet is condemned who does not preach against the first
doctrine but against the new one; he must perform signs or not be heard.
4)

V. 8. Have mercy. This means to love GOD above all things. 4)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 15. Here is clearly promised another sermon than Moses\' sermon,
which cannot be the law, which was sufficiently given through Moses;
therefore it must be the gospel. And this prophet is none other than
Jesus Christ Himself, who brought such a new message to earth.

V. 22. Presumption. Here Moses speaks of the prophets who preach new
doctrine over the old and former doctrine. Such should not be believed
without signs. For God always confirms His new word with new signs. But
above, Cap. 13, 2, he speaks of the prophets who preach against the old
confirmed doctrine. These are not to be believed, even if they perform
signs, ut 8upra.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 19: It is wood. Why do you want to go against the trees and cut them
down, as if it were a man or a fortress in front of you? It is wood in
the field, not in the city; it does you no good and is useful to you.
Hic sensus congruit allegoriae, non esse pugnandum contra eos, qui non
sunt contra nos, sed pro nobis \[This understanding agrees with the
spiritual interpretation that one should not fight against those who are
not against us, but for us). 4)

4\) Missing 1524.

1700 Eri. 64, 38-41. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 5th book of Moses. W.
xxi, 4\"7\*-47i\*. 1701

> **The 23rd chapter.**

V. 9. evil. Lest thou thyself be wicked, and so lose the victory by way
of punishment, and be smitten, as happened in the days of Eli and Saul.
1)

> **Chapter 26.**

V. 14. Suffer. God\'s sacrifice is to be joyful, pure and holy,
therefore nothing is to be eaten of it in sadness, nothing is to be
taken of it in uncleanness, nothing is to be given of it to idols or to
the dead. 1)

> **The 28th chapter.**

V. 5. basket, that is all that you need at present, and that you set
aside to keep.

1524\. v. 29. lamentations. 2) This is when the people lament, howl and
cry over the trouble and misery in the land, as everything eats away and
disappears under hands, which happens that God does not bless the land,
but curses and scolds it.

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 9. your doings. Without God\'s word all our doings are foolishness.
3)

V. 19: I am well. These are the words and thoughts of the wicked: \"Hell
is not so hot, there is no need for it, the devil is not so terrible as
he is painted, which all the saints of works do insolently and
thievishly, even awaiting reward in heaven.

Because I am walking, that is, because I am doing so and am doing my
idolatry, then there is happiness. He who serves God is never well. 3)

1524\. That the drunkard, that is, the teacher and the disciple were
lost with each other. The teacher is the drunkard of his drunken wine,
as Isaiah says, who passes over and seduces with himself the thirsty and
empty souls, who always learn and never come to the truth, as Saint Paul
says.

V. 29. The secret. It means this much: God has given us Jews before all
peoples.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) The text in the 1524 edition reads, \"The HErr will send among you
disappearance and lamentation and flight.\"

3\) Missing 1524.

on earth reveals his will, and what he has in mind, therefore we should
also be all the more diligent.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 9. Too good. For the wicked also have honor and goods, often more
than the saints. But to their and others\' destruction. 4)

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 3. alone. Let our God alone be God, and have all glory, and no other.
4)

V. 4. rock. The Hebrew language calls GOD a rock, which is a defiance,
comfort, refuge and safeguard to all who rely and trust in Him.

righteous. In the case of the wicked, God must be wrong and let himself
be mastered. Matth. 11, 19: \"Wisdom must be justified by her
children\", they know everything better; as God does, it is not good. 4)

1524\. courts, that is, that they give justice to everyone and do wrong
to no one.

V. 17. Of which they have no command nor God\'s word, but choose new
services of their own devotion.

V. 25. deprive. Horror. That is, they will be widows and orphans on the
outside, deprived of children, men and women by the sword and in prison.
But what remains inside shall perish miserably by terror, that is, by
famine, pestilence, rebellion. 4)

V. 28. They do not respect God\'s word, but know better. 4)

V. 34. Sealed. They will not believe it until they know it, for it is
hidden from their eyes. 4)

V. 36. the closed and abandoned. Custoditum et neglectum, id est,
servatam rem et contemptam, quia tempore pacis contemptum est, quod
tempore malo libenter colligeres, si adesset, preciosum et vile. \[That
is, that which one has kept and yet despised, because one has not
respected that at the time of peace, which one would gladly pick up at
the evil time, if it were there, precious and little\]. 4)

4\) Missing 1524.

1702 **Erl. \"4, 41-43.** Appendix. **W. XXI, 47I\*-47S\*.** 1703

V. 42. Above the blood. These are three punishments of the sword. The
first, that they much be slain; the second, that they be led captive;
the third, that their head be made bare, that is, their kingdom and
priesthood be taken away from them, which is signified by the hair upon
their head.

**The 33rd chapter.**

V. 5 Office. He was not a king, nor did he have any, yet he kept the
people together so that they would have one head, like a king, and not
go astray scattered.

1524\. fullness of the king. The fullness is the people of Israel, who
are the fullness of Christ their King, as Paul calls Christianity the
fullness of Christ, Eph. 1.

V. 8. right. 1) This is, as Ex. 28 says, the sanctuary on the bosom. It
means: Your priestly office be blessed 2) before God and man, with
praying and teaching.

Addition 1524: as it was to Moses, who was given to them by the grace of
God.

V. 12. Lovely. That is, the temple and Jerusalem and kingdom was in
Benjamin. 3)

V. 13. Noble fruits. This is said of the kingdom of Israel, which was
highly blessed with everything that bore and gave heaven, sun, moon,
earth, mountain, valley, water and all temporal goods, and also had
prophets and holy rulers.

V. 18. excerpt. This is what Deborah and Barak did. Not. 5. 3)

V.20. The blessing of Gad was given by King Jehu, 2 Kings 9:10, when he
destroyed Baal and restored the people, and slew two kings and Jezebel.
4) And the teacher is Elijah the prophet, which was taken up into
heaven, and hid. For he was a citizen of Gilead in the tribe of Gad.

V. 27. God\'s dwelling place is in the people of Israel from the
beginning, under which they abide forever, as little chickens under the
arms or wings of the hen.

1\) 1524: \"Vollikeit\".

2\) Erlanger: happily blessed.

3\) Missing 1524.

4\) The following is missing from the 1524 edition.

**The Book of Joshua.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 8. He who acts according to God\'s word acts wisely and happily. He
who goes by his head acts unwisely and in vain. 5)

**Chapter 3.**

This story means that Christ, presented through the apostles in the
gospel, leads us into the kingdom of heaven through the dry Jordan,
which was fullest at that time. That is, the law, which troubles and
drives us with works, ceases through the gospel, so that our consciences
are free, joyful and secure before him, and follow Christ alone in
faith.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 2. Stone knife. Sharp as sharpened on stone. Ps. 89:44: Avertisti
petram gladii the sharpness of his sword is dull, that \[it\] cut not.
5)

V. 11. sang. Scorched ears, tostas spicas.

**Chapter 6.**

1524\. v. 6. hall year horn. These trumpets, made of horns, signify the
gospel of Christ, by which cry Jericho falls, the world and all its
power, but Rahab the sinner with her friends is kept, the works saints
are all lost.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 21. tongue. Clasps, shaped like a tongue. 5)

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 15. KiriathArba. From such Arba the city is called KiriathArba, that
is, Arba city, as we Germans say Carlstadt, Arnstadt 2c.

**The Book of Judges.**

**Chapter 3.**

V. 23. hall. The council chamber, ubi ordinati et erant sedes \[where
there were also chairs for necessity\]. 5)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 2. The song wants to say so much that God has smitten the Sissera by
the least of them.

5\) Missing 1524.

1704 Erl. 6i, 43-46. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Book of Judges. W.
xxi, 4?s\*-47s\*. 1705

People in Israel, that the lowly also once became high and great, when
the great high families of Israel sat still, and left them in trouble.
This is the new thing that the Lord has chosen. There the peasants of
Israel became glorious and also lords.

V. 6. crooked, that is, there was no regiment nor order in the land.

V. 9. f. Praise 2c. That is: You lords, judges and common men.

V. 11. scooping. That is, when the shooters of Sissera cried out in
distress at the water of Kison, when they used to scoop, God helped his
farmers and let the law go.

V. 14 root. That is, Joshua was the first prince of the tribe of
Manasseh, who smote Amalek and after him the others, until Zebulun also
once overcame a Joshua against Sisserah. And notice that she calls the
princes rulers who fight with pens, that is, they win more by faith in
God\'s word than with the sword.

V. 16 Hurdles. That is, you stayed at home, even though you heard the
poor band blowing in the field, and yet you were close to them.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 37. Fell.. It must be rendered in this way: A coat, whether it has
been the wool that has been shorn off. 1)

**Chapter 7.**

1524 V. 13. Barley bread is the preaching of the law; when it is
preached spiritually, it is the sword of the Spirit, and kills all
consciences, that they should acknowledge themselves sinners. Rom. 4 and
7.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 16. to feel, that is, to experience, to become aware of 2c.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 9. float. It does not exist, it is a shuckle. 3)

> **Chapter 11.**

V. 26. Three hundred years. These three hundred years begin with the
exodus from Egypt under Moses and end six years before the reign of
Jephthah.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Erlanger: \"the spiritual sermon\".

3\) Missing 1524.

V. 35. Bow or humble me. God has lifted me high through this victory, so
that I raised my head high and joyful. But you bow me down, so that I
must bow down my head with great heartache, and turn such high joy to
deep heartache.

V. 39. as he had vowed. One would have it that he had not sacrificed
them. But the text is clear. So both judges and kings are seen to have
done great deeds, but they must also do great foolish things to prevent
the evil pride.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 4. the fugitives to Ephraim. Id est, qui ad Ephraim fugerunt in
periculis. Non vos eripitis nos, sed nos vos fugitivos, quia sumus regia
tribus \[That is, those who fled to Ephraim in perils. You do not save
us, but we save you, who are fugitives; for we are the royal tribe.

1524\. fugitive field. That is, the Ephraites were proud, as if they
alone were militant, and despised the Gileadites, as the despondent
stupid people. This angered the Gileadites.

V. 6. shiboleth means an ear of corn, also probably means a country
road.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 19. Miraculous. It happened miraculously, as follows, that the angel
disappeared and ascended in the flame.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 8. shoulders and loins. That is, he struck them as they appeared to
him, whether they were of high or low estate.

V. 17. RamathLehi means a throwing down of the jaw.

1524\. ramathlehi means a lifting up of the jaw, but it means the
preaching of the law, and the water from the tooth \[the preaching\] of
the gospel. 4)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 2. Sworn. This woman will have vowed such money to give to the image,
which will not have pleased the son at first,

4\) Erlanger: \"Tooth of Evangelion.\"

1706 **Erl. 64, 46-48. appendix. W. XXI, 47S\*-482\*.** 1707

stole it from her, then let her complain, and gave it back, and let her
do what she wanted. Since it now worked out well (as such a thing is
wont to do), he also let it please him. 1)

V. 5. Theraphim we German das Heilige oder Heiligthum, wie zu unserer
Zeit die hölzernen Heiligen, Todtenbeine, Todtenkleider und dergleichen
Heiligentand 2) gehalten ist für Gottesdienst. For it is vox ambigua. 3)

He filled it, that is, he consecrated it, as it says in Ex 40:13.

**Chapter 18.**

V. 7. They had neither enemies nor masters.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 28. I, says God, will do it; until now you have wanted to do it; but
it is said: I, not you. 3)

V. 35. The Lord struck them, not Israel. For it is said: Gloria in
excelsis Deo etc. \[Glory to God in the highest.\] 3)

**The Book of Ruth.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 20. Naomi is the name of my desire.

Mara means bitter or sorrowful.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 7. That is, she is not one of the metzen who sit at home on the
cushion and laze around.

**Chapter 3.**

1524\. v. 9. (In the text: \"For thou art the husband after.\") After
when is said, he that had to take his brother\'s or next friend\'s wife
in marriage, to raise up seed to the deceased, as Deut. 25 says.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. ploni almoni, nomen loci incerti, id est, aliquo \[the name of an
uncertain place, that is, anywhere\^ you like.

V. 11. The Lord make the woman 2c. Id est: Det Deus, ut cum illa
magnificeris,

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Erlanger: todten Beine, todten Kleider und dergleichen heiligen
Tand\" 2c.

3\) Missing 1524.

ut certe factum est, nam peperit Obed, avum Davidis \[that is, GOD grant
that you may be raised with her, as certainly happened, for she bore
Obed, the grandfather of David\^.

**The first book of Samuelis.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 3. old. The fixed, certain, honest, as one speaks, custom, old
tradition, country customs and ways; for on this people defy and say:
\"Eh, dear, the old ways are the best. Our ancestors were not fools
either. And so they insist against God\'s work, as if he did not have to
change it, nor change it again. 4)

V. 5. sold for bread, that is, they must serve for bread. 4)

1524 V. 14. Thus the doctrine of men always works against the doctrine
of God, and corrupts them, and compels men by force, and causes
blasphemy, as is signified here.

V. 18. ephod, which were priestly garments, of which 2 blos. 28, 6.

V. 25. Si Deus offenditur, et non ipse per se remiserit, non est aliquis
alius, vel superior, qui inter ipsum offensum et offensorem mediare
possit, sicut inter homines etc.. \[When GOD is offended, and He does
not Himself bestow mercy, there is no other or superior who can mediate
between the offended and the offended as among men 2c.\^

1524 This is not to be understood as if sin done against God could not
be forgiven, but this is what is said: If God is not a friend, no friend
helps; but if he is a friend, it does not matter if no one is a friend,
so that all this is said of the nature of sin, how much greater it is
done against God than against a man.

V. 29. Like Apost. 9, 5, S. Paul licks against the sting, that is,
insolently and wantonly. 4)

V. 33. Non auferam quidem de altari meo, sed diu non vivent, quia, ubi
adoleverint, morientur \[Though I will not take them away from my altar,
they shall not live long, for they will die as soon as they have become
men\]. 4)

4\) Missing 1524.

1708 Erl. 64, 4s-5o. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 1st book of Samuelis.
W. xxi, E-486\*. 1709

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. There were not enough preachers nor pastors, the Bible was lying
under the pew, no one studied it. Samuel came and pulled it out again
rc. 1)

V. 21. Id est: Deus coepit apparere copioso verbo sub Samuele \[That is,
God began to show Himself through abundant preaching of the Word among
Samuels. 1)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 18. When men and reason are incumbent, God\'s word and all honor is
gone. There the right priesthood falls back and dies, and all this out
of God\'s wrath. But those who win have no rest in their conscience
afterwards. For where God\'s word does not go right, it does all kinds
of harm to the consciences, as here the ark of God did to the
Philistines, until they finally have to confess their shame, that they
have perverted God\'s word, and have to make it right again with honor.
This is what is meant here by the golden veins and mice, which is
nothing but the secret plague of the conscience, which will finally be
revealed by God\'s word, as S. Paul says in 2 Tim. 3, 9: \"Their
foolishness will be revealed to everyone.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 2. wept. That is, they were grieving and lamenting to the Lord over
the Philistines.

V. 9. little milk lamb. That is, which is still at the milk. 1)

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 12. Who is their father? That is, let them prophesy. It is not born
of the father, but of God, who is the true father.

V. 22. Hidden. Honor is to flee and be driven to it.

**Chapter 11.**

1524 V. 2. Poke out the right eye. These are the teachers who cut out
the eye of faith, which is the right eye, and leave the left eye, that
is, reason, which causes all shame among God\'s people.

1\) Missing 1524.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 13. God confirms the king, and yet is angry that they had chosen him.
That is so much, they did wrong to put their trust from God in a man and
themselves, when so often they had been saved by God without a king. In
addition, because they were promised to have kings, God does not allow
them to choose him, but chooses him himself, so that everything God does
and does not do is not valid before God.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 23. 2) Here he calls toil the vice of one\'s own works, because they
make one\'s conscience troublesome.

V. 29. One should not change God\'s word, nor improve it. It cannot be
changed. 3)

1524\. v. 32. tenderly, 4) that is, he poses boldly and courageously, as
one who despises death and thus drives away the bitterness of death.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 24. naked. Not that he was naked, but laid aside the royal garments,
and put on only common garments, as another man. And fell down all the
day, that is, he prayed with them, and when they fell down, he also fell
down with them.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 30. You disobedient villain. Filius non heroicus, sed mulieris
ignominiosae, vilis, degeneris \[Not the son of a hero, but of a
contemptible woman, a bad, degenerate person\]. 5)

**Chapter 21.**

V. 5. In Scripture, every body is called a testimony, as also Apost. 9,
15. Christ says of S. Paul: \"He is my chosen witness\" 2c., because God
works with it, like a craftsman with his witness. Now here David wants
to say: If the person is holy, then everything is holy that one eats,
drinks, does or leaves, as S. Paul Tit. 1, 15. says: \"To the pure all
things are pure.\"

2\) 1524 has iin text: Unruliness is trouble and idolatry.

3\> Missing 1524.

4\) 1524: \"tenderly\" instead of: confidently.

5\) Missing 1524.

1710 **Erl. 64, 50-53. appendix. W. XXI, 486\*-49v\*.** 1711

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 28. Sela Mahelkoth, that is, Sheol Rock.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 4. Cover his feet. So chaste is the holy scripture that it means to
cover feet, to go into the secret chamber.

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 36. with himself. Neminem invitavit nec pauperes curavit \[He invited
no one, nor took care of the poor\]. 1)

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 3. Samuel had died. This is what the Scripture says, so that it may
warn everyone to understand the following ghost of Samuel and to know
that Samuel is dead, and that the evil spirit speaks and does this with
the sorceress and Saul in Samuel\'s person and name.

V. 6. The light is that which was on the priest\'s bosom, Ex 28:30.

V. 13. Gods, that is, judges. Ex 22, 8. And the silk skirt is the
priestly skirt. Ex 28, 31.

**The other book Samuelis.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 18. bow. This is the name of this song, just as many songs have names
in our country. 1)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 16. Helkath Hazurim, that is, the field of the feasts or heroes.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 6 These blind and lame were their idols, which they set on the walls
to defy David, as their patrons to protect them. As they do now with the
holy images. 2) As if he wanted to say: You are not at war with us, but
with our gods; fight with them, they will defend you. Not that they
called them blind and lame, but the spirit of the gods.

**1)** Missing 1524.

2\) The following is missing in 1524.

God in those who described the histories afterwards, so it is called.

V. 20. Perez means a crack or compartment, hence this place is called
BaalPrazim, crack man, that the Philistines are cracked there.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 19. This is a way of a man who is God the Lord. That is, you speak to
me of such an eternal kingdom, where no one can be king, he must be God
and man, because he is my son, and yet for and for shall be king, which
belongs to God alone. 3)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 1. These have all been great wars, but especially briefly described.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 25. Jedid Ja means: pleasing to the Lord.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 20. single. 4) That is, she kept herself inside, no longer went, like
a virgin in a wreath, among the people rc. 5)

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 7. These forty years we count from the first anointing of David; for
he is anointed twenty years \[old\], and suffered persecution ten years,
and in the thirtieth year confirmed and accepted king. 5)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 9. large oak. That is, branchy. 5)

V. 12. Hear: suffer thou. 5)

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 1. famous. One of the great Hanses, of the high nobility, who had
great following among the people and a reputation or name, as Catilina
at Rome rc. 5).

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 42. To love one another. Those who want to earn God\'s favor with
many services, mean it sincerely and do it seriously; but without God\'s
word, out of their own chosen presumption, as our monks and all
idolaters do. 5)

3\) Missing 1524.

4\) Erlanger: Leidig.

5\) Missing 1524.

1712 Erl. s4, 53-55. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 2nd book of Samuel.
W. xxi, 49o\*-4W\*. 171Z

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 4. Without clouds. Moses sets up the kingdom of the law from Mount
Sinai, with thunder, clouds, lightning, terrible. But this kingdom will
be lovely, as it is in the spring, when it has rained and the sun shines
early. 1)

V. 5. Nothing grows. No kingdom is so high in the sight of God, nor will
it so grow, but will pass away. This kingdom alone endures forever. 1)

V. 6. Belial are those who are hostile to the kingdom of Christ, as
Jews, Popes, heretics, Turks 2c. They alone want to be useful and the
best, and yet they are the most harmful. That is why they are called
Belial, the useless or harmful. Thus Jer. 23:30 says of the false
prophets, \"They are of no use to this people with their usefulness,\"
that is, they are the most harmful, precisely because they want to be
useful. 1)

V. 8 Jas abeam. In this place it is written in Hebrew thus: \"These are
the names of the heroes of David: Joseb, Basebeth, Thachmoni, the
noblest of the three. Ipse adino haez- nib, and smote eight hundred at
one time.\" There we consider that the text was corrupted by a scribe,
for example from a book, unrecognizable writing and from bad letters,
and was thus made adino for orer and haeznib for ethhanitho. For the
Ebraei know well how to read in evil handwriting Daleth for Res, Bau for
Nun, He for Thau, and again. Therefore we have it after the text 1
Chron. 12, 11. corrigirt, because the text in this place gives nothing.
The same may have happened in the little word three, item eight hundred,
which in Chronicles stands for thirty, item three hundred. But this can
have another opinion, ut infra 1 Chron. 12, 11. 1)

**Chapter 24.**

V. 23. This Arasna will have been the Jebusite king in Jerusalem, and
afterward converted to God, became pious and blessed, forsook the
kingdom for God\'s sake.

**The first book of the kings.**

**Chapter 6.**

V.? thirty cubits high. In the other part of Chronicles Cap. 3, 4. the
text speaks,

1\) Missing 1524.

the house was a hundred and twenty cubits high, which is speaking of the
whole height of the house; but here he speaks of the lowest room alone,
which was thirty cubits high.

The windows that are wide on the inside and narrow on the outside cannot
be seen in much, but they can be seen out much. This rhymes well with
the mystery: Spiritualis homo omnia judicat, et ipse a nemine judicatur
\[The spiritual man judges everything, but is judged by no one\]. A
spiritual man knows everything and looks well, but no one knows him.
This is to my mind that the text says, The windows of the house were
open and shut; to me within they are open, to thee without they are
shut. 2)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 37. fire. When the grain \"appeared or was burned by the sun. 2)

V. 41. stranger. This house shall be a house of prayer to all nations.
2)

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 11. Lifting is a tree in India land.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 13. miplezeth. Who the Miplezeth was is uncertain. Some say it was
the idol Priapus.

**Chapter 18.**

V. 26. Limped. The false saints, when they want to be devout, throw
their heads to both sides, as a goose walks, so that it seems like a
limping man wobbles to and fro on both sides. Hence also the Passover
comes, Ex. 12, when God passed through in Egypt, and limped, that he
smote deadly on both sides here and there, as a drunken man walketh. Sic
supra: ,,Ut quid claudicatis in duas partes significat impios esse vagos
et duplices animo, nihil certe habere, Eph. 4, 14. Inde etiam saltare^4^
) dicuntur tales, quia motu capitum similes sunt saltantibus et vere
capitibus saltant (So above (v. 21.): \"How long do you limp on both
sides?\" indicates that the

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) i.e. ebony.

4\) \"altare set by us instead of: \"liters.

1714 **Erl. \"4, 55-57. appendix. W. XXI, 4S3\*-497\*.** 1715

Godless are uncertain and doubtful in heart, having nothing certain,
Eph. 4, 14. Therefore it is also said of such people that they dance,
because by the movement of the heads they are like the dancers and in
truth dance with the heads\]. 1)

1524\. v. 32. sath is a measure of grain, as Christ also says of Matth.
13, where He calls three saths flour.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 11. Do not boast. That is, let him not boast until he comes over the
mountain, for he who has won puts off his armor and may boast, but he
who puts it on has not yet won.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 7. if you. Tu nunc facis regnum super Israel, id est: It is you who
make Israel a kingdom; without you it would be nothing. 1)

V. 10. Blessed, that is, blasphemed. For the scripture calls the cruel
vice called \"blaspheming God\" in this place most chastising, as also
Job 2:9 is written. But blaspheming God had forbidden Moses at death. So
the kingdom of Israel was established by God, that blaspheming the king
also concerned God.

V. 27. sackcloth, that is, distressed, lowly garments, as when one wears
or works in sorrow.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 34. As the sword hangs on, from the armpit over to the hip. 1)

V. 38. harlots. Since the harlots wash, id est: cauponae lotrices \[that
is, the washerwomen of a common house\]. 2)

**The second book of the kings.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 3. From your heads. To be at the head is to be master and teacher; to
be at the feet is to be pupil and subject. For when the teacher teaches,
he sits higher than the pupil, so that he puts them at his feet, and
they at his feet.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) In the Weimar Bible this is translated: \"hostesses, laundresses.
This translation is possible, but does not seem to fit here.

have him at their heads. So S. Paul says Apost. 22, 3. that he learned
the law at the feet of Gamaliel. And it is almost a common way of
writing to speak in Hebrew.

V. 9. Twofold. Elisha did not want to have a twofold spirit of Elijah,
since it is one spirit, 1 Cor. 12:3, in all the saints, but a twofold
mouth of the same spirit, so that he could preach stronger and more than
Elijah did.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 27. Then Israel was very angry. Vel quod ipsi Israel, offensi ista
abominatione, timuerunt, ne Deus in ipsos quoque irasceretur \[Or
Israel, angered by this abomination, may have feared that God would be
angry with them also. 3)

V. 13. I live, that is, I have nothing to do at court. I live alone
among the people. 3)

V. 17. At the same time about a year. Id est: More anni currentis, quo
vivitur a cunctis animantibus \[That is, after the manner of the yearly
course, as all living creatures have it. 3)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 18. Leaning hand. This is spoken in Hebrew, as we Germans say: He is
at my hand, that is, he is around me, does and executes what I command
him, and I rely on him.

V. 26. Did not walk. That is, Did you not walk anywhere? How is it then
that my heart walked, and was with the chariot? 2c.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 33. Evil. Yes, this is how we are when we serve your God, you unholy
prophets. How much better we had it when we served Baal! Jer. 44:17, 18.
3)

**Chapter 9.**

V. 11. frenzy. Non quod attoniti aut devoti, ut Rabbini delirant, sed
quod impii prophetas vocant furiosos, sicut hodie etc. \[Not that they
were furious or enraptured, as the rabbis are nonsensical, but because
the

3\) Missing 1524.

1716 Erl.kt, 57-59. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 2nd book of Kings. W.
XXI, 497\*-501\*. 1717

Godless call the prophets frenzies, as nowadays 2c.\]. 1)

V. 13. high steps. Hic fingendum

est, fuisse sellam magistratus, elevatam in urbe, candidam quasi osseam.
Huc posuerunt Jehu; sed quia pompa regia tam cito non poterat tapetis
ornari, suas vestes substernebant, in pompa festinantes scilicet [Here
one must imagine that a regent\'s chair had been there, which was
elevated in the city, white like ivory. On it they had put Jehu. But
because the royal chair could not be decorated so quickly with carpets,
they spread their clothes over it, namely, by hurrying with the
unfolding of the splendor\]. 1)]{.underline}

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 22. About the clothing house, which is, about the vestry.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 5. of the Sabbath. These were the ones who waited for the king\'s
service, one week after the other; when one part went off, the other
came on.

V. 12. Testimony. This was the book of Moses, the fifth, which was
commanded to the king \[Deut. 17:18, 19\].

**Chapter 16.**

V. 18. covering under which they sat or stood on the Sabbath, as princes
and lords do now under carpets or paneled seats. 1)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 9. They wanted to defend their sin as right and proper, as all
heretics and idolaters do. 1)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 4. A bold king is he who breaks down the serpent, commanded and
erected by God Himself at that time, because it had fallen into the
abuse of idolatry, and may contemptuously preach 2) that it is
Nehusthan, that is, a small piece of iron, a small piece of brass, a
small little carpenter, what kind of God should that be? 3)

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Erlanger: \"that\" instead of: \"thar\", that is, may (from
\"thüren\").

3\) Missing 1524.

V. 17 Rabsake. Rabsake in German means an archbishop. 4)

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 5 Camarim. These were peculiar spiritual people, as now the most
respectable and strict monks want to be. Therefore they also have a name
Camarim, which reads as of heated, great devotion. And the incense was
valid with them, as with us of the monks singing and praying in the
church. For incense means prayer everywhere in the Scriptures. But as
this is prayer, so was that incense, both human, without God\'s spirit
and word.

V. 13. Mashith means corruption; and it is thought to have been the
Oelberg, where the malefactors were put down, which we call the
Galgenberg or Rabenstein.

V. 17. Tomb. But what such chamber or gazophylacia, and tomb or grave
marker are, you will well find in Jeremiah and Ezekiel. 4)

**The first book of the Chronicles.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 52. sahe. The prophets are called seers or showers in the Scriptures,
and \"to see\" means to teach or preach. So this Sobal has been a
prophet or preacher in half of Manuhoth; this is a name of a country,
which is perhaps quiet and well situated, therefore it is called
Manuhoth, which means rest. 4)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 3 Egla. This one alone is called David\'s wife, perhaps because she
was the first and only one while he was still tending sheep. 4)

**The 6th chapter (otherwise 5th).**

V. 20. Ask. See how faith is able to do all things, as Christ says.
\[Matth. 21, 22.\] 4)

**The 10th chapter (otherwise 9th).**

V. 2. Nethinim means the given or the given, and were the Levites who
had given themselves especially to God\'s service, where God\'s
tabernacle and the ark were, among the priests.

4\) Missing 1524.

1718 **Erl. 84, 5S-6S. App. W. XXI, 501\*-505\*.** 1719

V. 22. Through their faith. This is what is said: They did not make such
a foundation out of human devotion and good opinion, but out of God\'s
command and their faith. For in the things of God no human foundation or
work shall be valid.

**The 12th chapter (otherwise 11th).**

V. 11. Three hundred. 2 Sam. 23:8 stands for eight hundred. Whoever
attacks a company of eight hundred and kills three hundred, and puts the
five hundred to flight, he has killed all eight hundred. Thus, since it
says \"among thirty,\" the text above in 2 Sam. 23:8 means \"among
three. For he that is chiefest among the best three is chiefest also
among the thirty. 1)

V. 18. Poured, that is, he offered it to God as a drink offering. 1)

**The 15th chapter (otherwise 14th).**

V. 11. B a alprazim. Baal means a householder or man, perez means a rift
or compartment; therefore this place must be called Baalprazim, because
the Philistines are divided and torn there.

**The 16th chapter (otherwise 15th).**

1524 V. 16. In this chant there were two voices, one high up, the other
low down. Therefore that lanacea is called Hasmonith, that is, up in the
octave. But the other in the bass, which is called Alalamoth, that is,
dark and low. Hence the titles on the psalms are: Alalamoth, super
octavam.

**The 17th chapter (otherwise 16th).**

These three Hebrew words, cicar, espar, asisa, mean not only the
materia, as bread, meat, wine, but also the measure or weight, as I
speak in German: He gave a loaf of bread, a pound of meat, a goblet of
wine. 1)

**The 18th chapter (otherwise 17th).**

V. 17. me. That is, not my person, but my blood\'s offspring, scilicet
in futurum et longinquum \[namely, in the future and in the distant
time\^, who will be such a man, who in height is GOD the LORD, Ps.

1\) Missing 1524.

89, 7. Who can be like God among the children of God? He is also God\'s
child, but far above other God\'s children, as he himself is also God.
2)

**The 19th chapter (otherwise 18th).**

V. 10. Blessing. Congratulations.

**The 20th chapter (otherwise 19th).**

V. 3. to turn back, as one turns back a thing, to look at it behind and
in front, which one actually wants to explore. 2)

**The 22nd chapter (otherwise 21st).**

V. 8. David insisted on the vain doctrine, that he wanted to see how the
kingdom had increased so gloriously through him, as through his doing.
There you see that fiducia operis \[trusting in works vain doctrine is
against God\'s honor and an idolatry. 2)

V. 16. sacks. That is, small, coarse garments, as sacks are made of
them, as with us the smocks and coarse linen (see 1 Kings 21:27.). 2)

V. 19. according to the words of Gad. Nota, quod non electicium locum,
sed ostensum elegit works, that he did not choose a place of his own
choice, but that which was shown to him. 2)

**The 23rd chapter (otherwise 22nd).**

V. 9. peace. Solomon is called Peaceful or Frederick.

V. 14. A centner is at a thousand florins, but in one place less or more
2c. In Graecia it is 600 crowns. 2)

**The 24th chapter (otherwise 23rd).**

V. 3. thirty. The Hebrew Bible seems to be falsified here, because
otherwise twenty is written everywhere, ut paulo infra in 4. paragrapho
et in Moses 2) \[as soon after v. 26. and in Moses\].

**The 26th chapter (otherwise 25th).**

V. 5. To sound the horn. I observe that this Heman had been David\'s
prophet, in royal business concerning the kingdom, as he should have
contended and ruled. For horn means ever regiment and kingdom.

2\) Missing 1524.

[1720 Erl. 64, 6S-64. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 1st book of
Chronicles. W. XXI, SOS\*-SOS\*. 1721]{.underline}

**The 27th chapter (otherwise 26th).**

V. 6. heroes, because the priests had to be the foremost in the army
with the trumpets at the time of war 2c. 1)

**The 29th chapter (otherwise 28th).**

V. 11. Solomon builds by God\'s command, according to the word of God,
promised to his father David, sup. 18, 12. David also gives him the
pattern for it, because he does not like self-chosen worship and works.
1)

**The second book of the chronicles.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 6. provide. Apost. 17, 24. God is not to be cared for. 1)

V. 8. lifting is to be a wood in India. 2) Is perhaps what is now called
sanding. 3)

V. 13. HuramAbif. Quite a few books have HuramAbi. 3)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. Moria. From this mountain Abraham sacrificed his son, Gen. 22, 2.
Arnan is thought to have been the king of the Jebusites, and converted
to God Abraham; to speak of this in Commenten. 3)

**Chapter 6.**

V. 5. Notice here how everything must be done by God\'s command, so that
no one may worship out of his own devotion. For Solomon here praises
both the city of Jerusalem and the person of David, that they are both
chosen by God. 3)

V. 17. Now also let \[Solomon\'s\] word come true, which you, God, have
spoken, to walk in his law, or it will be trouble. 3)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 13. supplies, not only of grain, but also of stuff, weapons or armor.
3)

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 11. Testimony. Fine is given to the king both the crown and the book,
that he might

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Compare I Kings 10:11.

3\) Missing 1524.

not only powerful, but also wise, or (how to speak) knowing God\'s word
and right. So now kings are made with a sword and book 2c. 4)

**Chapter 26.**

V. 5. visions. The visions are prophecies. He wants to say that
Zechariah was taught in Moses and the prophets, Samuel, David, Gab and
the like. 4)

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 19. This nakedness was that the people did not live under GOD
according to His word, but freely according to their own conceit in
worship, as, Ex. 32:25, Aaron stripped the people.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 19. Holy purity. That is, God looks at the heart; if it is righteous
in God\'s sight, He does not ask for outward purity, which is holy
according to the law.

**The 31st chapter.**

V. 4. so that they would not have to leave the books for lack of food,
both to study and to teach, and to seek their food. For church servants
should be fed and study, as Nehemiah \[Cap. 13, 10. 11.\] and Sirach
\[Cap. 39, 1. 2.\] also say. 4)

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 22. As a shepherd keepeth his sheep against the wolves, and keepeth
them to go to pasture, so they that were at Jerusalem might safely go
out and come in. rc. 4)

**The 36th chapter.**

V. 15. Early. That is, he told them beforehand so that they would have
time enough to mend their ways before the punishment came.

**The Book of Ezra.**

**Chapter 9.**

V. 8. 9. nail and fence is spoken in proverbial terms, that all the
rest, land and people, have perished, and they are left as a nail from
the house, and a fence from the land.

4\) Missing 1524.

1722 **Erl. 84, 64-67. appendix. W. XXI, S09\*-5I3\*.** 1723

**That too Nehemiah.**

**Chapter 3.**

V. 5. mighty ones. The poor must bear the cross; the rich give nothing.
Taus Eß 1) has not, Sees Zing does not give, Quater Three the help
freely. 2)

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 11. [Jaddua]{.underline}. This is Jaddus, who received the great
Alexander at Jerusalem. So Nehemiah, perhaps Ezra also, reached
Alexander, and find become old and outlived four or five high priests.
2)

**Esther too.**

**Chapter 8.**

V. 8. Revoked. That is, because the previous letters to Haman were
sealed with the king\'s seal, it would not have helped the Jews if they
had not been revoked anew by other letters 2c.

**The Book of Job.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 1. Job est Iobab, rex Edom, Gen. 36, 33., scilicet juxta Arabiam
felicem, in petraea Arabia, quia irruunt in eum Sabaei \[Job is Jobab,
the king of Edom, Gen. 36, 33., namely close to happy Arabia, in stony
Arabia, because the Sabaeans attacked him\].

V. 3. He was more glorious. Not that he was so rich and mighty, but
because of his wisdom, understanding and godliness he was more glorious
than others. 2)

V. 11. Bless, that is, curse and blaspheme.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 4. skin for skin, that is, for his skin he lets go children, cattle,
servants and all others\' skin.

V. 9. Yes, bless God. Yes, you do fine, praise and serve God, and perish
over it. 2)

1\) About the presumed interpretation of this proverb, see the
collection of proverbs in this volume.

2\) Missing 1524.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 10. My womb, from which I was born, that is, my mother\'s womb.

V. 14 Desert. To deal with building where nothing has been built before.

V. 21. hidden, that is, from the earth. 3)

V. 23. covered. What shall he live who for fear knows not whither from,
whither to? Better dead 2c.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 6. is this. That is: Now you see how pious you are, that God punishes
you like this.

V. 10. 4) Roar. The lions and lionesses are the rich and powerful on
earth who oppress the poor.

V. 18. messengers or angels. 5)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1. saints. That is, show me a saint who is innocently afflicted, as
you mean. But the foolish and unruly \[v. 2\] he calls here the loose,
insolent people who do not ask about God. The wrath and zeal of God
corrupts such.

V. 5. He calls the hungry and thirsty the robbers and tyrants.

V. 6. does not go. That is, man earns it with sins, otherwise it would
not come to him anywhere.

V. 23. Your covenant. That is, the stones will preserve your grain,
because a wall will be made around it.

> **Chapter 6.**

1524\. v. 2. my wrath, 6) that is, God\'s wrath that afflicts 7) me.

V. 5. The game. 8) That is, you have good comfort, you lack nothing. One
eats nothing unsalted, if one knows it better; but I must probably now
this and that 2c.

3\) Missing 1524.

4\) Erlanger: v. 11.

5\) Missing 1524.

6\) In the edition of 1524, as we assume, it says: \"my wrath\" instead
of: \"my sorrow\". The Erlangen edition offers: \"V. 1. 1524. (My
wrath.) That is: God\'s wrath, which does not plague.\"

7\) \"me\" put by us instead of: \"not\".

8\) 1524: the forest donkey.

1724 Erl. St, K7-6S. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Book of Job. W. XXI,
5I3\*-SI8\*. 1725

V. 10. Not denied. That is: I do not deserve to be afflicted like this.
If God would, I would be dead.

V. 17. To pine away, that is, because my friends are now rushing by like
waters, and they know me not; if even once a heat shall oppress them,
they shall then dry up and wither away, because they now forsake me.

V. 19. The ways of the subject. That is, they keep it with those who
robbed me, as it says above in chapter 1; they give them justice and me
injustice.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 3. In vain. That is, I have sought rest and an end to labor; but it
is in vain, restlessness still remains.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 9. Orio n is the bright star at noon, which the peasants call
Jacob\'s staff. The mother hen or the hen are the seven small stars.

V. 13. The proud lords. The proud lords who rely on their power and can
help anyone. 1)

V. 28. pains, \[scilicet, ne redeant \[namely, they would like to
return\^. 1)

V. 31. clothes, that is, my virtue.

**The 1V. Chapter.**

V. 8. Around and around. There is nothing in me that you did not make or
that is not yours. Nor do you reject me as if I had been made by someone
else who was your enemy. You do not even take care of your own. 1)

V. 12. Breath, that is, my life, which the breath indicates.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 12. Wild, that is, free and of his will.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 5. despised little light, id est, glowing wick. 1)

V. 13. With him. That is, you say wisdom is with the grandfathers; but I
say it is with God, who alone destroys all kings, priests, judges,
authority, art, holiness.

1\) Missing 1524.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 14. Bite. That is, why should I mortify myself much and hurt myself,
if I am to die and am not helped? Item, to put my soul into the hands,
that is, to dare much, and to give into driving.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 19. Hope. That is, before death he has no hope in this life.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 2. to distend one\'s belly, 2) that is, to be full of loose words.

V. 11, low. That is, do you think God comforts sinners, and throws his
comfort fo little? You must first become pious 2c.

V. 27. gloats, scilicet contra Deum, sicut bos pinguis, crassus et
pugnax \[namely, against GOD, like a fat, thick and poking ox\]. 3)

**Chapter 16.**

V. 8. This is their remedy against me. 3)

V. 15. Horn. That is, my power, might and dominion, and what I relied
on. 3)

**The 17th chapter.**

1524\. v. 7. wrath. 4) That is, before the plague that comes from God\'s
wrath.

**Chapter 18.**

V. 4. That is, God will not do it differently with you than with all the
others, and will not leave His ways for your sake.

V. 13. prince. That is, the power and authority of death, thus also \[v.
14\] king of terror, is the authority of terror, that he must succumb
and cannot escape.

V. 16 Root. Root means everything that is planted in the earth; harvest
means everything that grows up, be it grain, oil, wine 2c.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 9. glory, crown, hope is all spoken of temporal life in good rest 2c.

2\) In the 1524 edition: \"air\" instead of: to distend his belly.

3\) Missing 1524.

4\) 1524: \"Anger\" instead of: Mourning.

1726 **Erl. \"4, 69-71. appendix. W. XXI, 5I8\*-S22\*.** 1727

V. 22. Be satisfied, that is, cannot stop biting and punishing me.

V. 25. savior. Savior, vindex, quia Christus vindicat nos contra
homicidam nostrum diabolum. \[Avenger, because Christ avenges us against
our murderer, the devil. 1)

> **The 20th chapter.**

V. 12. is missing. When he begins wickedness, he has pleasure and rest;
but it will not last, will soon taste bitter.

V. 16. Suck, that is, he will suffer mortal heartache and sorrow, and be
deprived of everything good.

V. 26. puffed up, that is, a fire kindled by GOD; not puffed up by men,
but kindled by GOD.

> **Chapter 21.**

V. 13. moment. That is, they live well until death, and if there is an
evil moment with them, they are through. But I have to suffer terror and
misfortune for such a long time.

V. 31. To repay, that is, who can judge what is to be repaid to him
without God alone.

V. 32. heap, that is, there is also a grave prepared for him among other
graves.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 11. Darkness means gloom and misfortune. Light again means happiness
and salvation.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 13. one. So Gal. 3, 20: \"God is one; but of one there is no
mediator.\"

**Chapter 24.**

V. 1. The times. Because God lets the wicked do as they please, it seems
as if he knows nothing about it. Since you say that he punishes the
wicked and not the pious, you must admit that he does not know, and
those who know him do not know at what time he will punish, as you pride
yourselves on knowing.

V. 5. The game, the free impudent people and tyrants.

V. 18. That is, those who follow fornication

1\) Missing 1524.

go, kill their property, and leave it unbuilt.

1524 V. 23. on their doings. That is, lest they make a rebellion against
him, he subdues them evermore, and so must seek safety by guile; but it
lasts not.

**Chapter 26.**

V. 5. scores. The great whale fish, which mean the great tyrants on
earth.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 8. Hypocrite in this book means a false man everywhere, as they all
are before God, without faith.

V. 15. Do not weep. They will be glad that he is dead.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 3. darkness. That is, one finally digs so deep that one finds what
lies hidden in the darkness of the earth.

V. 8. Proud children, these are young lions.

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 6. In butter, that is, since I had all left over, all fat and full.

V. 20. bow. That is, my power always increased.

V. 24. laughed. Being friendly and cheerful with them, they did not
therefore become bold to despise me; id est, familiaritas mea non pe-
perit apud eos mei contemptum. \[That is, that I was so friendly with
them did not make me despised by them\].

**The 30th chapter.**

V. 11. They, the Chaldeans, have unharnessed my rope, id est-,
deposuerunt, privarunt curru et aurigatu, id est, dominio^2^ ) meo.
\[That is, they have deposed me, they have deprived me of my chariot and
harness, that is, of my dominion\]. 3)

V. 18. That is, many a misfortune is done to me mightily, that I cannot
help it, and girds me, that I cannot come out, and must have it on like
a skirt at my neck.

2\) dominio set by us instead of domino in the Erlanger.

3\) Missing 1524.

1728 Erl. \"4, 71-74. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Book of Job. W. XXI,
S22\*-5W\*. 1729

V. 24. Do not stretch out your hand to the charnel house. That is, in
the charnel house I will ever have rest.

**The 31st chapter.**

V. 21. driven. 1) Driven now and then. 2)

V. 26. Light, that is, when I was blessed, did I not have my joy in it?

V. 27. To kiss one\'s hand is to praise one\'s own work, which belongs
to God alone.

V. 31. That is, My servants also did not have to covet anything from my
enemies.

V. 37. Prince. Free, undaunted.

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 20. Get breath. Otherwise I suffocate with great wisdom. 2)

**The 33rd chapter.**

V. 14. considers. Sicut homo post factum consulit, poenitet et cogitat
mutare. Triumphator in Israel (inquit Samuel \[1 Sam. 15, 29.\]) non
poenitet nec mutat. \[Just as a man, after it has happened, ponders,
regrets, and intends to change. \"The hero in Israel (says Samuel) does
not repent, nor does he change.\"\] 2)

V. 17. Like Abimelech, Gen. 20, 3.

V. 21. may not see well. That his face may pass away, that he may
neither see nor hear. 2)

V. 29. Two or three times. That is, many times.

**The 34th chapter.**

V. 6. My arrows. These are God\'s arrows that are in me.

V. 30. That is, he lets a tyrant rule, who sows and torments the people
with levies and tortures.

**The 35th chapter.**

V. 10. songs, that is, of the birds\' songs; or spiritually, to praise
him in sorrow and calamity, as the Psalm also says, Et nocte canticum
ejus \[\"and at night I sing to him,\" Ps. 42:9.\^

1\) The 1545 edition has in the text, \"Have I run my hand over the
orphan.\"

2\) Missing 1524.

**Luther\'s Works. Vol. \>HI.**

**The 36th chapter.**

V. 30. all the ends of the sea, id est, ab occidente in orientem. \[That
is, from the setting of the sun to the exit.\]

1524\. His light. That is, he makes it beautiful in the sky and on the
sea, where the clouds come from and are raised.

**The 37th chapter.**

1524\. v. 7. crossed. That is, when it thunders, people are terrified,
even the wild animals.

V. 22. Gold. That is, bright weather, like pure gold.

**The 38th chapter.**

V. 14 The seal. That is, their status and nature, which they want to be
sure of as sealed.

V. 36. hidden, that is, into the heart.

**The 39th chapter.**

V. 1. (Cap. 38, 39.) 1524 has in the text: \"The game of the lions\",
instead of \"the young lions\", with the gloss: The game. That is, that
they have eaten game enough.

V. 20. 3) Price. That is, it is only the more defiant and courageous,
and snorts, as if it boasts, where terrible things, as strife and war,
are present.

V. 24. 4) does not pay attention. That is, it acts as if nothing
mattered to it, which is nevertheless so terrible.

**The 40th chapter.**

V. 10 Behemoth means all great monstrous beasts, as Leviathan means all
great monstrous fish. But under it he describes the power and authority
of the devil and his servants, the godless house in the world.

V. 20. He calls Leviathan the great whale fish in the sea, but under it
he describes the prince of the world, the devil, with his followers.

**The 41st chapter.**

1524 V. 1 has in the text: \"When he is awakened, he will not be so
cruel\", with the gloss: so cruel. That is: because no one can resist
me, I will resist him so that he will not have to be so cruel.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 23.\"

4\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 27.\"

55

1730 **Erl. 64, 74-76. appendix. W. XXI, 526\*-ö30\*.** 1731

V. 16. strong ones. That is, the great fish flee from him, so also from
the world\'s violence the mighty flee.

no mercy. 1) Thus they have sinned, that is, they must have done it, and
they must be held up as poor sinners.

V. 23. Gray. That is, he swims and lives in the sea, as he wants his way
to be seen from afar.

He respects the deep like an old man. He respects the sea like an old
man, which is too weak for him. All this is also the devil\'s nature in
the world, since he rages, rules and rolls as he wants.

**The Psalter.**

**The 1st Psalm.**

V. 1. scoffers who think it is vain foolishness what God speaks and
does. 2)

V. 5. judgments. That is, they will have no ministry, nor will they
remain in the Christian community; indeed, they will weave themselves
together like chaff from grain.

**The 2nd Psalm.**

V. 7. way. Of a new way; that is, the new doctrine of the gospel of
Christ, the Son of God. 2)

V. 11. Serve. 3) Be obedient, submissive. 4)

V. 12. Kiss. Or thus: pay homage to the son. 4) - 1524. That is: accept
him with honor.

on the way. That is: In your way and being. 4)

**The 4th Psalm.**

V. 1. Sing before. As the cantor and priest sing a verse or epistle, and
the choir then sings a responsory, hallelujah or amen.

1524\. as one sings with two voices, one above the other in the height.

V. 3. lords. That is, you great Hansen, and what wants to count for
something.

1524\. men. This is: You who are not children and should be reasonable.

1\) The following is missing in 1524.

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) Erlanger: \"Servant.\"

4\) Missing 1524.

Honor, that is, my psalm or teaching, as I honor God with it.

V. 5. You are angry. Move a little to unwillingness. 5)

V. 7. light of countenance is friendly and gracious reputation. 5)

**The 5th Psalm.**

V. 10. Certain things. That is, their teaching makes vain troubled,
unholy consciences, because they preach vain works and not God\'s grace.
5)

**The 6th Psalm.**

V. 7. Wash, I have lain in sweat.

1524\. v. 8. wrath. This is God\'s wrath and punishment.

**The 7th Psalm.**

1524\. v. 7. has in the text: \"Revive me the judgment that you have
commanded\", with the gloss: judgment. That is: Help me again into the
office which you have commanded me, so that the people may find their
way to you again.

V. 9. judge. Not I, nor anyone, but God Himself alone rules over us.

**The 8th Psalm.**

1524 V. 1. What this githith is is still unconscious, but it means a
winepress in German.

V. 8. sheep. The Christians shall also have food on earth.

**The 9th Psalm.**

V. 17. meditatione scilicet verbi, sine vi, gladio, brachio carnis, in
silentio et spe erit fortitudo vestra \[namely, by contemplation of the
Word, without violence, sword, and arm of flesh, \"you will be strong by
being still and hoping,\" Isa. 30:15\]. 5)

**The 10th Psalm.**

V. 2: He is overconfident. Scilicet docendo et nocendo superbit
confidenter, quasi re optime gesta \[namely, in teaching and harming, he
is confidently overconfident, as if he had aligned everything to the
best\]. 5)

V. 5: He continues his work, works, and makes it sour for him, but he
likes his work to last and continue. 5)

5\) Missing 1524.

1732 Erl. 64, 76-78. L.\'s marginal glosses On the Psalter. W. XXI,
S3O\*-SÄ4\*. 1733

**The 11th Psalm.**

V. 3. What should. Should the fool defend or teach us? 1)

V. 7. their, that is, the pious. Non franguntur persecutione, sed.
perseverant spectando justa; ideo experiuntur, Deo gratam esse justitiam
\[They are not made despondent by persecution, but persevere in seeing
what is right. Therefore they experience that God loves justice). 1)

**The 13th Psalm.**

V. 4. eyes. Make my face cheerful. 1)

**The 14th Psalm.**

V. 1. Fools, that is, rough, loose people who do not ask about God.

V. 5. Fear. They do not fear God; otherwise they fear all kinds of
things, such as belly, bread, goods, honor, driving, death.

1524 That is, they make consciences, where there is none, serve God,
which He has not commanded.

**The 16th Psalm.**

V. 4. With blood, that is, those who make atonement for God with the
blood of a goat; but I with my own blood. 1)

names. That is, I will not teach nor preach their thing that deal with
works, but of the faith that God gives. 1)

V. 9. Glory, that is, my tongue, as I honor and praise God with.

**The 17th Psalm.**

V. 1. the justice. Scio, quod non mendacium, sed tuum verbum doceo; ideo
si non vis me exaudire, exaudi tuam justam causam (I know that I teach
not lies, but thy word; therefore, if thou wilt not hear me, hear thy
righteous cause). 1)

V. 10. fat, that is, the great and mighty.

V. 14. of your hand. To punish those who come into your hand. Hebr. 10,
31.: \"It is terrible to fall into the hands of the living God.\" Ps.
21:9: \"Thine hand shall find all thine enemies.\" 1)

1\) Missing 1524.

V. 15. Awake. To be valiant in word and faith, not to snore. 2)

**The 18th Psalm.**

V. 21. of my righteousness, non personalis, sed realis, id est \[not of
my person, but of the thing, that is: I have started nothing from
iniquity, but have remained at God\'s word, have suffered over what I
should suffer. 2)

V. 22. Haec est illa justitia, de qua hic loquitur \[This is the justice
he is talking about here\]. 2)

**The 20th Psalm.**

V. 7. That is, God must help and counsel; our suggestions and actions
are otherwise of no use. 2)

**The 21st Psalm.**

V. 13. to the shoulder. That they must always carry and suffer
misfortune.

**The 22nd Psalm.**

V. 4. Praise. That is, among the holy people, when they praise you in
Israel. 2)

V. 18. They see their pleasure in me. They cool their tiredness on me.
2)

V. 30. fat people. These are the rich and great. Those who lie in the
dust are the poor and lowly, who live wretchedly and miserably, or are
ready to die. All of them should worship Christ.

1524\. who do not let their soul live are those who die 2c.

**The 24th Psalm.**

V. 6. face. That is, God\'s face and presence, which was in the people
of Israel and nowhere else. 2)

**The 25th Psalm.**

V. 3. Loose. To have great and yet futile cause to despise, as force,
art, wisdom, wealth. 2)

**The 26th Psalm.**

V. 8. Where your glory dwells. God\'s house and assembly is where God\'s
word goes, and nowhere else, for there God dwells; therefore he so
joyfully praises God\'s house, because of the word. Ps. 122. 2)

2\) Missing 1524.

1734 **Erl. 84, 78-80. appendix. W. XXI, 534\*-538\*.** 1735

**The 27th Psalm.**

V. 13. living, that is, those who are well. 1)

**The 29th Psalm.**

V. 6. To lick, that is, to jump, to leap. 1)

V. 11. peace. This is that \[it\] will go well with him.

**The 3V. Psalm.**

V. 5. His holiness. That is, preach that God is not a God of false
hypocrites, as they boast; but He is holy, and loves the right saints,
Ps. 18:26: Cum sancto sanctus eris etc.. \[\"With the saints you are
holy\" 2c.\] 1)

V. 6. desire. He is not serious, he means well and not dying, as it
feels. 1)

V. 13. Honor. My tongue and strings, as I honor you with. Ps. 16, 9.

**The 31st Psalm.**

1524\. v. 10. has in the text: \"pined away with wrath\", with the
remark: wrath. This is before the calamity that I suffer, as God\'s
wrath.

V. 22. Firm city means all kinds of security. 1)

**The 32nd Psalm.**

V. 3. To conceal, that is, because I would not confess that there was
vain sin with me, my conscience had no rest until I had to confess it,
and trust in God\'s goodness alone.

**The 33rd Psalm.**

V. 15. directs. That is what they think, that he directs and turns as he
wills.

1524\. has in the text: \"He directs their heart, allersammt\", with the
note: directs. That is: What they think, he gives and directs as he
wills.

**The 34th Psalm.**

V. 6. to run. They come to him and immediately attack him, like the
lecherous woman to the judge \[Luc. 18, 3\], or they flow like water
with heaps and storms. For he is pleased that they should seek, knock,
and rumble with prayers without ceasing.

1\) Missing 1524.

V. 14. That is, flee false doctrine, and do good, and suffer thyself. 2)

V. 17. eradicate memory so that they are no longer thought of?

V. 22. have guilt. Id est, perdentur sicut rei \[That is, they will
perish as guilty\]. 2)

**The 35th Psalm.**

V. 12. heartache. Sterilitatem animae meae, id est \[The barrenness of
my soul, that is\^: As if my soul should be forsaken and despised, like
a widow or barren. 2)

V. 15. Limpers, that is, those who carry the tree on both armpits, serve
GOD and yet also serve the devil, \[1 Kings 18.\] 2)

V. 20. Silence. Those who would like peace. 2)

**The 36th Psalm.**

V. 2. from reason. If I am to be thoroughly truthful. For the wicked
seem as if they were pious and holy, and yet is false in reason. 2)

V. 5. camp. That is: without ceasing, not resting rc. 2)

V. 7. like the mountains of God. That is, firm and indestructible.

V. 10. Light, that is comfort, joy. \[Job 25, 3. Ps. 27, 1. John 1, 9.\]
2)

**The 37th Psalm.**

This saying \"Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth\"
is a gloss and interpretation of this psalm. 2)

V. 3. honestly. With God and honor, that you fear God and do no one
wrong. 2)

V. 7. Quiet. Harp, and do not rage. 2)

1524\. v. 34. to see, that is, to see your desire.

**The 38th Psalm.**

V. 1. remembrance. To praise and owe to God, that is, to remember God
and oneself rightly. 2)

V. 11. Light of my eyes. That is, my face is not light and joyful, but
looks sour, sorrowful and gloomy.

2\) Missing 1524.

1736 **Erl. K4, 80-83. L.\'s marginal glosses On the Psalter. W. XXI,
538\*\--s42\*.** 1737

**The 39th Psalm.**

V. 2. bridle. That I do not murmur, because it is so bad for me and so
good for the wicked. 1)

V. 3. of the joys. It is not ridiculous to me. 1)

V. 5. Teach me not to live as surely as the wicked who hope for no other
life. 1)

V. 10. Keep silent. I will let them go and not murmur against you. 1)

**The 40th Psalm.**

V. 13. to see. So that my face goes away because of great sorrow. 1)

**The 42nd Psalm.**

V. 3. God\'s face, where God dwells, as in the temple, and where His
word is. 1)

V. 6: Face is his knowledge and presence through word and faith.

V. 7. In the land of the Jordan and Lord onim, that is, in the Jewish
land, which he so calls because the Jordan flows in it as the land
water, and Hermonim, the great mountains, are around it, against which
Mount Zion is small.

V. 8: Flood, as happened to the Egyptians in the Red Sea. 1)

V. 12. of my face. That is, he will not let my face be put to shame,
sup. Ps. 34:6, but will make me glad to be heard. 1)

**The 44th Psalm.**

V. 20. dragon, that is, the poisonous tyrant, and darkness means
misfortune\".

V. 23. for thy sake, not for our sake; but thy word do they persecute in
us. 1)

**The 45th Psalm.**

V. 9 I do not know what Kezia is; some call it Kasia; it must be a root
that smells good and keeps clothes well.

V. 13. Zor is called the city of Tyre; but appoint the city of Tyre,
which was at that time the richest and most famous city, as if to say,
Even the richest in the world will honor Christ.

V. 14. Inside. Just as everything in a woman\'s room is gold and silk.
1)

V. 15. to you. As to dance or joys.

1\) Missing 1524.

**The 46th Psalm.**

V. 7. Listen. This is when it thunders. 2)

**The 47th Psalm.**

V. 8. Wisely, to handle the word diligently in preaching, and to stay on
it, not to shout and babble, like the wild, wild shouters and spouters
and insolent preachers who speak what they think. 2)

V. 10. by the shields. Princes must also be Christians, so here they are
called \"shields on earth\". 2)

**The 48th Psalm.**

V. 5. kings. That is, kings have been terrified of this city, and often
go away in disgrace. 2)

V. 14. Proclaim, that is, may preach God\'s word. 2)

V. 15. youth, that is, graciously and gently, by the word of grace, as
father and mother bring up a child, not as executioners or masters of
sticks by law and compulsion, driving and choking. 2)

**The 49th Psalm.**

V. 10. Live long. Has good courage, never thinks of death. 2)

V. 12. their houses. Their family, children, servants rc. 2)

V. 13. dignity, that is, good and honor. 2)

V. 19 Life. That is: He thinks that one has enough here and that one is
prosperous.

V. 21. 1524 has in the text: \"so he is like the cattle that are
silent,\" with the note: silent, that is, who are gone and no longer
live.

**The 50th Psalm.**

V. 4. judge, rule, help, save from the devil, people, death, sins rc. 2)

V. 14. vow that you vowed to him to be your god in the first
commandment. 2)

**The 51st Psalm.**

V. 8 Truth. That is: Hypocrisy and appearance you do not respect, but
reason and righteousness, which is secret and hidden from the world.

V. 9. Unpray, that is, absolve me.

2\) Missing 1524.

1738 **Erl. 84, 83-88. appendix. W. XXI, 542\*-S47\*.** 1739

and release me, as was meant in the law of old by blasting with ysopen.

V. 12. certain. This is a spirit that is without doubt in faith and
certain of the matter, and is not led astray nor moved by various
delusions, thoughts, doctrines 2c. as the dark, doubting ones are. 1)

V. 16. blood debt, that is, from debt, so that I deserved death, as we
all are before God.

**The 52nd Psalm.**

V. 4. harm, that you bring misfortune to others and do harm. 1)

V. 7. He tells of four plagues, that he should not keep any house or
property, nor should he stay in any city or country. 1)

**The 53rd Psalm.**

V. 6. drivers. These are the ones who want to make people religious in
their own works with laws and force, just as the captains drive the
people of war.

**The 55th Psalm.**

V. 11. toil and labor. This is vain wickedness, that they may weigh
themselves and others down. 1)

V. 24. Life. What they intend to do with their lives. 1)

**The 56th Psalm.**

V. 1. David had to be dumb as a dove, that is, silent and not accuse
King Saul among the Philistines. 1)

V. 3. Saul\'s courtiers drive me out into misery, and \[I\] must always
live in flight. 1)

V. 8. what they do is indulgence. 1)

V. 9. You count them. You know how many of them there are, and you do
not forget them. 1)

**The 57th Psalm.**

V. 2. misfortune. Pity, sorrow, that they do to me. 1)

V. 9. Glory, that is, my psaltery and song, since I honor God with it.

**The 58th Psalm.**

V. 4. from womb. That is: kind is not good and does not let of kind.

V. 10. Before yours. That is, before they bring it halfway to where they
want it,

1\) Missing 1524.

it will destroy God\'s wrath and bed the righteous one

V. 11. Blood. That is, vengeance will be greater than anyone desires;
that where he desires a drop of blood and vengeance, it will be so much
that he will want to bathe in it.

**The 59th Psalm.**

V. 6. Be merciful to no one. That is, do not put up with their evil
ways, and do not help their wickedness to continue.

V. 8. Who shall hear it? That is, they act as if there were no God to
hear it, and neither say nor think that \[it\] must one day become loud.

V. 10. Power. That is: If they are too powerful for me, I look to you.
2)

V. 11. God shows. God does more good to me than they can do evil to me.
2)

V. 13. Court keeping. That is: they remain on their defiance and pride.

**The 60th Psalm.**

V. 1. rose chip. This is a pendant or precious jewel in the form of a
rose. So he calls here his kingdom, which is a divine jewel or chip. 2)

V. 6. Historia judicum et regum testatur, subinde duces suscitatos, qui
quietem darent et liberarent hunc populum \[The history of the judges
and kings testifies that leaders are awakened continuously, which should
provide rest and make the people free\]. 2)

V. 8. will divide. That is: I reckon what I have for people. 2)

V. 9. prince. Qui tempore pacis legibus, non armis gubernat^2^ ) \[Who
at the time of peace rules with laws, not with weapons\].

V. 10. washing pots, that is, my subjects. 2)

V. 11. solid city means everything that is secure and makes. 2)

V. 12: Our army. That is, not by our power, but by your power you do
what you do to us. 2)

**The 61st Psalm.**

V. 6. Vow. That I praise and call upon you as one God, which we vow to
God in the first commandment. 2)

2\) Missing 1524.

1740 Erl. 64, 86-88. L. \'s marginal glosses on the Psalter. W. XXI,
547\^-552\*. 1744

**The 62nd Psalm.**

V. 2. quiet. Is content, lets God rule, grumbles, does not rage, suffers
himself and waits. 1)

V. 10. lack. He who relies on men is lacking. However great they are,
they are nothing, and must be lacking. 1)

**The 63rd Psalm.**

V. 3. power. I would gladly be with your worship, since you are mighty
and honored; but now I must be here in the wilderness. 1)

**The 64th Psalm.**

V. 6. See. GOD does not see them Himself. 1)

V. 8. Woe is me, they will feel it. 1)

**The 65th Psalm.**

This psalm praises God for good peaceful time. 1)

V. 2. silence, in the patience that one suffers, is silent 2c.

V. 7. Prepared to do good continually and more.

V. 9. signs. There are vain great wonders, when God keeps peace and
controls the unpeaceful. So go and weave 2) both men and cattle, which
cannot be in war. 3)

V. 10. God\'s fountain is His land and people. Ps. 46, 5. 3)

V. 12. Footsteps. Where he walks, there it grows. 3)

**The 66th Psalm.**

V. 3. lacking, that is, which they undertake against you. 3)

V. 7. Exalt. They shall not prevail nor be subject to how high they
ascend. 3)

**The 67th Psalm.**

V. 2. to shine is to look cheerfully and graciously, to show oneself
friendly. 3)

V. 5. judge. Defend and rule.

**The 68th Psalm.**

This psalm certainly speaks of Christ, so it is important to pay
attention to it, because it contains strange speech and words according
to the letter.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) \"Weaving,\" going back and forth like a weaver\'s shuttle.

3\) Hehlt 1524.

V. 13. Kings are the apostles who teach with one accord.

Home honor in Hebrew means a housewife, and here speaks of the church
and bride of Christ.

V. 14 Silver and gold. Red and white, like an army of armor and
breading. 4)

V. 16. fertile, in Hebrew \"fat,\" that is, good land, not bare
mountains. 4)

V. 17. leap. Boast, defy, insist on your glory. 4)

V. 19. will remain there. Even his enemies must suffer Christ. 4)

V. 20. 1524. has in the text: \"The God of our salvation will well
burden us\", with the explanation: Well burdened. Matth. 11, 30: \"My
yoke is sweet\" 2c.

V. 22. Hair head. The kingdom and priesthood of the Jews, because they
remain in unbelief.

V. 23. fat. Of the people of Israel, who were rich, glorious because of
God. 4)

V. 27. fountain. That is, for the kingdom of Christ, which has begun, is
springing up and growing. 4)

V. 31. animal. False teachers with their pile.

their calves. That is, among their people. 4)

trample. As the stallions tread down the water and make it turbid so
that it is not drinkable, so the Scripture treads down and makes turbid
all the spirits of the wicked. 4)

V. 34. Thunder of his sermon. 4)

V. 35. power, that is, the kingdom; let him be HErr. 4)

**The 69th Psalm.**

V. 23. table, that is, their preaching and teaching, that they may think
themselves fed. 4)

V. 28. Let them fall into one sin over another. Let nothing be good nor
right for them. 4)

**The 72nd Psalm.**

V. 6. As happened to Gideon, Judg. 6, 36. f. 4)

V. 8. water, that is, from the Jordan. 4)

V. 12. a king of the poor crying. 4)

V. 16. quake. That is, the mountain Lebanon

4\) Missing 1524.

1742 **Erl. st, 88-91. appendix. W. XXI, 552\*-556\*.** 1743

stands thick with trees, and trembles when the wind weaves. So thick
also shall the gospel stand and lift in the cities; that is, the gospel
and Christians shall abound and increase.

V. 17. That is, one will always preach his name for and for, although
the old die, so do the descendants.

**The 73rd Psalm.**

V. 1. Pure in heart is he who keeps the word of God pure and clean.

V. 7. boasts. That is, they are fat, that is, rich, powerful, in honor;
therefore they boast, and want to be in front and on top, and to be seen
before all. What they do must be right and fine, and what they say is
delicious, so that their splendor and courtliness are considered an
honor and adornment. But what others speak and do must stink and be
nothing. Their tongues rule in heaven and earth.

1524\. has in the text: \"They want to be seen, because they are so
fierce\", with the gloss: They want. This verse reads in Hebrew: Their
eye goes out before the flesh, and they pass over the thoughts of the
heart. But this is spoken darkly, and thus wants to say: They are fist,
that is rich 2c.

V. 17. sanctuary, where one hears God\'s word and learns to understand
such things correctly. 1)

V. 20. image, that is, their temporal being, which is only an appearance
and image.

**The 74th Psalm.**

V. 4. houses. Schools and synagogues where God\'s Word is taught. 1)

V. 8. houses. That is, the oerter where GOD has His word, as in the
schools. 1)

V. 11. The bosom is the temple in which God gathers His people and
teaches them, as a mother carries her child and nurses it.

V. 13. 14. dragons. Tyrants, as Pharaoh and his princes; thus also the
whales. 1)

V. 15. springs. God builds land and cities, he also destroys them again.
1)

**The 75th Psalm.**

V. 2. near. Who soon \[and\] confidently helps and sustains us. 1)

1\) Missing 1524.

V. 4. columns. The pious are afraid of God, but he strengthens them; the
wicked remain proud and thus perish. 2)

V. 5. violence. Ebraeus: On the horns, which mean violence. 2)

V. 9. That is, he apportions to each his measure that he suffers; but
the basic soup remains for the wicked.

**The 76th Psalm.**

V. 5. mountains of robbery. These are the great kingdoms and
principalities, such as Assyria, Babylon and Egypt, which divided the
lands among themselves with strife, and so robbed them.

V. 6. Sink. They have no more fists, cannot strike, are cowardly and
despondent.

1524\. v. 11. has in the text: \"For that you anger people, 3) they will
thank you, but the rest of the anger you will gird around you\", with
the gloss: gird. That is, temporal wrath and punishment passes over the
saints, but eternal wrath afterward over the wicked. Therefore God girds
the same around Himself and does not refrain from it.

V. 12. Vow that he shall be your God according to the first commandment,
and vow not to the saints nor to other vows. 4)

**The 77th Psalm.**

V. 11. can do anything. That is, I may care to death, but I still can\'t
change it.

V. 14. Holy is hidden; as if God gives life in death, and is near when
He is far away, which reason does not comprehend. It is too holy and
hidden.

1524\. v. 18. has in the text: \"and your arrows went down,\" with the
gloss: arrows, the lightnings.

1524\. v. 19. has in the text: \"the voice of your thunder is in the
round,\" with the gloss: round, that is, in the sky.

**The 78th Psalm.**

V. 9. like the children of Ephraim. Before the kings was the regiment of
the tribe of Ephraim, which wore the harness and bow; but they were
proud, and trusted not in GOD: therefore it was taken from them, and
Shiloh was disturbed, and was set up in Judah. 4)

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) Erlanger: \"menschzürnest\".

4\) Missing 1524.

1744 Erl. \"4, Si-g3. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Psalter. W. XXI,
5S6\*-55g\*. 1745

Dispute. Dispute here means contestation, driving and distress. 1)

V. 33. That they did not get the promised land, and went out of Egypt in
vain. 1)

V. 41. They always set the time and way for God, when and how he should
help quickly and tangibly, and did not want to trust nor hope in the
future. Now they want meat, now water, now bread. But to set and teach
as God should, that is to tempt God. 1)

1524\. v. 57. false bow. That is, as a bow bows and shoots, not so the
hypocrites pretend to be pious, and there is nothing behind it, and
nothing presses.

V. 61. power, that is the ark of the covenant, on which they relied 2c.
\[Psalm 105, 4.\] 1)

1524\. v. 72. has in the text: \"and led them with understanding of his
hands,\" with the gloss: understanding, that is, wisely.

**The 79th Psalm.**

V. 11. Children of death. Those who are daily strangled, and even want
to clean up. 1)

**The 80th Psalm.**

V. 1. Spanish roses. A jewel like a rose, and is called here the kingdom
of Israel. 1)

V. 2. Joseph. This is the kingdom of Israel. 1)

V. 3. Ephraim. That is, on the mercy seat behind which these tribes of
Israel lay. Numbers 4:2, 17, 18, 20, 22.

V. 7. To quarrel. That everyone should seek cause with us, and plague
us, and fetch fire from us. 1)

V. 11. Cedars of God. Id est, regnum dilatatum usque ad Libanum \[That
is, the kingdom is spread out to the Libanons. 1)

V. 12. water, which is the water Phrath. \[Ex. 23:31.\]

\'1524. v. 16. has in the text: \"And judge him whom your right hand has
planted, and over the son whom you have strengthened\", with the gloss:
son. The vine he calls son in a Hebrew way, as Is. 5, 1.: \"The vineyard
is in the horn of the son of Oeles\", (that is) in a place that is there
feisty, and Psalm.

1\) Missing 1524.

4, 3.: Filii viri, you children of the man, that is, you men, so filii
Belial, filii anni, filius mortis \[children Belial, children of the
year, child of death) and the like. So here also filium, quem formasti
tibi, eam, quam firmasti s. vitem \[the son you have formed, the holy
vine you have planted).

**The 83rd Psalm.**

V. 4. hidden ones. These are those who live hidden in the faith of the
world, so that they are considered heretics.

**The 84th Psalm.**

V. 7. wailing valley. Move now and then, and teach the people. 2)

V. 12. Sun and shield. He teaches and protects, comforts and helps. 2)

Grace for the hatred and shame of the world. 2)

**The 85th Psalm.**

V. 9. foolishness. Lest they finally become despondent or impatient, and
blaspheme God. 2)

V. 10. Honor. That \[it\] be commendable, the people be pious toward one
another, florente religione et politia sub coelo toto \[in that worship
and world regiment go in swing as far as heaven reaches). 2)

**The 86th Psalm.**

V. 2. Holy here can also mean condemned and despised, per antiphrasin
\[by the opposite sense), as a heretic. 2)

V. 11. uniting, that is, God\'s word, which remains and unites; other
teachings divide, and make vain divisions. 2)

**The 87th Psalm.**

V. 4. Rahab is Egypt Isa. 30, 7. 3)

V. 4. There. To Zion. 4)

**The 88th Psalm.**

1524\. v. 6. has in the text: \"Among the dead free,\" with the gloss:
free, that is, that no one assumes nor adheres to it.

**The 89th Psalm.**

V. 3. Joh. 1, 17: \"Through Jesus came grace and truth. 4)

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: Isa. 33.

4\) Missing 1524.

1746 **Erl. \"4, 93-s\" Appendix. W. XXI, SS9\*-S63\*.** 1747

in heaven. For Christ\'s kingdom is not an earthly kingdom, but heavenly
and in clouds, that is, not on earth. 1)

V. II Rahab, Egypt, ut supra, and means proud. 1)

V. 13. rejoice. The whole land is green and standing joyfully. 1)

V. 16. rejoicing, that is, having the joyful word of God.

V. 38. Witness. This is the rainbow that God sets as a witness of the
eternal covenant with Noah. Gen. 9:14. 1)

V. 45. Purity, that is, all its adornment and adornment of worship.

**The 90th Psalm.**

V. 3. Let die. People always die and others come back through God\'s
word. Therefore our life is nothing compared to him.

1524\. has in the text: \"Thou that turnest men to destruction\", with
the note: destruction. That is, the human race you create so that they
always die some, and others are born again, and all this by your word.
Genesis 1.

V. 8. unconfessed, that is, Adam\'s sin, Rom. 5:18, so that death is
deserved, and yet the world does not know this. 1)

V. 11. Wrath, that is, that such is your wrath, and our sin is so great
as to deserve such wrath. 1)

V. 16. Your works, that is, life and help and all good. 1)

V. 17. Our works. That is, spiritual and temporal regiment. 1)

**The 91st Psalm.**

V. 4. truth. Word and promise of grace\....

V. 5. 6. He indicates all kinds of misfortune, be it violence,
injustice, cunning, treachery, outrage, etc. 1)

**The 92nd Psalm.**

V. 6. deep. Wonderful, so that he helps us in such a way that \[it\] no
man can comprehend nor conceive. 1)

V. 11. anointed, that I may be gladdened. 1)

V. 16. No wrong. He looks at no person, and does not help the ungodly
cause, as they think. 1)

1\) Missing 1524.

**The 94th Psalm.**

V. 1. Appear. Break forth, let yourself be seen. 2)

V. 3. boast. To come in with words, as a lord or tyrant, to be feared
for what he says or wills. 2)

V. 17. Silence, that is, in hell, since it is silent and everything is
off.

V. 20. Harmful chair, that is, teaching harmful things and corrupting
souls.

1524\. has in the text: \"He who causes trouble in the law\", with the
gloss: trouble. That is, their teaching makes evil conscience and sour
life.

**The 95th Psalm.**

V. 5. dry, that is the earth. 2)

**The 97th Psalm.**

V. 11. Light, that is happiness and salvation. 2)

**The 99th Psalm.**

1524\. v. 4. has in the text: \"The strength of the king loves
judgment\", with the gloss: strength, that is, his kingdom and power.

**The 101st Psalm.**

V. 8. early, that is, soon and quickly.

**The 102nd Psalm.**

V. 19. written, that it might be preached. 2)

V. 25, in half, before I know it. 2)

**The 103rd Psalm.**

V. 9. to quarrel, to be ungracious. 2)

V. 14. privates, like a weak, loose building or room of a short, poor
life. 2)

V. 16. She no longer knows her place, that is: she no longer knows about
the flower, nor does she remember it; id est, nullum vestigium aut
memoria relinquitur. \[That is, no trace or memory of it is left. 2)

**The 104th Psalm.**

V. 16. Trees of the Lord are called that are in the forest, which are
not planted by man.

V. 28. ge satiated, that is joyful. 2)

2\) Missing 1524.

1748 **Erl. 64, 96-98. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Psalter. W. XXI,
563\*-567\*.** 1749

**The 105th Psalm.**

V. 28. were. Moses and Aaron. 1)

**The 106th Psalm.**

V. 20. Glory to God. Rom. 1, 23. 2)

**The 107th Psalm.**

V. 2. This Psalm is a common thanksgiving, how God helps all kinds of
people out of all kinds of distress, as Paul says, 1 Tim. 4, 10. 3):
\"He is a Savior of all men.\" 4) The first are those who are poor,
miserable, have neither house nor yard, and know nothing to do (vv.
4-9). The others are those who are afflicted with prison for their
iniquity, and are set free by God\'s help (vv. 10-16). The third are
fools, that is, those who do not fear God and live sinfully, who are
afflicted with sickness, yet some recover so that they do not die (vv.
17-22). The fourth, who suffer distress on the sea and are saved (vv.
23-32). The fifth, when they were afflicted with barren weather,
received rain and fruit (vv. 33-39). The sixth, afflicted with tyrants
or rebellion, will again have peace and unity (vv. 39-42).

1524\. v. 32. has in the text: \"And exalt him among the congregation of
the people, and praise him in the seat of the elders,\" with the gloss:
seat. That is, in the assembly, as in the church.

V. 43. keeps. Remembers and deals with it. 5)

**The 108th Psalm.**

V. 2. honor, that is, my string playing, since I honor you with it. 5)

**The 109th Psalm.**

V. 6. set. Their teaching, living, learning, praying 2c. all must be
condemned. 5)

**The 110th Psalm.**

V. 7. from the brook. He will suffer and rise again.

1524 That is, he is slain so much that one would like to drink blood
like water.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"Rom. 23.\"

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"1 Tim. 2, 4.\"

4\) The following is missing in 1524.

5\) Missing 1524.

**The 111th Psalm.**

1524\. v. 2. has in the text: \"asks all who have a desire for it\",
with the gloss: asks. That is: whoever has a desire for it, asks for it.

**The 112th Psalm.**

V. 4. Light, that is. Happiness and salvation in the midst of adversity.

1524 V. 5 has in the text: \"he divides his words rightly\", with the
note: divides. That is, he does not pretend to the great, nor bite the
lowly, but comforts, punishes, speaks where and when it is necessary,
and looks at no one.

**The 116th Psalm.**

V. 11 [Liar]{.underline}. That is: No man is to be relied upon; he
cannot help in the end and must be absent. 6)

**The 118th Psalm.**

V. 12. They all run to and extinguish, as if all the world wanted to
perish because of my teaching, no one wants to be the last.

1524\. fire in. This is: As the fire in thorns and rice almost crackles
and rages hostilely, but soon comes to an end, and is not constant: so
their anger almost rages, but it is soon over with it, and does not do
as much as it would like.

**The 119th Psalm.**

V. 61. Rob me. Col. 2:8: \"Let no one rob you.\" 6)

V. 66. knowledge, that is, humility. 2 Petr. 1, 5. 6. 6)

V. 83. skin, where oil, wine, water are kept, like a wadding bag. 7) 8)

V. 113. Fluttering spirits (1524. Heretics) are called here the fickle
spirits who always find something new and undertake to do as heretics
are wont to do.

V. 139. Forgotten. Not only to disregard, but to disregard nothing at
all, as if there had never been no word from God. 8)

V. 163. lies, hypocrites and false people. 8)

V. 165. stumble. They will not err nor miss, neither be averted by force
nor cunning. 8)

6\) Missing 1524.

7\) Wadersack - cross sack, snap sack.

8\) Missing 1524.

1750 **Erl. \"4, 98-IM. Appendix. W. XXI, 567\*-57v\*.** 1751

V. 176. Strayed. No one takes care of me. 1)

**The 120th Psalm.**

V. 4. fire in juniper blazes and burns very much, because it is fat and
likes to burn; so the heretical teaching also goes on with great
violence and burns very much.

1524\. has in the text: \"juniper coals\", with the gloss: coals. That
is, they are fiery arrows.

**The 122nd Psalm.**

V. 1. house of the Lord. Where God\'s word is taught and heard, there
dwells God, and God\'s house is to be rejoiced in. 1)

V. 8. peace, that is, that it may go well with you. 1)

**The 126th Psalm.**

V. 1. dreamers. That is, the joy will be so great that we will hardly
believe it, and will be the same to us as if it were a dream and not
true.

1524\. v. 4. streams, 2) that is, how the streams are purely dried up by
the hot sun at noon.

**The 127th Psalm.**

V. 3. gift. That is, it is in vain that you want to do it with your
work. The children for whom you work are not under your control, but God
gives them.

**The 132nd Psalm.**

V. 6. You, that is, from the same place.

1524 This is the place of the dwelling.

V. 8. power, that is, of your dominion. 3)

V. 18. crown, that is, the kingdom. 3)

**The 133rd Psalm.**

V. 1. This is when the rich, great, holy, wise take care of the poor,
little ones, sinners, fools 4). \[Rom. 14, 1.\] 5)

**The 136th Psalm.**

V. 5. orderly. That the heavens and all the stars have a certain course,
and are not lacking. \[Gen. 1.\] 5)

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) The 1524 edition has in the text: \"streams\" instead of: Water.

3\) Missing 1524.

4\) Walch and the Erlangeners: \"the poor little sinners\".

5\) Missing 1524.

**The 137th Psalm.**

1524\. v. 6. has in the text: \"where I do not exalt Jerusalem above the
head of my joy\", with the gloss: head. That is, I do not rejoice, for
over Jerusalem alone, that is the head and my highest joy.

**The 138th Psalm.**

V. 1. gods. Before the angels and God\'s children).

**The 139th Psalm.**

1524\. v. 3. has in the text: \"You are around my path and around my
camp\", with the gloss: camp. That is, where I walk or stand, do
something or lie still, you are there.

1524\. v. 5. has in the text: \"Behind and in front you make me\", with
the gloss: Behind. That is, what I am before and after, and will or do,
that is all your work.

V. 15. Below, that is, deep in the womb.

V. 16. and all the days were written on your book. That is: How long I
should live, you knew before I began \[to\] live. 6)

**The 140th Psalm.**

V. 11: Lightning and thunder strike them into the earth, ut in mari
rubro swie im rothen Meeres. 6)

**The 142nd Psalm.**

V. 8. dungeon, that is, from the distress and fear in which I am
imprisoned. 6)

**The 143rd Psalm.**

V. 8. Early, that is, soon and temporally, not late nor slow. 6)

**The 144th Psalm.**

V. 6. This is: Let thunder once, and strike three times. 6)

V. 7. Strange children. That is, who are not truly God\'s children in
faith, but have only the name and appearance. 6)

1524\. v. 8. wrong. That is, they teach nothing but temporal use and
splendor.

V. 13. Thus speak and desire the wicked, who do not build on God, like
the rich man in the Gospel, Luc. 12, 19. 6)

V. 14 Lamentation. That no accident, pestilence or plague may befall us,
but that we may have everything enough, and live safely and happily in
all abundance. 6)

6\) Missing 1524.

1752 **Erl. 64, IVI-IV3. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Psalter. W. XXI,
570\*-576\*.** 1753

**The 145th Psalm.**

V. 16. Pleasure. That is, enough and full that they may be well pleased,
though a miser seeks otherwise rc. 1)

**The 146th Psalm.**

V. 3. He who hopes in man lacks his attacks and is in vain. 1)

V. 9. Return. He does the antagonism with them. 1)

**The 147th Psalm.**

V. 17 Frost. He makes such winter and frost that one must have fire;
otherwise no one could stay before it. 1)

**The 148th Psalm.**

V. 8. His word, what he wills. 1)

**The Proverbs of Solomon.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 7. beginning. He who wants to learn well must first of all fear God.
But he who respects God little does not ask for wisdom, nor does he
suffer punishment or discipline. 1)

V. 17. 2) cast the net. This is a proverb and wants to say: It goes to
them, as one says: It is in vain the net 2c., that is: Their pretensions
will be lacking, they themselves will perish.

V. 30. of my council. Stulti vertunt se a consiliis verbi ad carnalia
etc. \[The fools turn from the counsel of the Word to carnal things. 3)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 2. with diligence. Must take care and be diligent from the heart. 3)

V. 17. Lord. Her husband, whom she took young. 3)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 4. prudence. You will become a fine, sensible person, who will be
able to see and understand everything you attack. 3)

V. 20. Wisdom. Word. 3)

V. 35. fools. Scoffers, loose people who do not respect God or his word.
3)

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 14.\"

3\) Missing 1524.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 10. 11. strangers. For fornicators consume their goods, and live with
wicked men, who do not give them brans or bark afterward; as happened to
the son in the Gospel, when he had squandered his goods. Luc. 15, 16. 4)

V. 19 Hind. That is, spoken in proverbs, so much: Stay with your wife
and keep your property, so that you do not kill it with whores, but help
others with it; because no lovely creature on earth is, where husband
and wife keep themselves friendly together.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 12. Goes. Does not lead a steady speech, does not look at anyone
rightly. 4)

V. 26. Bread. He who feeds with harlots and rides with carts is bound
for misfortune. 4)

V. 29. None unpunished. Quia adulterium est capitale 4) \[for adultery
is a crime punishable by death.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 6. Princely. Princes should do, speak, and do honestly and
praiseworthily, so that their example may be praised and followed; not
like the tyrants, unfilialists, cyclopes, etc. 4)

**Chapter 9.**

V. 7 Mockers. Solomon calls all scoffers and rebels of the truth
scoffers.

V. 8. The world wants to be unpunished. 4)

V. 12. Non me doctorem, sed te deluseris ipsum \[You will not mock me,
your teacher, but yourself\^. 4)

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 3. drudgery, by which they become rich at everyone\'s expense. 4)

V. 5. Shame and honor are often called poverty and riches by Solomon,
because he who is rich has honor.

V. 12. 1 Cor. 13:5: \"Love cannot be angered.\" \[1 Pet. 4, 8.\]

V. 14. terror, that is, of driving and misfortune.

V. 15: Good makes you brave, poverty hurts.

V. 16. to life, that he may be nourished.

V. 17 remains erroneous. He is not well. 4)

4\) Missing 1524.

1754 **Erl. 84, 10S-108. app. W. XXI, 576\*-S81\*.** 1755

V. 18. One does not admonish his brother of his sins, or where he
starts, he likes to see the other one talking, and does not correct
anyone with it. 1)

V. 22. blessing of the Lord. God blesses, God blesses.

V. 26. Vinegar. Where there are loose lords and officials, the eyes do
not see and the teeth do not bite; that is, discipline and punishment
perish. 1)

**Chapter 11.**

V. 12. Desecrates. He readily reveals another\'s infirmities, but a wise
man covers up and excuses it. 1)

V. 16. tyrants. A pious woman receives honor, even though she is not
rich. Tyrants seek good, and respect no honor. 1)

V. 25. drunk. That is, he who gives abundantly will be given abundantly
again.

V. 29. Wind. Peace nourishes, discord consumes. 1)

V. 30. tree. What the righteous do is good for everyone. 1)

V. 31. Righteous. If the righteous, who do all that is good for others
and please God, are still much afflicted, how will the wicked fare?

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 4. industrious, domestic.

Industrious, unhoused, taking on nothing as if she were a guest in the
house. 1)

V. 8. The pitfalls become shame. Vincit veritas \[truth prevails\^. 1)

V. 11. his field. He who waits for his own in his occupation or
profession, otherwise it means: 14 craft, 15 misfortune. 1)

V. 18. Careless. Those who are not careful of their words or whom they
hit, which happens both in preaching, courts, and otherwise in meetings.
1)

V. 26. Better, if he already suffers much, and the wicked is well. 1)

V. 28. path. Country road is safe, wooden road is dangerous. God\'s word
leads to life, but self-conceit to death. 1)

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 3. terror, that is. Ride and punishment.

V. 8. Do not scold. A rich man scolds

1\) Missing 1524.

one, but gives him away for money. A poor person has to serve. If you
don\'t have money, you pay with your skin. 2)

V. 23. of the poor. God gives enough to the poor where they are pious.
2)

V. 25. Sufficient. Suffices him. 2)

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 1. breaks it. The man must perish who has an unhoused wife. 2)

V. 4. oxen. Where one does not work, one gains nothing. 2)

V. 6. Seek. Loose people do not seek wisdom earnestly, but for their
benefit, glory and splendor. 2)

V. 13 Sorrow. As one speaks: drunken joy, sober sorrow. No love without
suffering.

V. 22. will be missing. Infidelity strikes its master. 2)

V. 23. deals with words. Lots of words, nothing behind them. 2)

1524\. v. 30. has in the text: \"A sound heart\", with the gloss: Good
courage, half body.

1524\. v. 32. does not exist, that is, he cannot suffer anything.

V. 35. a shameful servant who brings households to nothing. 2)

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 1. lime. A good word finds a good place. 2)

V. 2: The wise man\'s tongue can help him finely. 2)

V. 12. They do not let them say. 2)

1524\. v. 15. good courage, that is, good conscience.

V. 26. 3) Comforting speech to the pure. Vel: the speeches of the kind
are pure. 4)

V. 32. makes himself null and void, that is, he goes to the gallows. 4)

**Chapter 16.**

V. 6. Reconcile with God and men; for God turns away punishment, and men
become friends through it. 4)

V. 10 King. For he judges according to the law, which God confirms and
gives as a public office. 4)

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 16.\"

4\) Missing 1524.

1756 Erl. 6t, 106-108. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Proverbs of
Solomon. W. XXI, S8I\*-S85\*. 1757

V. 22. discipline, their teaching, wisdom, holiness rc. 1)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 9. äfert. Repeat, put on again, rain again rc. 1)

1524\. v. 24 has in the text: \"but the fool\'s eyes look at the ends of
the earth\", with the gloss: the ends. That is, he has a wild spirit.

V. 27. theure, werthe, edle. 1)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 1. what he desires. Non veritatem, sed sua quaerit \[He seeks not the
truth, but what is his. 1)

1524\. v. 14. has in the text: \"Man\'s spirit ends his sickness\", with
the gloss: Spirit, that is, good courage lightens all evil.

V. 16. gift. Money brings for the masters.

1524\. v. 17. That is, he must not seek to punish him.

V. 19. Hurt. When one brother is wronged by another, it is easier to win
a firm city than to reconcile him. The closer and dearer friend, the
more bitter and fierce anger, as between husband and wife, between
sister and brother rc. 1)

V. 22. Good things. 2) Even though it is sometimes unequal, he knows
that his marriage is pleasing to God, as his creature and order; and
what he does or suffers in it is called good in the sight of God. 3)

V. 24. A faithful friend. Strangers do more good than one\'s own
friends.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 2. Not well, because one must tolerate the other.

V. 8. Love. He isware of danger, does not trust men in their good words.
3)

V. 11. patient. He who is able to interrogate well will become wise. 3)

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) In the 1545 edition it says: \"and can be of good cheer in the
Lord\" instead of: \"and gets pleasure from the Lord\".

3\) Missing \^524.

V. 12. kings. Rom. 13:4: \"Do not endure the sword in vain.\" 4)

V. 16. Die. He comes into the hands of Master Hansen and to the gallows,
because disobedient children do not escape him. 4)

V. 24. To the mouth. As it is said: He is so lazy that he cannot eat
because of laziness, even if he has his hand in the bowl or the food
before him. These are teachers, governors, servants, who leave their
office, even though they could easily carry it out. 4)

V. 29. Mockers. Disobedient loose lads must be pushed by Master Hans;
that is where they will surely end up. 4)

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 1. wild. This is asotia illa \[the disorderly being, Epb. 5:18: \"Do
not drink yourselves full of wine, from which follows a disorderly or
wild being.\" 4)

V. 4. the lazy. Preachers and rulers who do not carry out their office
honestly, and fear -challenge or hatred 2c., are like lazy stewards. 4)

V. 6. Pious. For hypocrisy is great, even among good works. Some are
thought to be evil, and some are thought to be good, since both are
wronged. Therefore do not trust in men. 4)

V. 11. a boy. Young used to, old done.

V. 14: Evil. That is, what one has, one grows weary of, and wants to
have what is not there.

V. 21. Haste. As the children who like to see their parents and friends
dead 2c.; item, who bring other people\'s goods to themselves with
pretense, against the tenth commandment. Examples: Absalom, Brutus.

V. 25. saints. God\'s name, word and service 2c., and then give alms,
pray, fast 2c. That is, thou holy S. Martin, they offer thee a penny,
and steal thee a horse. 4)

V. 27. shine, that is, God\'s comfort and gracious will.

1524\. divine happiness does gently.

V. 30. with serious blows. Mali non verbis, sed verberibus emendantur;
laxa imperia et anarchia \[the wicked will not be beaten by

4\) Missing 1524.

[1758 **Erl. 64, 108-110. appendix. W. XXI, 58S\*-S8S\*.**
1759]{.underline}

words, but improved by blows; casual regimentation and letting go is no
use. 1)

1524 Suffering is as necessary as eating and drinking.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 2. Certainly. What one does from God\'s command, one is certain that
it is right. Apart from God\'s word, everything is vain conceit, a 2)
delusion and uncertain. 3)

V. 4. light. That is, favor of the world. \"He who is the world\'s
friend is God\'s enemy\" \[Jac. 4:4\] . 3)

V. 5. Finally. Haste broke the neck. Slowly one goes far away. Haste
tires and soon wears off. With leisure and stopping one brings it to an
end. Festina lente \[haste with distance

V. 8. Whoever does better and differently than he is commanded, ruins
it, however beautiful his conceit glistens, as Saul did over Amalek. 3)

V. 12 is wise. The example is David against Saul. 3)

V. 14. secretly. Who does not praise his good deeds, Matth. 6, 1. as the
Pharisees did. 3)

V. 21. \"Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy,\" Matth.
5:7. 3)

V. 22. strong. Those who rely on force and are secure, there is no luck
with them, like Babylon, Roma 2c. 3)

V. 24. That is, he gets such a shameful name and will never become an
honorable honest man. For his presumption, that is. Defiance, pride and
insistence make him hostile. 3)

V. 25. dies. Before he does anything righteous, death comes upon him.
These are lazy preachers, rulers, landlords, who want heaven, honor,
goods, and yet neither work nor suffer. 3)

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 6. used to a boy. Young used, old done, sup. 20. 3)

V. 9. Good eye, that is a mild man.

V. 12. Good counsel. What remains good in teachings and counsel, that
God keeps; otherwise

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Erlanger: \"fine\" instead of: \"one\".

3\) Missing 1524.

is so much of the wrong mouths that it would spoil everything. 4)

V. 13. Strangled. These are preachers, regents, servants who do not bite
the fox, do not go through thick and thin. 4)

V. 18. Well advised. You will benefit and help yourself and others. 4)

V. 21. Answer. You can say with a clear conscience: Yes, Lord, what you
have commanded me has been done. - For you know that it pleases God what
you do according to his word. 4)

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 2. knife. This is to guard thy tongue, that thou speak not too much,
and come into ride over it 2c., for this right is unfaithful; so is
false bread in the court, where always one denies and dissembles the
other, until he bringeth him down and up.

1524\. has in the text: thrust a knife 2c., with the gloss: thrust. This
is spoken proverbially, as: It is evil to eat cherries with gentlemen
2c.

V. 5. gives it wings. The more one desires it, the further it comes.

V. 7. ghost. That is uncertain, as the fires fly in the night, on which
one must not sverjlassen. So he poses benevolently, and yet is nothing.

V. 13: He must not be killed. If you push him, the executioner must not
push him. It must be beaten; if the father does not do it, then Master
Hans does it; nothing else will come of it. No one has ever escaped from
him, for it is God\'s judgment. 4)

1524\. v. 17. has in the text: \"Do not let your heart be jealous over
sinners\", with the gloss: do not be jealous. That is, do not think to
follow them in their good life.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 1. Follow. That is, do not let your poor evil life spoil you, so that
you will follow the wicked in their good life.

V. 4. orderly. If things are kept orderly in the house, this creates
more than great work; as if one gives where, when, to whom one should.
rc. 4)

V. 5. mighty of powers. Sic impetus non est fortis, sed consilium est
potens

4\) Missing 1524.

1760 Erl. 64, 110-112. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Proverbs of
Solomon. W. XXI, WO\*-SSI\*. 1761

(Thus impetuous being is not strong, but wise counsel is powerful). 1)

V. 8: O wicked one. Some are so wicked that they will gladly harm
themselves so that their neighbor may suffer even greater harm than he
who would have one eye put out and two eyes put out. 1)

V. 10. strong. Many are bold when it is well, and some are not afraid 2)
of ten when they are alone. 3)

V. 11. Kill. As Christians were strangled before, and still are, and
laugh at it, or say, We do not understand; I must let my master\'s
command go, and be obedient. 3)

V. 13. honey. That is, use the goods God gives you and do not spare them
to your disadvantage. 3)

V. 15. rest. As, to seize the houses and goods of the poor, or otherwise
to pluck them out with treachery. 3)

V. 16. falls. God always helps the righteous, however often he corrupts
and is driven away. 3)

V. 33. So the lazy ones move their things: Tomorrow, tomorrow 2c. Ei, es
kommt noch wohl 2c., item, es ist bald geschehen rc. 3)

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 2. Hide. In God\'s reign we are not to be prudent and want to know
why? but believe everything; but in the worldly realm a gentleman is to
know and ask why? and trust nothing to anyone. 3)

V. 11. Golden apples, as bitter orange and citron. 3)

V. 13. cold. A faithful servant or subject is not to be paid. 3)

V. 14. much. As the world does; good words, and nothing behind them. 3)

V. 20. sings. For he becomes angrier or prouder because of it, and with
such people, as they say, the first anger is the best. For he does not
stop until the last anger).

V. 21. If your enemy is hungry, feed him. Rom. 12, 20. 3)

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) \"some\" is missing in the Erlanger.

3\) Missing 1524.

**Chapter 26.**

V. 1. Honor is good, wealth and everything that one has honor from.

V. 7. Fools are not supposed to be wise, yet they always want to be
wise. 4)

V. 9. briar. When a drunkard carries a thornbush in his hand, he
scratches more with it than he gives the roses to smell; so a fool often
does more harm than a pious man with the Scriptures or with the law.

V. 16. They are the ones who teach and judge other people\'s actions,
and yet they themselves can and will do nothing better. A peevish
people! 4)

V. 19. joked. If he lacks his evil intent, he has joked and knows how to
excuse himself; but he would rather not have joked. 4)

**Chapter 27.**

V. 8. bird. Let no temptation drive you from your command, hold fast,
God will make it well. 4)

V. 10. Friend. Old friends the best.

Neighbor. Strangers do more good than your own friends.

V. 11: Beware of the deed, the lies will be well advised. 4)

V. 14. This is he who greatly reproves praises, and he who greatly
praises reproves; for they are not believed, because they make it too
great.

V. 19. Shine. That is, as the Scheme is shaky and uncertain in the
water, so are the hearts. It means do not trust.

1524\. has in the text: \"As the faces in the water are against other
faces, so is\" 2c., with the gloss: That is, trust no one, because Trau
rode the horse, away.

V. 21. Löber s. Whoever likes to hear himself praised is deceived,
because he proves that he is a loose man who loves his honor above all
right. 4)

V. 24. crown, that is, the dominion in the house, as if to say, Be
content with what is present, here is no abiding.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 1. shines. One\'s own conscience is more than a thousand witnesses.
4)

4\) Missing 1524.

1762 **Erl. 64, 11L-11S. Appendix. W. XXI, S94\*-600\*.** 1763

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 4. miser who values the land. 1)

V. 8: Mockers. Counselors often go in freely, asking nothing of it, that
they may bring misfortune to a city or prince, from which they will not
come in many years. 1)

V. 13. rich here means a rich man who is usurious, as they are all
usurious, as Isa. 53, 9. also calls the rich man ungodly. 1)

Enlightens, comforts and gives enough. 1)

V. 18. Divination. Without God\'s word, man can do nothing but idolatry
and do his will. 1)

V. 26. Princes. Relying on the grace of princes without God is futile.
1)

**The 30th chapter.**

V. 1. Words of Agur. This looks like an addition of a wise man among the
sayings of Solomon.

V. 2. foolish. Wise people realize that their wisdom is nothing; fools
know everything and cannot err. 1)

V. 8. idolatry. A fine prayer is this, he desires God\'s word and his
daily bread, that he may live here and there. 1)

V. 17. To peck out the ravens at the brook, that is, to come to the
gallows.

V. 18. 19. maid. That is, love is not to be thought of nor spoken of. 1)

V. 32. Do not be ashamed of your shortcomings, and do not defend them.
For to lack is human, to defend is diabolical. 1)

**The 31st chapter.**

V. 1. of King Lamuel. But this is an addition of a king to the Proverbs
of Solomon.

V. 3. To perish, as those do who are chased away or stabbed, or
otherwise perish shamefully.

V. 10. nobler. There is nothing more lovely on earth than the love of a
woman, who can become one. 1)

V. 17. girded, that is, she is sprightly in the house.

V. 18. Pious. Prevents harm, and sees what is pious. 1)

1\) Missing 1524.

at night. In times of need, she has need. 2)

V. 26. Mouth. Train their children and their servants finely to the word
of God. 2)

V. 30. That is, a woman can live with a man honestly and godly, and be a
housewife with a good conscience, but above and beside that she should
fear God, believe and pray. 2)

**Ecclesiastes.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 8. 3) all doings, that is, the misery and vanity on earth is greater
than can be said, and yet must be spoken of in this book.

V. 18. teach, id est, regere mundum^4^ ) \[that is, govern the world\].

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 8. delight, with singing and jumping, dancing and skipping. 4)

V. 12. Praesentem fastidiunt, futurum petunt \[of the present (king)
they are weary, of the future they desire\], and yet do not know how he
will turn out. 4)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 3. as one wills. If the hour is not right, do nothing, do as you
will: if it is not to be, nothing will come of it. 4)

V. 15: What he does stands, what he wills, that goes. That is, he does
not waver, nor does he become disheartened like a man; he perseveres. 4)

V. 22. That is, do not worry about tomorrow, for you do not know what
will happen. Be content with today; tomorrow will also be day and
council.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3. is not he who does not yet live in such misfortune. 4)

V. 5: If anyone can do anything, he is an enemy, and yet the enemy
himself is a fool who can do nothing but torture himself with hatred.
That is why it is ever a miserable being on earth.

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 1.\"

4\) Missing 1524.

1764 Erl. 84, 115-117. L.\'s marginal glosses on Ecclesiastes. W. XXI,
6OV\*-6V5\*. 1765

V. 15 Solomon calls them living creatures, who live gloriously on earth,
as at court and in other places, as if life and the world were their
own.

V. 17. Keep thy foot. Here he teaches to fear and trust God, and to be
pious in such a miserable life. 1)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 3. First, be pious. 1)

V. 5. On the other hand, do not seduce anyone. 1) innocent. That is, do
not defend your seduction, like the false spirits and dreamers.

Angels here means the priests and teachers. 1)

V. 8. to build the field. That is, he rules over everything and manages
the land so that it does not fall apart and become desolate, which is
the office and name of a king.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 3. 2) without a grave. That one is gladly rid of, and does not honor
his burial. 3)

V. 8: They are both fools, the wise and the poor. The wise man wants to
do it with his care; so the poor man thinks: \"Oh, if I were in this or
that state, how it should be! Yes, behind him! 3)

Alive, who live well and feed.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. After him. How his doings will turn out and come to an end. 3)

V. 9. The end of a thing. If the end is good, all is good. Beginning is
easy.

1524\. v. 15 has in the text: \"so that man does not find something
else\", with the gloss: other. Nothing else than what God inflicts on
him.

V. 22. Proverb: He who likes to hear much, hears much that he does not
like to hear. 3)

V. 27. net, for adultery forfeits death. 3)

V. 29. No woman. This does not include a wistful female, but a man who
can dare, suffer, and bear all these things as they come; but these same
men are the ones who are the most important.

1\) Missing 1524.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 6.\"

3\) Missing 1524.

are strange. For when they hear that it is not in their power, they
become unwilling and will do nothing. But if they do and do not succeed,
they become even more unwilling. They are women, not men.

V. 30. arts. They want to hit it and think it should be well done. 4)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 1. illuminates his face. He who has wickedness in mind or in deed
looks on no one cheerfully or rightly; the innocent looks on cheerfully
and surely.

1524\. Enlightened. That is, it makes him pleasant and blissful.

V. 17. He thinks he has it right, but it\'s all in the guesswork. 4)

**Chapter 9.**

V. 5. to know, that is, they may be corrected and be afraid of death;
but the dead do not feel it. 4)

V. 11: It says, \"Prosper well. Therefore one should not let up, but
always create, and command God to prosper. 4)

V. 18. Jack. A knave sometimes corrupts a whole country with his evil
counsel.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 4. stills. To interrogate and let go, so that it quiets itself, is
great art and virtue.

V. 9. roll. To make a new regiment stings badly in the end, because the
mob is unruly. 4)

V. 14. does not know. He does not remember how others fared before,
continues, and yet does not know how it will go. 4)

V. 19. Living ones. These are the ones who live in the buzz and feast
with joy.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 1. Drive. That is, give away freely to everyone what you are able;
for the time may come when you would like to do it and will not be able
to.

V. 5. Know, for all things future are hidden from us. Therefore,
everything must be risky in the flesh. 4)

4\) Missing 1524.

1766 **Erl. 64, 117-119. appendix. W. XXI, 605\*-60S\*.** 1767

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 2. With these broken words he describes the age of a man, when the
hands tremble, the legs bend, the eyes darken, the teeth do not grind
well, the hair turns gray\] 1) and the shoulders stoop, the ears droop
and become deaf 2c.

**The High Song of Solomon.**

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. braids. He means the locks of hair which, in the natural old way,
unbraided and folded back, look almost good on women when they look out
with a full face and reddish cheeks, and the hair hangs down on both
sides over the ears and armpits. 2)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 12. Fullness. Full face and eyes, not decayed or wrinkled. 2)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 6 Flame. Here you can see that in this song Solomon sings of
spiritual love, which God gives and also shows us in all his benefits.
2)

**The prophet Isaiah. 3)**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 4. Harmful ones, both of whom seduced and corrupted the people with
false doctrine and idolatrous examples.

V. 13. and trouble. These are the two pieces of the devil, lying and
murder, or false teaching and unrighteous banishment.

V. 18. Right. God must always do wrong; if we are pious, why do you
punish us so severely? The punishment is not our fault.

V. 24. by. That is, my enemies, the Chaldeans and other kings, must
avenge me on my people.

1\) \"look\" - appear. Added by us according to the edition of 1524,
which offers here: \"glaublichen\".

2\) Missing 1524.

3\) The following Old Testament books are not yet found in the 1524
edition.

V. 31. Protection. Is their idol.

Do. Is their worship and idolatry, as all the wicked have.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 2. Be sure that one may not run here and there, but will certainly
find God, contra dubia et vaga opera cultuum \[against the doubtful and
unfaithful works of worship.

Run, as water runs, with force and felbst free.

V. 4. sickles or hips.

V. 6. The strange children. These are the children of false doctrine and
idolatry, who are more unbelieving than the Gentiles of the morning.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 9. They want to have publicly vowed it for virtue, of which 4) they
should be more ashamed, namely, of their idolatry. Thus they boast that
they have served God. That is a glory that would be worthy of silence.

V. 14. Vineyard, that is, the people of God. Cap. 5, 1.

V. 20. tinsel or main ornament.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 2. branch or plant.

V. 5. Glorious. That is more glorious in the sight of God than the
faithful.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 7. Here the prophet interprets what the host is, almost to the end of
the chapter.

V. 12. Work, that is, what God gives and wants.

V. 17. fat, that is, of the great and rich, who are driven out and must
leave their goods behind them desolate.

V. 26. They come, that is the Chaldeans.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 20. hired. The king of Assyria is called a hired or hired shearer;
for God needs his for a time to punish his people.

V. 24. Thorns and hedges, that is, the land will lie desolate without
people to work it.

4\) Erlanger: \"that\".

1768 **Erl. 64, 119-1S1. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Isaiah.
W. XXI, 6O9\*-6I4\*.** 1769

**Chapter 8.**

V. 7. stream, which is the Phrath, beyond which lies the land of
Assyria.

V. 8. Immanuel means: God with us.

V. 9. gives the flight. He mocks the Assyrians that they would come
before Jerusalem, and yet go away in disgrace, 2 Kings 19:21. f.

V. 12. Covenant. The Jewish people did not trust God and made a covenant
with the Gentiles around them, who were their enemies.

V. 16. Bind. The law remains misunderstood and unfulfilled where there
is not the faith that makes disciples of Christ.

V. 19. disputing. Those who want to be wise and master the Scriptures
with reason.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 15. as if he were not wood. It is easier for God to raise up a tyrant
than for us to raise up a straw 1) stick that is not wood.

V. 17. Light, that is, God in the temple at Jerusalem.

V. 27. Rot. Just as an ox outgrows the yoke when it grows fat and
strong, so that it breaks the yoke as a rotten rope 2c. So also it is
said: He has outgrown the ox.

V. 28. Here he describes the march of the king of Assyria toward
Jerusalem, when he plunders such cities 2c. but he shall be cut down
like a forest 2c.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 3. Smell. His sacrifice, which smells well before God, and his
incense will not be, as of the old priesthood of the law, in outward
incense, but in the fear of God; that is, his prayer will be in the
spirit, John 4:23. For to burn incense is to pray; to smell is to hear.

V. 4. with judgment. He justified them by grace, and yet by the cross he
punished the rest of the old Adam in the flesh. And this means to punish
with judgment, that is, not in anger nor wrath, but with reason and for
their benefit.

1\) Erlanger: \"einstrohern\".

2\) Thus the Weimar Bible (1686). In other editions: \"smoke\".

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 12. Whoever, that is, the people will be as few in the land as gold.

V. 14. They, that is Babel.

V. 21. Ohim, Zihim. Ohim, I say, is almost all wild animals that are
four-footed, like Zihim is all wild birds.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 9. goats, that is, the great lords.

V. 11. Harps, that is, both painted and joy is out.

V. 19. cairn, that is, in the stony ground, in the grave or on the
shingle.

V. 31 Smoke, that is a great army, and do not breed singly, but with
heaps.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 5. cow. Moab is called a heifer of three years, because \[it was 1) a
fine country, rich people, as a young heifer is fertile and gives much
milk.

V. 9: Lions. He calls the lions of Moab the great henchmen; he means
that both lords and subjects, who remain, will have more misfortune.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 1. That is, send the opser to Jerusalem to see if it would help.

V. 9. Song. The cry of the enemy instead of your joyful song.

V. 12. Tired. That he has tried very hard, without any benefit.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 3 Damascus is the name of the stronghold of the people of Ephraim,
because they left Damascus. Isa. 7, 8.

V. 9. strength. These are the cities where their idols and worship were,
from which they relied; but as the children of Israel left scarcely a
branch and twig, that is, few people, when they took the land of the
Canaanites, so shall it be with them.

V. 12: The multitude of such a great people as the Assyrians, to whom he
proclaims their destruction, as a comfort to the people of Israel.

V. 14. Read the 37th chapter of Isaiah \[v. 36\].

1770 **Erl. \"4, 1SI-1S4, app. W. XLI, 614\*-620\*.** 1771

**Chapter 18.**

V. 1. The land lies between Egypt and the Red Sea, which is called
Troglodytes, Egyptians, Arabs, Ishmaelites; a desolate, wild, robber
people, who also boast that they feed on robbery and iniquity.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 3. These are their priests and ministers, prophets, teachers.

V. 4. A harsh king, the king of Assyria.

V. 13. cornerstone, that is, the king.

V. 18. Irheres is called the city of the sun, and many consider it to be
Heliopolis.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 2. sack. Rough skirt, workday dress.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 1. This goes against the Babylonians.

V. 2. His groaning, which he causes to afflict many people, especially
the people of God.

V. 10. Babylon is God\'s threshing floor, for He would crush and break
it.

V. 11. night. That is, dark and gloomy time of calamity.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 1. Jerusalem is called Shuthal because they had many showers, that
is, prophets and teachers in the Word of God.

V. 6. Elam. These are the Persians with the Chaldeans.

V. 8. curtain. That is: The treasury and armory will all be open to the
enemies.

V. 13. Let us eat. So they mock the prophets who proclaim death to them.

V. 17: That he be not buried in his house nor in his grave, but
elsewhere.

V. 22. Key. That he be treasurer in that place.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 1 Chitim. This was done by the great Alexander of Macedonia. Isaiah
had seen such a thing long before.

V. 4. stronghold by the sea, that is Tyre.

V. 8 Crown. Aliarum^1^ ) corona electissima \[the chosen crown of the
other cities\].

V. 10. girth, that is, no regiment and authority 2c.

V. 12. Chitim. Alexander had to disturb Babylon after Tyro.

V. 17. harlot\'s wages, that is, her trade and commerce, which she
engages in idolatry.

**The 24th chapter. 2)**

V. 16. But how am I so thin? The Gentiles praise God with multitudes,
and our people are so thin and few who do such things.

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 7. cover. As the dead are covered; that is, he will make the dead
alive.

V. 8. Forever. Paul 1 Cor. 15, 54. Interpreted here: \"Death is
swallowed up in victory\"; that is, death lies down and has no more
power, but life lies up and says: \"Here you have won! Where are you
now, death?

**Chapter 26.**

V. 1. salvation. That is, firm and unconquerable.

V. 8. memory, that is, your sermon or word, hoc facite in mei memoriam
\[this do in my memory\^.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 4. mortificatio est, non traditio in mortem. Ps. 118, 18.: Castigans
castigat me dominus et morti non tradit me; castigat, ut pereat fiducia
sui et crescat fides etc.. \[It is a chastening, not a going to death.
Ps. 118:18: \"The LORD chasteneth me well, but giveth me not unto
death.\" He chastens that self-confidence may perish and faith grow\].

V. 9. altar, that is, all their idolatry.

V. 12: To winnow. As one winnows the grain in the threshing floor.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 7. to speak. A drunken judge spouts out a verdict as it falls into
his mouth; so mad prophets also say as it falls into their minds.

1\) Erlanger: Haruna.

2\) This caption is missing in Walch and in the Erlanger.

1772 **Erl. 64, 124-126. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Isaiah.
W. XXI, 62v\*-\"24\*.** 1773

V. 9. which are set apart from breasts. \"The poor have the gospel
preached to them,\" Matth. 11, 5.

V. 10. 1) they say. Hear, the scoffers.

V. 12. Tired. They do not respect the peace of conscience that comes
from faith, but scoff at the teaching of faith and insist on works.

V. 16. does not fly. An evil conscience would fly through an iron
mountain if it were possible, so terribly does it tremble and fear as
often as it encounters adversity. But a believing heart stands secure,
and mocks even the gates of hell \[Matth. 16, 18\].

V. 19. temptation makes good Christians, Rom. 5, 3. f., tentatio
probationem \[temptation brings experience\^. Untried people are
inexperienced, vain, useless speculists, what should they know?
Nevertheless, they seduce all the world.

V. 21. in another way. 1 Cor. 1, 21. 3): \"Because the world through
wisdom did not know God in His wisdom, it pleased God to make the
faithful blessed through foolish preaching\"; that is, the preaching of
the cross is an annoyance and foolishness to all the world, and even a
different language, which it understands much less than the law or
reason wisdom of God, by which they also did not improve. \[Matth. 11,
17.:\] Ploravimus vobis, cecinimus vobis etc.. \[We have lamented you,
we have whistled to you.\^ God speak sweet or sour, yet it does not
help. Therefore he speaks just before \[v. 11.\]:. In aliis linguis
loquar etc., quem locum Paul, citat 1 Cor. 14, 21. \[\"I will speak with
another tongue.\" St. Paul cites this passage 1 Cor. 14, 21.\]

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 1. Ariel is called God\'s lion. So they call the city Jerusalem
because it was mighty through God \[Gen. 49:9\], but now he shall be
called God\'s lion, against whom God will fight 2c.

V. 14. blinded, because the word of the cross makes them all blind, mad
and foolish; quod ex operibus legis nemo^4^ ) justificatur,

1\) Walch and Erlanger: \"V. 11.\"

2\) Walch and Erlanger have wrong punctuation here: \"respect them, not
he who comes from faith\" 2c.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"1 Cor. 1, 12.\"

4\) nerno is missing from the Erlanger.

item, quod oportet justificari et damnari veterem hominem per verbum
Spiritus, qui arguit mundum de peccato etc.. Joh. 16, 8. \[because by
the works of the law no one is justified; likewise, because the old man
must be judged and condemned by the word of the Spirit, who punishes the
world for sin 2c. Joh. 16, 8.\].

V. 17. Lebanon is the city of Jerusalem, built of Lebanon.

V. 20. Trouble, that is false doctrine and work.

V. 24. Chatterers are the useless chatterers, as the gushers, so vain
spirit, spirit boast.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 7. Rah ab is Egypt and means: proud.

V. l5. Quiet, that is, suffering, patience and

V. 18. judgment. Not of anger or wrath, but punish with moderation, and
do not do too much to him, as the vengeful are wont to do \[Jer.
30:11\].

V. 24. Blended. Ameliorated; sour, tempered with sweet.

V. 25. Towers are the great tyrants and mighty ones.

V. 33. pit. This is from hell and eternal fire.

**The 31st chapter.**

V. 2. the evildoers, that is, the Jews who seek such help.

V. 9. rock, that is, their king.

Hearth, that is, who keeps house at Jerusalem and is at home there.

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 19 Jerusalem is called the forest, because it is built of the forest
of Lebanon.

**The 33rd chapter.**

V. 7. Their messengers who are sent to them, yet will not hear them.

V. 9 Lebanon, Saron, Bashan, Carmel are all one thing here, Jerusalem,
because it builds and feeds itself from such mountains and fields.

**The 34th chapter.**

He calls the Jewish people with their worship here the host of heaven,
so that they would be like a heavenly people against other Gentiles.

1774 **Erl. \"4, IL6-IS8. app. W. XXI, 624\*-630\*.** 1775

**The 36th chapter.**

V. 2. Rabsake in German is called an Erzschenke.

**The 38th chapter.**

V. 12. Weaver. How a weaver\'s thread breaks before he knows it, in the
middle of the work.

sucks. That I retain neither strength nor sap of life, as a miser sucks
poor people dry in the land,

V. 14. Break. The very sick look about them as if their eyes were about
to break and their faces to perish.

V. 16. of this. That is, from such your words, since you promise life,
and not from our strength and power.

V. 18. Truth. Promise of grace and life.

**The 4V. Chapter.**

V. 2. Knighthood is the service of God.in the Old Testament.

Twofold, namely forgiveness of sins and freedom from the Law of Moses;
which is vain grace for sin, life for death 2c.

V. 6. Goodness is all benevolence or good living that reason is able to
do.

V. 12 Dreiling, that is, with a measure of three fingers wide.

V. 19. 20. Heave, that is, sacrifice to idols, like the heave offerings
in the Law of Moses. The rich make gold idols, the poor make wooden
idols.

V. 22. locusts, which are easily chased away and scattered.

V. 30. boys. The young team, so rely on the strength and youth.

**The 41st chapter.**

V. 1. Let them come near. That is, let them hear what they can.

V. 2. righteous, that is, Abraham. IMos. 12, 1. 17, 1.

V. 6. 1) Be confident. He mocks the Gentiles as they fear to defend
their actions against God and His word, for they fear that they will be
defeated and lose.

V. 9. strengthened. Caught, seized, apprehended.

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 5.\"

Mighty, that is: Of the princes of Egypt.

V. 24. Whoever thinks of you and accepts your thing is an abomination.

V. 25. 2) Here he calls the authorities Saganim, that is, the spiritual
leaders, such as the high priests, Levites, bishops and priests.

**The 42nd chapter.**

V. 4. Greedy. He will not be harsh or biting and sour, but kind, gentle
and gracious.

V. 19. messenger. These are the chief priests, and those who have the
office among the people, so others should teach, but they are the most
blind, as in the Gospel Christ testifies of the salt that is dumb
\[Matt. 5:13.\], and: The learned the perverse.

**The 43rd chapter.**

V. 3. Seba is a capital city in Mohrenland.

V. 4. Your soul. That is, I will cause other lands to be disturbed by
the king of Assyria, that you may be preserved.

V. 14. bar, that is, the princes and mighty men of Babylon disturbed by
King Cyrus.

V. 23. 24. 3) This is all so much said that our works do not wipe out
sin before God, but His grace alone, as He says here. \"Me\", \"to me\",
he says, that is to make atonement for me 2c.

**The 44th chapter.**

V. 5. this, that. That is, here and there and everywhere there will be
Christians, even among the Gentiles.

V. 23. done. Ei 4) is a doer and not a false washer without action, as
the idols are.

V. 26. Counsel, that is, their preaching, that they may counsel the
people. Ps. 1, 1.

**The 45th chapter.**

V. 8: I, the Lord, create it. He speaks of the king Cyrus that he should
come and help the people of Israel.

V. 11. Their master, that is, the one who can restore them to honor,
like a potter, as a master and lord of clay,

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 26.\"

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 25.\"

4\) Erlanger: \"It.

[1776 Erl. 64, 128-130. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Isaiah. W.
XXI, 63v\*-635\*. 1777]{.underline}

can make a vessel out of the clay, whatever he wants. Jer. 18, 6.

to me, so that they do not call on other gods because of impatience; for
I will prophesy to them when their misery shall come to an end;
therefore make them cleave to me alone. I can and have already raised up
the one who is to help them.

V. 19. Spoken in secret. That is, as into the air, or there are not
people who may hear it.

**The 46th chapter.**

V. 11. bird, the king of Cyrus, coming quickly as if he were flying.

V. 12. Of proud heart, these are the Babylonians.

**The 47th chapter.**

V. 5. Silence, that is into death and nothingness.

V. 13. tired. That is, so many suggestions make you crazy and unhappy,
yet none of them is good.

**The 48th chapter.**

V. 11. Note here that to blaspheme God is to praise one\'s own work and
merit.

**The 49th chapter.**

V. 2. pure. Which is finely smooth, smooth 1) and well prepared for
shooting.

V. 12. Sinim, from Sinai, from the bushes and wild hedges.

V. 20. Barrenness. Children she has, yet she is barren. This is a
forsaken people, and yet almost multiplied, as the Christians are.

V. 24. righteous. Laws and sin had us equal with right and all power
under them. Christ had to win us by right.

V. 26. oppressors are the tyrants over the conscience \[, who\] do with
works and law 2c.

**The 5V. Chapter.**

V. 4. Learned tongue, which does not write poetry of itself, but teaches
what it is taught by GOD, it is not master, but disciple.

V. 11. In the light of your fire. Spoil in accident, which you prepare
for me.

1\) \"glw\", which is \"glu\", glowing, shining, polished, smooth.

**The 51st chapter.**

V. 6. that. Such \"that\" must be pointed with a finger, as if one were
hitting a clip with fingers; as one says: I do not give that for it.

V. 9. the proud, the Egyptians, and the dragon, that is, Pharaoh the
king.

V. 13. Pharaoh, Ex. 12, 31.

V. 14. They, the children of Israel.

**The 52nd chapter.**

V. 5 Rulers. Here Christ speaks against the Pharisees and deceivers.

Howling. Their teaching is a howl and make the consciences heavy and
howling with laws.

V. 12. Hasten as they went out of Egypt with fear 2c. Ex. 12.

**The 53rd chapter.**

V. 9: A rich man who sets his heart on riches, that is, an ungodly man.

V. 10. To purpose, that is, his will and work, which he has in mind,
namely, the redemption of men.

**The 54th chapter.**

V. 4. virginity, that you have been without children and miserable,
without a husband in suffering.

V. 14. Injustice. That is, you shall suffer iniquity no more.

V. 16. Work. This is that he may destroy himself and his own, and not
you.

**The 55th chapter.**

V. 3. grace of David promised to David.

**The 56th chapter.**

V. 10. All their watchmen are blind. They are false teachers.

V. 11. mind, that is, God\'s word.

**The 57th chapter.**

V. 3. The day chooser is the wrong crowd against God\'s word.

V. 6. To comfort, that is, to put up with.

V. 7. camps, he calls their altars or tabernacles, because they
fornicate with idols, as a lewd woman with an adulterer, and \[v. 9.\]
to go to Pharaoh the king with gifts is to rely on men.

1778 **Erl. S4, I30-IM. Addendum. W. XXI, 635\*-641\*.** 1779

V. 10: I leave it. When a man grows tired and weary of a thing, or is
unwilling to do more, he says in German: Das lasse ich, item: Das lassen
wir, das lassen sie wohl, item: Lieber, ablassen, aufhören.

V. 11. so carefully. The wicked take care of what they do, even though
it is all lies and falsehood.

V. 13. heaps, that is, your teachers, comrades, together with idolatry
2c.

V. 14: Make way. That is, in distress they shall have room and comfort.

V. 16. Breath. That is, I will refresh the afflicted.

V. 18. The pious suffer the wickedness of the wicked, as Lot did in
Sodom.

V. 19. Fruit. Just as the field bears all kinds of fruit, so the mouth
should also bear fruit. Heb. 13:15: Offeramus fructum labiorum
confitentium, etc. \[Let us offer the fruit of the lips that confess his
name 2c.\].

V. 20. Koth is their holiness, Phil. 3, 8. on which they labor with
great toil.

**The 58th chapter.**

V. 5. hang his head. So the hypocrites hang their heads and look sour
and miserable, Matth. 6, 16.

V. 8. Improvement. That you may become richer and increase in good and
blessedness.

V. 12. Lay the foundation. That is, you will be a protector and better
in the land, be useful and help many.

V. 13. To sanctify and praise the Lord. Here he gives the right
understanding of the Sabbath, that one should practice God\'s work and
word in it.

**The 59th chapter.**

V. 4. Judge, that is teach, for he speaks here of false, poisonous
teachers.

**The 60th chapter.**

V. 5. Spread out as the rivers of water run and spread.

**The 61st chapter.**

V. 8. Robbery. These are all worship services that do not seek God\'s
glory, but their own benefit, fame and joy.

V. 10. with priestly adornment.

Priests were gloriously, yet honestly adorned. So the bridegroom\'s
adornment is not evil, but honest. But he wants Christ to be priest and
bridegroom at the same time.

**The 62nd chapter.**

V. 4. That is, a bride who is not without a husband and abandoned, but
dear and worthy, like a paramour.

V. 11. His reward is with him. He will not be long in rewarding the
righteous and punishing the wicked.

**The 63rd chapter.**

V. 3. I have pressed them in my wrath. That is, I have trodden under
them, that all things, so that they before overpowered me, are shattered
and splashed; even as now the gospel leaps and treads under the papate,
that its supremacy splashes and attaches evil clicks to us, must be
called heretics, rebels, devils\' disciples, and have all kinds of
clicks on us 2c.

**The 65th chapter.**

V. 3. bricks. On the altars they made themselves.

V. 5. Sanctify. That is, you prophet must not teach me to become holy;
rather, let me sanctify you or teach you how to become holy.

V. 11 Gad will have been a god of war, as Mars, because Gadad means to
arm. Meni means number; this will have been the god of the merchants, as
Mercurius, who deals with counting money. This is what he touches when
he says: I will count you to the sword, as if he should say: I will give
you armor and counting.

V. 15. Oath. That is, to exemplify a curse.

V. 20. Boys of a hundred years are called the wicked, from such speech:
If you lived a hundred years, you would still be a child; if you lived a
hundred years, you would still be a boy, that is, you would never become
wise and prudent. The same is called reaching the days and fulfilling
the years, that is, becoming wise and pious.

**The 66th chapter.**

V. 3. unrighteousness, that is, idolatry.

V. 5. Let us see. The wicked defy Christ; so sure are they in their
holiness.

1780 Erl. 64, i\[2-135. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Jeremiah.
W. xxi, E-64Z\*. 1781

V. 7: She gives birth before she suffers. This is a miracle, as if I
said, \"She gives birth before she becomes pregnant. So also here,
before she has contractions, that is, she gives birth and yet has no
contractions, as if she were not pregnant.

**The prophet Jeremiah.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 10. Disturb, not by war, but with preaching and prophesying.

V. 17. Discourage. Under God\'s name one frightens the right preachers:
\"You are a heretic, you preach against God and His church\" 2c. There
may well be this comfort, that one may know that God does not do it.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 11. glory, that is, his God.

V. 18. Drink, that is, seek pod apart from GOD, with King Pharaoh and
Assyria.

V. 25. Do not walk so lightly. That is, spare not thy feet, lest they be
bare; and thy neck, lest it thirst.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 15. work, that is, their pens and worship or idolatry, in which they
have labored and done much.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 5. Yes, then. If the fire comes on and you have not reformed, it will
not help that you arm yourselves.

V. 12. Wind. The king of Babel.

V. 16. guardian. Contradictory: The disturbers are called guardians.

V. 27: \"I will leave a few,\" that is, I will leave some. They
understood this to be a common saying at that time, that it would be
finished except for some who would not have the former kingdom.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 6. lion. The king of Babel.

V. 10. vines. The people of the land.

V. 12. Deny. It does not have to be God\'s word what Jeremiah speaks.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 11. Dawn. That is: I have to obey God\'s wrath and the word of his
anger right away.

and thus 1) push out the bottom of the barrel.

V. 14: Peace. That is: It goes and stands well; everything is safe, has
no need. 1 Thess. 5, 3: Pax et securitas \[It is peace, it has no
danger\].

V. 15. Unshamed. They do not want to hear that they should be evil and
become disgraced.

V. 20. cinnamon bark. Alii sandere\^: Calmus.

V. 27. smelter. By the word thou shalt smelt and punish them; but it is
wicked ironwork, all smelting is lost. The bellows are the priests,
through whom he should drive the teaching. The prophet Ezekiel, Cap. 24,
3., from Tops 2c.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. melecheth. Let us understand the effect or forces, weather or
thunderstorm of heaven, Jer. 44, 17.

V. 28. The faith has perished. That is, the right doctrine is even gone,
and they preach nothing of it.

V. 31. GeBenHinnom means a valley. BenHinnom has been a very merry
valley, as St. Jerome says, close to Jerusalem, as Joshua 15:8 shows.
They called it Tophet afterwards, don\'t know why, and had the most
glorious service there. The prophets make an evil name out of it, as
also Christ Matth. 5, 22. 2c. makes Gehenna out of GeBenHinnom, the
hellish fire. I leave it at that, that it comes from Toph, that means a
timpani or drum. For Lyra reports 3 Mos. 23 that the children of Israel
put their children into the arms of the idol Moloch and burned them, and
the priests sounded with kettledrums and bells, so that the parents of
the children should not hear their cries. Vide ibidem \[See there\]. So
Tophet may be called a drum-house or drum-church; and Isaiah, cap. 30,
33., the king Assyria prepared such a pit, that is, he shall be burned
in hell; item, Job 17, 6.: \"I must be a wonder (that is Tophet) before
them,\" a drumming, which mock me to the hurt still, as one then paints
that the pipers mock his.

1\) Erlanger: \"as\" instead of: \"and therefore\".

1782 **Erl. 84, 135-137. appendix. W. XXI, 645\*-649\*.** 1783

V. 34. bridegroom. That is, whistles and all joyful cries that sound in
honor of the bridegroom at the wedding.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 14. Drink. He will help us to misfortune and sorrow, and not, as you
think, to happiness.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 25. All. All in one heap, Jews and Gentiles. One is as pious as the
other; the Jews are as wicked as the Gentiles, according to the heart,
though they are circumcised in body.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 5. yes. In Ebraeo \[In Hebrew\]: \^meu.

V. 15. Friends. Just as the mother in anger calls her son Junker, so he
calls them his friends, the pious little children, who do all evil and
idolatry, and yet shall be well-doers.

V. 16. a fire, the king of Babylon.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 3. sparest. Heb: sanctify or prepare them.

V. 5. Tired. Dear Jeremiah, are you afraid of Anathoth, what will become
of Jerusalem, when the trustworthy tyrants will be against you? Do not
fear so 2c.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 16. Dark mountains. That is, you rely on Egypt and hope for light and
happiness on such mountains, but they will leave you in darkness and
misfortune, and your comfort will be lacking.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 8. Stranger. You present yourself as a sojourner, a stranger, a
despondent one; for you do not take care of us and do not prove your
power to help us.

**The 15th chapter.**

In Hebrew, he calls these four plagues four familias or families,
perhaps to indicate that one devil has many devils among him, and one
plague has many ways to corrupt, as physicians well know daily.

V. 12. Iron. One evil over another; the Persians over the Chaldeans.

V. 19. Hebrew: If you can separate the delicious from the vile, you
shall be like my mouth.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 7. divide out. Bread, food or the like.

V. 18. corpses. That they sacrificed many children and burned them to
Moloch.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 1. Sin. That is, their idolatry drives them hard, and establishes it,
that it shall remain with the descendants; as with us the mass.

V. 6. drought. That is, he will remain unhappy.

V. 9: The heart is a defiant and despondent thing. If it goes badly, it
is vain despondency; if it goes well, no one can force it nor hold it in
its will to courage, hears no punishment, knows how to turn and decorate
itself, even against God\'s word, but still it does not help. In German
we say: It is a desperately evil thing about a heart; it can bear
neither good nor evil.

V. 16. days of men. That is, glory with men, who yet are wretched and
nothing in their glory, life and days.

**Chapter 18.**

V. 12. nothing out, or: we leave that.

V. 15. Untraveled paths. That is, they serve foreign gods, which was
unknown to their fathers and an unfamiliar thing, like an untraveled
path.

V. 18. is not missing. That means: they are in office by God, as ours
say: The church 2) cannot err.

V. 23. Do not forgive. Don\'t like what they do and don\'t help them.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 7. worship. Hebrew: rath. The prophets commonly call idolatry or
false worship vain, vain thing, like

1\) Erlanger: \"sageten\".

2\) Erlanger: \"the church\" twice.

1784 Erl. 84, 137-139. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Jeremiah.
W. XXI, 649\*-üS5\*. 1785

also Christ Matth. 15, 9, item, the godless counsel or doctrine Ps. 1,
1, item, lies, falsehood, deceit 2c., which we have interpreted the
several part idolatry.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 3. pas hur comes from pas, which means wide, and hur white.

Magur means fear. So Jeremiah reverses his name, as if to say: you shall
not go about as tall, broad and white as your name is, but fear and
terror shall be around and about you, that it may be narrow and black
enough around you.

V. 7. I was persuaded to accept such a preaching ministry, and I did not
know that the people were so wicked, and that preaching had so much and
such a great drive.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 2. This king is called here and often afterwards NebucadRezar (who is
otherwise called NebucadNezar).

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 7. Ordered. Sanctified.

V. 21. days of life. Hebrew: From your youth up.

V. 22. Grazes. Drives like cattle.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 15. Hypocrisy. False spiritual life and misbelief.

V. 22. The same. God\'s word converts; all other teaching deceives.

V. 23. is near. They are as sure and bold as if I did not catch their
false teaching.

V. 28. Preach dreams. Let him have my name with peace, and say not that
my word is what he dreams, but that it is his word and has his name.

V. 30. Steal. To interpret falsely, and thus steal the right word from
the people.

V. 36. Burden. They mockingly called the prophet\'s word a burden,
taking Jeremiah for a fool.

living God. The Hebrew says \"of the living Gods\", as many, and yet
One, LORD of hosts, indicating the three persons in the one Godhead.

1\) \"means\" is missing in the Erlanger.

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 3. with diligence. In Hebrew: early.

V. 23. These are the troglodytes, called Arabs, Egyptians, in the corner
between the Red Sea and Egypt.

V. 26. Sesach. This is said to be the king of Babylon.

V. 30. Song. The enemies will shout that they are victorious 2c.

V. 35. Shepherds. The princes and lords; their pasture is their
dominions, which the tyrant of Babylon will lay waste.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 18. Mark this: He who has God\'s word can also pray; he who does not
have it cannot pray, but as his preaching is false, so also his prayer
is nothing.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 9. of peace. They are certainly false prophets, so sweetly
comforting, yet the people are wicked.

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 10. This is the main saying that sustained the people at that time,
and Dan. 9:2. is praised.

V. 15. at Babel. That is: You shall not believe your prophets of
Babylon; I did not raise them up, as you think.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 1. These two chapters prophesy of Christ and the New Testament by all
means.

V. 8. yoke. Scilicet legis \[namely, of the law\^.

V. 23. A further of the Lord. Vastitas Judaeorum per Romanos. \[The
destruction of the Jews by the Romans.\]

> **The 31st chapter.**

V. 19. Hip. To strike the hip is a sign of pain, as women do in childish
distress.

V. 22. I do not throw away reason, since the ancients say: Christ is the
man surrounded by Mary, that is conceived and born. There is nothing in
it, which the blind Jews here and elsewhere more gaukeln. Because

2\) Erlanger: \"bodily\".

1786 **Erl. 84, 139-142. appendix. W. XXI, 6S5\*-66I\*.** 1787

Because it is to be a new thing, it must be a great, strange thing above
all the old. And summa, it shall be the new testament, because a
woman\'s image is a new, strange mother. For the whole text here speaks
of the New Testament, and calls her mourning and 1) burying the old
Moses, and turning to the way of the Lord. It can also have the
interpretation of S. Pauli Rom. 7, 3, since the old man leaves the law)
the woman through death. For the law is now not over us, but under us,
and no longer surrounds us, 2c. which is also nothing, but the new
testament.

V. 32. Compel, by law govern the unwilling.

**The 33rd chapter.**

V. 24. Blaspheme, that is, they move the people to unbelief and despair.

> **The 34th chapter.**

V. 19. 2) Calf\'s pieces. This was a sign that the covenant should be
firm, because they honored the sacrifice of God with it, as a testimony
of the truth.

> **The 35th chapter.**

V. 14. Always. Early.

**The 44th chapter.**

V. 17 Melecheth means effect. The effect of heaven is that it gives
rain, dew, snow, frost, ice, cold, heat, light, shine, and summa all
kinds of weather, so that Melecheth might well be called weather or
thunderstorm of heaven. The Jews kept this service for the sake of good
weather (as the text says, that they had bread and all sufficiency), so
that the fruits of thunder, hail, lightning, flour and other
thunderstorms, unharmed, would grow abundantly through good weather and
everything would be well received in due time. Such Melechethstück is
with us S. Urban, which should give good weather to the wine; and S.
Alexius against the thunder and lightning help, and the like.

V. 19. To grieve. That she may take care of us warmly, as being
concerned for our great need, as God was concerned Gen. 6:6 that there
was so much wickedness on earth.

1\) Erlanger: \"umb\" instead of: and.

2\) Walch and the Erlangeners: \"B. 18.\"

**The 46th chapter.**

V. 21. day laborers. Princes and lords who serve him and take great pay.

V. 25. Regents. Hebrew: Ammon means a regent, a master, that is, the one
who rules and governs everything, so that the people are fed and
protected. Proverbs 8:30: I, Wisdom, was Ammon, that is, the master or
nurturer who masters and governs everything.

**The 47th chapter.**

V. 5. You scratch. In sorrow, as those who carve themselves over a dead
person, which Moses bequeathed, Deut. 14, 1.

**The 48th chapter.**

V. 7. Camos is the name of the Moabite idol.

V. 34. Three-year-old heifer. The kingdom of Moab is like a
three-year-old heifer, strong, rich, pregnant, full of goods and people.
Isa. 16, 14.

**The 49th chapter.**

V. 1. Malchom is their idol.

V. 19. Youth. The great Alexander, who was to win all the lands.

V. 20. Shepherd boys. The people of the captains and princes. For
shepherds are called princes everywhere, who feed the righteous and
punish the wicked.

V. 34. Elam. The Persians.

V. 38. chair. This is the great Alexander who won Elam.

**The 5V. Chapter.**

V. 5. They will search for the way to Zion. This is the journey home
from Babylon, permitted by King Cyrus.

V. 21. embittered. God and man have grieved and angered those who are
worthy to be afflicted again.

V. 37: Women in childbearing distress.

V. 44. youth. Alexander Magnus.

**The 51st chapter.**

V. 7. Great. Who boast proudly, like fools.

V. 17. art. This is the teaching of idolatry.

V. 30. Wives. That is, despondent and stupid, like women in childish
distress.

V. 39. drinking. That is, I want them \[Ba-

1788 Erl. 84, 142-144. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Klaglieder Jeremiä.
W. XXI, 661\*-665\*. 1789

Let all the world\'s goods and people drink safely, and when they are
most secure, I will put them to sleep, and they will perish forever.

V. 59. to Babylon. This was done before the disturbance, perhaps to pay
homage 1) to the king of Babylon 2c.

**Book of Lamentations.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 10. sti l l. They are finished, gone.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3. Unmerciful. She cannot suckle or nurse her children, which the
most cruel animals do, for the urge is too great.

V. 14. defiled. That is, they have shed much innocent blood.

V. 17. Void ones. They relied on Egypt and men, and confidently
strangled the pious prophets.

V. 20. Anointed. Our king; for we thought our kingdom should have no
need, and defy all the heathen.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 17. Dark. The face passes away from us, and everything is black
before the eyes, with great misery and sorrow.

**The prophet Ezekiel.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 4. light bright. In Hebrew it says, like the figure Hasmal; no one
wants to know what it is. We let it be the brightest in the fire or
lightning, which some speciem electri \[for a kind of amber\^, the white
Agtstein 2) equal, and be the opinion: In the cloud was red fire, in the
red fire bright white light.

V. 7. round. So that they could go to all places, and yet the animals
were not allowed to move or turn.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 13. kissed. That is, touching each other above or swinging against
\[one\] another.

1\) obeisance \-\-- homage.

2\) \"Agtstein\" - amber. Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XXII, 1333.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 2. rams. These were arietes \[rams\] of old, to flow around the
walls.

V. 12. Dung. He had to cook with such dung, as one cooks with grass and
cow dung. But the food smells of fire: so they would be in such distress
and hunger that they would have neither fire nor bread.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 10. flourishes. He is prepared, and will succeed; and is said of the
king of Babylon.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 3. Master of the house. God was the master of the house at Jerusalem,
and they brought in another idol for him, and it displeased him.

V. 14 Thamus. This is said to be the idol Adonis, of whom the poets and
pagans have written much, and has been the paramour of the woman Venus;
therefore the women lament him. Methinks it is Bacchus, the wine idol,
as with us S. Urban.

V. 17. vines. This is a way of worship, as with us the consecrated salt,
water, seasoning and the like, in honor of the god.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 9 Cherubim. Here it is seen that cherub or cherubim is not a special
creature, but a winged figure or image of a bird, ox, lion, man, in
which the angels appear as they wish. Therefore they are also called
cherubim and are signified by cherubim. So also the angels of the
church, that is, the apostles, prophets, bishops or preachers rc

V. 13. Galgal reads, when we speak in German to the wheel: Wende, wende,
dass es sich immer wenden und gehen soll.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 6. full. They had slain so many prophets, yet they boasted that they
would remain before the king of Babylon. For they thought that our Lord
God could no more do without them than he could do without flesh in
pots, that is, than he could do without worship and sacrifice in the
temple, which could not perish.

1790 **Erl. 84, 144-146. Appendix. W. XXI, 66S\*-669\*.** 1791

V. 16. 1) away. Alii imperative wander in commanding form\^: Flee away
afar.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 12. carry in the dark. That is, he will not ride out or drive 2c.

V. 13. did not see. For his eyes were put out at Riblath, Jer. 39:7 and
52:11. So he saw the king of Babylon, as Jeremiah says, and yet did not
see Babylon, as Ezekiel says: which two pieces the Jews held against
each other as lies.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 7. Face. Their preaching and teaching.

V. 10. Build a wall. That is, to work and do what is taught; to
whitewash is to promise and comfort that it shall be well; yet both are
lost, and are vain false lies.

V. 21. 2) no longer see. Devout hearts are afraid of God\'s name,
therefore they are easily weighed down and caught with false doctrine,
brought forward under God\'s name.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 9. deceived. That means: to deceive with good words, to speak vain
good things out of one\'s own conceit without God\'s word, so that his
good words themselves deceive him to his own misfortune.

V. 23 Consolation. The captives of Babylon were glad that those of
Jerusalem also had to come captive to them, by whom they were shamefully
mocked as apostates.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 8. 3) it was the time to woo you, that is, you were manable.

V. 37. Shame here means nothing else than that she is worldly disturbed
and her rule has come to nothing.

V. 43. vice. Vide Ebraeum, et redde melius, si potes \[Look at the
Hebrew, and translate it better if you can\].

V. 49. Courage. Courage means defying God, despising His word, and
relying on one\'s own wisdom and power, just as if

1\) Erlanger: \"V. 11.\"

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 20.\"

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 18.\"

no God. Where there is such contempt for God, plus abundance and good
peace, all courage follows.

V. 53, this Sodom. Sodom means Judah here, as Samaria means Israel; and
speaks of the new covenant, when all the world is converted to Christ.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 3. eagle. The Jews of Jerusalem mocked the prophets and the people
who had surrendered to the king of Babylon and had allowed themselves to
be led to Babylon; therefore Ezekiel preaches here that the rest of
Jerusalem must surely also depart, who had fallen away from the king of
Babylon, and relied on the help of Egypt. The first eagle is the king of
Babylon; the uppermost branch \[v. 4\] on Lebanon is King Jechaniah, who
was led away; the merchant country \[v. 4\] is Babylon; the seed \[v.
5\] that is set loose is Zedekiah, who seeks help from the king in
Egypt; this is the other eagle \[v. 7\]. But it did not help him.

V. 22. I will take from the top of the tree the Lord Christ, who is of
the tall cedar tree, that is, of God\'s people and of the tribe of
David.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 3. Young lion means Jehoahaz, king of Judah, whom the king of Egypt
had carried away. \[2 Kings 23:33.\]

V. 5. Other means Jehoiakim, the king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar had
captured.

V. 7 Widows have no protection, therefore they must suffer and be
oppressed.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 6. erhub. That is: I proved myself honest with them.

V. 25. Not good. The right doctrine of God is peace, joy and life in the
Holy Spirit; the doctrine of men is vain strife, heartache and death,
for it leaves neither peace nor quietness to the conscience, even though
they do great things, such as sacrificing much, even burning the dearest
children, as he says in text 2c.

V. 35. desert of the nations. Etiam extra captivitatem Babylonis \[even
without the prison of Babylon.

V. 46. Noon. Jerusalem lies toward mid-

1792 Erl. 64, 146-448. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Ezekiel. W.
XXI, 669\*-673\*. 1793

day from Babel. Now Ezekiel is at Babylon, speaking of Jerusalem; which
he calls the forest toward the south.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 10 Ruthen. He fears that the punishment will not be distemper and
infantile punishment, as correction is succession, but that it will be
wrath and destruction. Therefore he wishes that there were a sharp rod,
yes, that all trees were made into rods, but that there was no wrath.
But he says afterwards that God has often tried with the rod, but it has
not helped; therefore the sword must come.

V. 21. Shoot. The king of Babylon will ask his soothsayers what people
he should attack and where he should succeed; and he will try signs,
such as shooting, and be careful where the arrow will fall; for such
signs these same warriors have used. This was also a sign when the
pagans sacrificed cattle, they looked at the liver and heart.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 15. Kogel 1) is Hebrew Seruch, as Moses 2 Mos. 26, 12. calls the rest
of the carpets, and is a Kogel, as in former times the magistrates and
students wore Kogel, since much useless cloth hung around the head.
These were right Babylonian Seruchim or Chaldean Kogel. So Jer. 49, 7.
calls sapientiam \[wisdom\]: Nisrah, loose, fluttering, pampel.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 16: He calls his wife with pleasure, because she gives him comfort,
pleasure and joy.

**Chapter 26.**

V. 20. dead. In Hebrew: to the eternal people. Solomon also,
Ecclesiastes 12:5, calls the grave an eternal house, because the dead
always remain in the same way. For day, night, morning, and evening are
one thing; with them there is no difference of time, place, works, or
changes, as with the living; but they are called one people, because
they shall rise again 2c.

1\) Kogel = hood, cap.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 4. In the midst of the sea. As other princes have cities and
villages, fields 2c. on the land: so Tyre was mighty on the sea.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 12. Clean. Since everything is finely and beautifully formed, that is
made up, and nothing about it is missing or forgotten, id est,
entelechia, forma \[that is: form, shape\], as it should be.

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 3 The river is Nilus, but it means the whole kingdom of Egypt, which
was a very beautiful and powerful kingdom; therefore Pharaoh also relied
on such power and did not ask anything about God\'s providence. This is
what he means when he says, \"I made it for myself,\" as if to say,
\"God is not the Lord of it; I am the Lord of it.

V. 6. Judah often seeks help from Aegyptus, and in so doing Judah sins
with unjust trust; yet Aegyptus did not help in times of need. Therefore
it is compared to a reed, on which, if one leans, because it is pointed,
he pricks it and breaks it.

**The 31st chapter.**

V. 8. 3) Chestnut trees or maples.

V. 11. mightiest. For the kings of Babylon devoured the kingdom of
Assyria and Nineveh shortly before Jerusalem was destroyed.

**The 33rd chapter. 3)**

V. 32 Song. The Jews came to the sermon, not that they believed or
wanted to improve themselves, but that they sneered at the poor prophet
and mocked him, and heard something about which they would have to joke
and sing afterwards. Thus they honored the dear word of God, as it is
honored in our time in the world.

**The 36th chapter.**

V. 2. the eternal heights. Id est, cultus perpetuus \[that is, the
eternal worship\].

V. 7. I lift up my hand. This is: I swear.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 9.\"

3\) This caption is missing in Walch and in the Erlanger.

1794 **Erl. 64, 148-150. appendix. W. XXI, 673\*-678\*.** 1795

**The 38th chapter.**

V. 2. Mesech and Thubal are also Tattern, and of the people back there
who are called Schütten or Schotten; although Mesech reads as if the
Moscowites come from them, that is, the Reussen.

V. 5 Persians come up against Arabia; therefore the Turk will also have
several of them.

V. 6.^1^ ) Gomer and Thogarma, his son, Gen. 10, 3., I think, are the
Wends, because at the Turkish court they speak Wendish.

V. 13. Dedan. Dedan is a part of rich Arabia; thus Mahomet lies buried
in rich Arabia at Mecha. come right. That is: O, thou doest right and
well, always continue to be happy. right. That is: You are the right
emperor and lord.

V. 18. My wrath. That is, Gog is my wrath and ruthlessness because of my
Christians\' sin.

V. 21. They shall strangle themselves among themselves.

**The 39th chapter.**

V. 2. entice. We leave aside what the rabbis do here with their sextiren
2); we keep it with S. Hieronymo.

V. 6. islands. That is, in Gog\'s country, at home it shall also burn.

V. 11. Shun. To hold one\'s nose from the stink. Gogs Haufenthal. That
the great multitude and heaps of Gogs lie buried there.

V. 14. Inquire whether they are all buried, or whether any still lie
unburied.

V. 16. hamona. Crowd or large heap.

V. 24. As their sin and transgression deserved. It says that Gog is
mighty because of our sin, and has so much happiness and victory.

**The 40th chapter.**

V. 38. chamber. These were chambers that in the Gospels are called
gazophylacia, God\'s chamber. There were many of them: some for the
priests, Levites, singers, where they put their utensils and garments;
some rich

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 9.\"

2\) \"Sextiren\" into six parts. They got this meaning by confusing
dtVV, which is here in the text, with nrw.

People kept their money, grain and other things for sacrifice or other
worship, like almost with us the sacristies.

**The 43rd chapter.**

V. 8. Their threshold. That is, the kings erected chapels next to the
temple where they were buried, and there they also held forbidden
services.

V. 15-17. Harel. Harel means God\'s mountain, Ariel God\'s lion. This is
what he calls the upper part of the altar on which one sacrificed. Asara
is the name given to the lower or lower and the higher part of the altar
where one could stand, some on the lower, some on the higher. So he
calls the upper place of the altar also Asara. Asara in German means
help or assistance, according to the language. The foot of the altar is
called a bosom or bosom.

**The 44th chapter.**

V. 18. In sweat. That they do not soil the holy garments with sweat, as
the village priests do their chasubles. Jerome interprets it that they
should not gird themselves too hard, that is, not forced, but do
everything willingly, without sweat or effort.

**The 45th chapter.**

V. 2. ruths, as it says at the end of the 42nd chapter.

V. 11. Ephah is a grain measure. Bath is a wine measure and oil measure.

V. 12. Sekel. A mina here has 60 secels; therefore these numbers must be
added together, and one secel is two drachmas, which in our country is
one local guilder.

**The prophet Daniel.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 2. Sinear is the land of Babylon, Gen. 10, 10.

V. 17. writing. That is, they learned all the arts that were written
among the Chaldeans.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 18. Ask for mercy. Prayer is our ultimate comfort and refuge, and we
do not lack it.

V. 19. reveals. How gladly and graciously God hears the prayer of the
faithful.

1796 Erl. 64, 150-153, L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Daniel. W.
XLI, 678\*-68ö\*. 1797

V. 21 Time and hour. He sets the time, how long every kingdom shall
stand, how long every man shall live, and every thing shall last.

V. 27. does not stand in their fortune. Daniel excuses the wise men and
keeps them alive.

V. 30. Not by my wisdom. This may mean humility.

V. 41. lance. Some say of the strength of iron 2c. But he wants to say
that the Roman empire, at the time when it will be divided, will be
moved, and like a plant or root will come to another place; and yet it
will be the same iron or empire plant, and not a new, different empire.
All this happened when the Roman Empire came from the Greeks to the
Germans, through the Pope and Carolum Magnum.

V. 46. He worshiped not Daniel, but God in Daniel, or Daniel would not
have suffered.

V. 48. Daniel exalted. Wisdom reigns over violence.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. A golden image. The king may have had this image made after the
dream to praise God, who had revealed the dream to him through Daniel;
but because God had not commanded it and it was against the first
commandment, it is unjust and idolatry. For worship without the word of
God is always idolatry.

V. 17. 18. Mark what faith this is!

V. 22. Hurrying. That one has not like to take off the clothes.

V, 31. ff. This is a letter of the king in which he confesses what God
has shown him in the following history.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 10. He calls the angels watchmen here, so that they watch and guard
against the devils without ceasing, as Ps. 91:11 says: \"He has
commanded his angels over you\" 2c., and is a very comforting word to
all people, especially to the captive Jews at Babylon.

V. 13. The human heart shall be taken away from him. Wisdom must be
taken away first, if a lord is to fall, that one may see how wisdom
alone

and not force governs. Proverbs 29:18: Cum defecerit prophetia etc..
\[\"When the prophecy is out\" 2c.\].

V. 16 Then Daniel was astonished. Daniel does not like to say it and is
sorry for his lord the king.

V. 27. By my great power. Here the king forgets from whom he has such a
kingdom, exalts himself as if he had obtained it by his power and jokes,
and must learn it differently.

V. 29. Cast out by the people. He will perhaps have been senseless and
possessed with evil spirits.

V. 34. All his doings are truth, and his ways are right. Behold, what a
beautiful faith and fine confession!

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1. 2. It does not remain with the drinking, but they must also mock
God and misuse His vessels; therefore S. Paul says: From drunkenness
follows a wild and desolate life, Eph. 5, 18.

V. 4. Praised to scorn the God of Jerusalem, from whom they had taken
the vessels, as a sick, void God.

V. 10. The queen. This may have been the king\'s mother, the old queen
and widow. For up there in the beginning, the king\'s wives are also in
the drinking hall.

V. 13 was brought. Daniels is so forgotten by this king that he must be
sought and called. So it is with all faithful servants in the world.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 27: Delivered from the lions. This is the fruit of Daniel\'s faith,
for faith always performs miracles and great things.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 24. Ten kings. As Alexander\'s kingdom became four kingdoms, so the
Roman empire became ten, as, Spria, Egypt, Asia, Grecia, Jtalia, Gallia,
Hispania, Africa, Germania, Anglia; for these lands the Romans had all.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 2. Elam, which is called Persia.

V. 9. The land is Judea, where God dwelt in Jerusalem in the temple.

1798 **Erl. 6\", 153-155. appendix. W. XXI, 685\--69I\*.** 1799

V. 10. Heaven\'s army. The army of heaven is the service of God in
Jerusalem, because God was served by it from heaven, and he was the
prince of such an army. The stars are the saints in such an army.

V. 14. From evening to morning. These are not weekdays, like Daniel 9,
24. weeks of the year, but ordinary natural days, since evening and
morning are counted inside.

V. 17. of the end. This indicates that Epiphanes is not only meant in
this vision, but also the end-Christ.

V. 24. Not by power, but by cunning, treacherousness and
mischievousness.

V. 25: Welfare, that he may have great goods, honor, happiness, and lead
a good life in pleasure, he will attract many with it.

V. 26. A long time passed. But again he shows that he means something
more than Antiochum; for Antiochus did not come more than four and a
half hundred years after this vision.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 13. Truth, that we might have believed that your prophecy must come
true; for we do not believe God\'s prophecy until we know it.

V. 23. When you began to pray. Notice that our prayer is already
answered when it begins.

V. 24. Sealed, that is, added to, cancelled and fulfilled, as a thing
that is now to be over and to have an end.

V. 26. There will be nothing more. There will be nothing in Moses and
the temporal government, because he will start a new, spiritual,
heavenly kingdom, and the Jews will know that there will be no more
Messiah, because they have cut off this Messiah.

of the prince, that is, the emperor, who will have the regiment in the
world at that time and will be lord. These are the Romans.

V. 27. Wings, that is, where the cherubim stand in the temple.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 6. incandescent 1) ore. Bright, clear, polirt.

V. 13. prince. A royal court devil.

V. 20. See how the angels act for us with the great lords.

1\) In the original it says: \"glow\". Cf. Col. 1776.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 2. fourth. Xerxes.

V. 3. Mightier. The great Alexander.

V. 5. king at noon. Ptolemy Lagus.

one. Seleucus Nicanor.

V. 6. daughter. Bernice, Ptolemy Philadelphi\'s daughter.

Kings at midnight. Antiochus Theos.

V. 7. of the branches of one. Ptolemy Euergetes, Bernice\'s brother.

King of Midnight. Seleucus Gallinicus, Antiochus Hierax.

Feste is called here the kingdom.

V. 9. He will again go to his land. That is, he will not keep the
kingdom when he probably could.

V. 10. Sons. The great Antiochus and his brother Seleucus Keraunus.

V. 11. King at noon. Ptolemy Philopator.

King at midnight. Antiochus Magnus.

V. 13. king against midnight. The same great Antiochus.

V. 14. King at noon. Ptolemy Epiphanes.

V. 15. The king against midnight. The great Antiochus against Ptolemy
Epiphanes.

fixed cities. Not in Egypt, but in the cities of Syria and Judea, which
were before of Ptolemy.

V. 16. Precious land. The great Antiochus did great honor to the Jews,
because they helped him to win Syriam against Ptolemy Epiphanem.

V. 19. Fall. He was slain at Elymaide in Persia.

V. 20. one. Seleucus Philopator, who has not done anything princely, and
who is a swindler of the people.

V. 21. unthought-of. Antiochus Epiphanes, better sent to be a boy than a
king.

V. 22. Arms. The captains of King Aegypti in Syria.

Covenant. Ptolemy Philometor, Antiochus sister-son.

V. 30. ships. The Romans.

1800 Eri. 64, 165-167. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Daniel. W.
xxi, 69i\*-\"ss\*. 1801

V. 31. Poor. His people and his mighty ones.

V. 32. people. This is Judas Maccabee and his brothers and followers.

V. 36. the king. Here 1) the angel directs his words under the person of
Epiphanies to the end-Christ, and go to the sealed words, of which he
says at the end.

V. 37. fathers GOt. All other gods, even his ancestors\' God, must be
nothing; but his own God, he shall be.

love women. He wants to say that he will float in the unnatural vice,
where the despisers of God are plagued with, Rom. 1, 27, which is called
welsh marriage and dumb sins. For he shall not have the marriage state
and the right love or custom of wives. As it is then under the pope and
the Turks in the most horrible way.

V. 38. Honor with gold. A bad god who has no better, other honor than
gold and silver.

V. 39. Maosim. Maosim means the fortresses or fortified presidia, as
castles or cities are called fortresses and are often used in the 11th
chapter of Daniel. So now \"God Maosim\" actually means a god of the
fortresses, deus praesidiorum.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 10: The wicked continue and remain as they are, and do not turn back;
but let no one be offended.

**The prophet Hosea.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 6. LoRyhamo, without mercy. For he would not deliver them from the
king Assyria.

V. 9. LoAmmi, not my people. For he would finally leave the Jewish
people and abolish their kingdom and priesthood, as was done through the
gospel, as soon follows.

V. 11. Hold to one head. This is to preach of Christ and the gospel
among Gentiles and Jews; there is another head and kingdom. This head is
Jesus Christ.

1\) lenden - to steer.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 5. harlot. That is, she served the idols.

V. 7. The idolaters, because they are fortunate, think they have earned
it with their worship; until tribulation comes, they must call on the
right God for pure mercy.

V. 14. friendly. That is, the dear gospel.

V. 15. The valley of Achor is the golden floodplain where the cross of
affliction is, and yet the comforting word of Christ. For Achor means
tribulation or cross, where one preaches a vain invisible thing, which
one must hope for.

V. 18. Covenant. That is, the covenant and peace of conscience through
faith in Christ, to which no one can do any 2) harm.

V. 22. Jezreel is called God\'s seed; to this end He says \[v. 23\]:-I
will keep her for seed, that is, make a right 3) Jezreel, that she may
have descendants forever, as the holy church must always remain.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. jug of wine. For the sake of the belly: Yes, heaven, heaven; if I
had flour here, they say.

V. 4. Without a king. Israel did not return to kingship after the prison
until the right David Christ came, King of all the earth.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. No word of God, that is, one teaches nothing of God.

V. 6. Learn. Hear sermon from God.

V. 10. Eat. They will almost do their service, and yet have little to
eat; just as the end Christians would like to do their service, but it
will not be as it was before.

V. 14. beaten. Fools must be beaten with pistons.

V. 16. Let her graze. She is an unruly cow, does not want to stay in the
stable; so I will also make room for her and break her up.

2\) In the original, \"ichtes.\"

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"Right.\"

1802 **Erl. 64, 157-159. appendix. W. XXI, 696\*-7VI\*.** 1803

scatter among all the heathen, that she may have enough to run.

V. 18. Lords. Their kings, princes and priests.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1. Mizpah. They set up a church service there and seduced the people
with it, like our priests with the masses and pilgrimages 2c.

V. 2. Slaughter. That is, they sacrifice much and make their idolatry
(that they may stray from God as an adulteress strays) so deep that
there is no healing nor hope. He does not want to call it sacrifice, but
a mere slaughter.

V. 5: Their worship, on which they build and insist.

V. 9. Before. I said it for a long time, it would go to failure once.

V. 15: When they are in trouble. Here he prophesies of Christ and the
gospel. The Jews did not want to obey God when they were well; so they
must serve God under the cross in the New Testament. It will not be
otherwise, because pauperes evan- gelisantur \[the poor have the gospel
preached to them\], the wretched hear God\'s word, the rich do not heed
it.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 5. h ofele. 1) That is, I condemn their worship, that they may learn
to serve me rightly.

V. 11. Judah will still have a harvest ahead of them. Israel manebit in
captivitate, Judah redibit. \[Israel will remain in captivity, Judah
will return\].

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. is found. The more one teaches, the angrier the world becomes.

V. 3. wickedness. Idolatry.

V. 6. their becker, that is, their king.

V. 7. like an oven. This means that they burn so hot in idolatry that no
plague can bring them out of it; indeed, they make martyrs out of those
whom God punishes, as if they suffer it for God\'s sake, and canonize
their own saints.

V. 8. No one turns over. Always lets itself be roasted on one side.

1\) \"hofeln\" - planing.

V. 12. How to preach. That is, they drow and banish the right prophets
as heretics before God 2c. The same shall fall on their heads, and shall
themselves bear the punishment they preach over others in their schools
2c.

V. 13. Lies. Idolatry.

V. 14. camps. That is, in their churches and schools, where they court
idols.

gather. They go to choir for the sake of food and drink.

V. 16: Forbidding, namely against the prophets.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 1. He comes. The enemy, king of Affprien.

V. 5. calf. Idols or idolatry.

V. 12. A foreign doctrine. That is, they call it heresy.

V. 13. Eat it. As one is accustomed to eat the sacrifices as sacred food
to serve God.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 4. Deut. 26, 14. It is forbidden to make sacrifices in sorrow.

V. 9. Gibeah. Judg. 19, 15. cap. 20, 13. Then the children of Benjamin
defended the deepest wickedness that could not be healed and had to
perish.

V. 14. Sealed breasts. That they can no longer raise children in the
land, but all shall be carried away.

V. 16. withered away. The kingdom is gone, and must be scattered among
the Gentiles, as in error 2c.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 1. fruits. That is, the cities are the fruit of this vine, but it is
picked and empty.

V. 9. Gibeah. Davon Richt. 19/25.

V. 10. Two sins. Both calves idolatry.

V. 12. sow. That is, preach right, or I will plow with you once 2c.

V. 14 Salm an. This story is not found anywhere else in Scripture, and
there are many more like it, not all of which are described, such as the
one Judas describes in his epistle about Michael and Satan.

V. 15. early. That is, soon and suddenly.

1804 Erl. 64, 160-162. L. \'s marginal glosses on the prophet Hosea. W.
xxi, 701\*-707\*. 1805

**Chapter 11.**

V. 3. directs. Like the mother shepherds a child and teaches it to walk,
and leads with the poor.

V. 7. Tired. No one is to understand this verse, not even in Hebrew.

V. 8. 1) Protect. He wants to say, I do not know how to help you;
neither punishment nor mercy will help, I must send Christ, who will
make it good.

> **The 12th chapter.**

V. 1. lie. Idolatry.

holds. Hebrew: Still rules with God.

V. 2. idolatry. Lies and corruption, with Assur. They trust in men and
not in God.

V. 5 Bethel. They prove that Bethel is better than Jerusalem for worship
because Jacob performed miracles there.

V. 8. False scales. They do not interpret the writing of Bethel
correctly.

V. 11. ad. Heb: Assimilatus, id est \[present parables that is\]: It was
I who spoke through the prophets; and the prophets were my larvae or
persons, under whom I presently did and spoke all things. Qui vos audit,
me audit \[He who hears you hears me, Luc. 10, 16\].

V. 13. had to. That Jacob served God at Bethel had to happen at that
time for his person. But after that God led the people out of Egypt
through Moses; that is what they were to follow, not the example of
Jacob.

V. 15. idols. Hebrew: bitterness.

Lord. The king Assur.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 1. Terrible. A devout heart trembles at the terrible idolatry
Jeroboam set up; still it continued and increased, as all idolatries
increase greatly, which is terror \[terrible\] to see.

killed than Ahab with all his own.

V. 3. Thau. They promise great things to false worship; yes, behind
them, says Hosea.

V. 9. misfortune. That you seek help from men and not from God.

V. 11. King. Saul he gave with disfavor,

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 9.\"

2\) This is how the Hirschberg Bible explains it.

1 Sam. 8, 19. ff. I will say: As I gave you the first king in anger, so
I will take away the last king in anger, so that you will have no more.

V. 14. 15. Hell. The temporal kingdom shall perish, but the spiritual
kingdom shall come. But few Jews will take comfort in this, for they
will not accept it, and will be disturbed by the Romans as a sour wind.

**The prophet Joel.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 23. as before. Hebrew: in primo; quod de primo mense Rabbini
intelligunt, sed hoc nihil est \[at the first; this the rabbis
understand of the first month, but it is nothing\]. For early rain and
late rain do not fall in one, silent in the first month. He wants to
say: Until Christ comes, preaching and feeding shall remain with you,
utrumque regimen (spiritual and temporal regiment\], that is, the
teachers 3) to righteousness and fruits of the land, as it happened at
the first and before 2c.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. 2. This is how the Levitical priesthood will end when all classes
come to the ministry.

V. 6, 7 on account of. Notice that all God\'s punishment and judgment of
the wicked is for the sake of the righteous; so is the last judgment.

V. 8. for wine. That is, sold contemptuously and derisively.

**The Prophet Amos.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 4. lies. Idolatry and false teaching.

V. 6 Shoe. The wicked would not give an old pair of shoes for all the
priests.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 8. Who should not prophesy? That is, I must preach, God calls me, and
you are the cause with your evil nature.

V. 12. Bed. Bed and camp are called church and altar, Isa. 57, 7. on
which they mean fornication, the

3\) Walch and the Erlangeners: \"Teaching\".

1806 **Erl. 64, 162-164. appendix. W. XXI, 707\*-714\*.** 1807

is to practice idolatry. They serve the gods of Damascus, and in the
corner, that is, of Dan or Bethel.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. Cows and their masters are the idolaters with their idols, from
which they get rich.

V. 3. Harmon is perhaps Mount Amanus, beyond which Israel is carried
away into Assyria.

V. 6. Idle teeth. Clean, innocent teeth that do no harm to the bread.

V. 12. I will also continue with plagues; therefore repent, I counsel,
before it begins.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 8. mother hen called Pleiades, Job 9:9.

V. 13. Silence. One must not preach; no one wants to hear or suffer.

V. 17. I will teach you morals.

V. 21. I do not like to smell. That is, your incense offering does not
please me; I have the sniffles.

V. 26. Sichuth. Apost. 7, 43. 1) Lucas uses this saying differently,
which you may read there. It reads, however, as if it had been a service
of God, which they called Sichuth, that is, hat, protection, screen (as
we, S. Bastian, prayed to a Sichuth against the pestilence), by which
they wanted to be safe from all evil. So Chiun reads as certain,
constant, safe, that they have thereby safely kept what they have been
and had. However, as we invoked the saints, that they preserved us the
present good, and protected us from future evil.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 9. Isaac. So the church will be called after Isaac, the archfather,
or the people of Israel will also have been called Isaac. But the
prophet interprets it in mockery; for Isaac means to mock.

Churches. Hebrew: sanctuaries.

V. 12. Seer, you prophet and preacher.

V. 14. not a prophet. That is: Not of the order or collection of
prophets.

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"Act. 7, 41.\"

**Chapter 8.**

V. 2. basket. In Hebrew the two words (basket and end) are almost the
same, kaiz and lss. So he comes from one to the other, saying, The
basket, yea, the end is come. As we would like to say: I will speak to
you, yes, I will wheel you 2c.

V. 6. pair of shoes. That is, for all kinds of necessities they have to
pay dearly.

V. 8. river. This is the Nile, which floods the land of Egypt every year
in summer.

V. 11. 12. Hunger. Whoever does not want the word of God shall find it
far enough away that he may never find it, even if he would like to.

V. 14: Curse. This is what he calls the idol, because they sin against
it and deserve the curse.

Wise man. This is the service to Bersaba.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 7. Moors. God always drives out one people by another for the sake of
sin; just as He drove out the Cananites by Israel, the Syrians by Kir,
and the Caphtorians by the Philistines, and just as the Moors drove out
many other peoples.

V. 9. The grains shall not fall to the earth. Reliquias ex Judaeis
servabo; infidelem synagogam rejiciam et perdam \[the remnants of the
Jews I will raise up, the unbelieving synagogue I will reject and
destroy\].

V. 13. The time. This is the time of the gospel and the kingdom of
Christ.

**The Prophet Obadiah.**

V. 5: Thieves. The Chaldeans are called thieves because they are said to
rob Edom unawares; yet they are right thieves before God, because they
are as bad boys as all the others. Summa, one thief must be another\'s
thief.

V. 7. Betray. Hebrew: Ponent sub te emplastrum \[they will put a plaster
under you.

**The prophet Jonah.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 5. no more. Ebraice est quaesi- tivum: Num vel an videbo templum? Hoc
debet verti negative. Nec cures hic ebraistas

1808 Erv \"4, 164-166. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Micah. W.
xxi, N4\*-\*720. 1809

grammatistas, qui in sensu scripturae sunt Rabbinistae, id est, animal
sine intellectu. Ipsi in affectibus propheticis de rebus tam arduis
nihil experti sunt, ideo nec verbum intelligere possunt, \[In Hebrew
this is an interrogative sentence: Will I then see the temple? This must
be translated in a negative way. And here do not bother about the Hebrew
grammarians, who are rabbinists in the sense of Scripture, that is,
creatures without intellect. They themselves have not experienced
anything of the heart emotions of the prophets in such high things,
therefore they cannot understand the words\].

V. 9 In German: Werkheiligen und Heuchler verlassen ihren GOtt und
Christum wegen ihres nichtigen Gottesdienstes.

**The prophet Micah.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 5 Sin. Idolatry, which is also fornication.

V. 7: Harlot\'s wages. The wages and profits are the interest and goods
of such wards, which are whores\' wages and become whores\' wages again,
because they are given to the wicked.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 6. to call, that is, to preach.

V. 9. My jewelry. What I have given them, you take from them.

V. 10. Impurity. Idolatry.

V. 12. Solid stable. Here he speaks of the kingdom of Christ, who is our
hero, who has broken through before us, making way through death, sin,
the devil and all evil. According to the fresh 2c.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 6. face. Your preaching and teaching.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3. 1) judge. God\'s word will come into all the world.

V. 8. it becomes. Alii sic: usque ad te veniet. [\[Other so: until to
you will come\].]{.underline}

golden rose. Your kingdom, even though it may be weak, it should and
must still be

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 2.\"

come. Therefore, hold on and suffer. The cross must give birth to the
Church of Christ.

V. 9. Why do you hang. Alii sic \[other so\]: Why do you grieve?

V. 13. Thrash. Thou shalt thresh Babylon and all things in all the
earth, though thou suffer both Babylon and Rome to destroy thy judges
and thy kingdom.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 2. Let him that is troubled be troubled, until he come with the
gospel; he shall have the victory; that and no other.

V. 4. Seven shepherds. The Persians and Medes, however, are to subdue
Assyria until Christ comes to save us completely.

V. 8. Conquer. So does the gospel in the world, even though it may wear
out the gates of the shells.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 6. God will not be reconciled with sacrifices and works if one
sacrifices his son, but if one fears him and trusts him 2c.

V. 8. keeping God\'s word. In Ebraeo: Facere judicium \[In Hebrew: to do
justice\]. That is, believe, love and suffer.

V. 16. wise, that is, worship.

**Chapter 7.**

V. I.ff. A song of the prophet Micah to comfort himself against the
raging of the wicked.

V. 9. to the light. That is: He will comfort me.

**The Prophet Nahum.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 3. weather, as in the Red Sea. Ex. 14, 24.

V. 11. Shalksrath. That is, the wicked plot and nobles of Nineveh
against the people of Judah to destroy them had to come to naught when
it throbbed highest, as happened to Sanherib and Rabshakeh before
Jerusalem. \[2 Kings 19:35.\]

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 6. mighty ones. The king of Nineveh will rely on his men of war.

V. 14. messengers. Of thy officers and mighty men.

1810 **Erl. 64, 166-168. appendix. W. LXI, 72O\*-72ö\*.** 1811

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. lies. Idolatry, which he also calls sorcery and fornication.

V. 13. to women. Despondent and miserable, as in childish distress.

V. 17. lords. Nazaraei, their priests.

**The prophet Habakkuk.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 3. robbery, vel sic \[or so\]: strife and contention have the upper
hand.

V. 5. This saying is used by S. Paul, Apost. 13, 41 in a different way
than the prophet does here, as he usually does.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 3. Remain outside or absent.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 2. In the midst of the years. That is, in due time and in the midst
of trouble you help and make your own blessed and free.

V. 4. shine. Ebraice: Cornua ut de Mose \[Horns as of Moses\].

**The prophet Zephaniah.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 4. Camarim. Who wanted to be better than bad priests or priests.

V. 5. Malchom was an idol of the children of Ammon. \[1 Kings 11:33,
1)\]

V. 7. guests. The Babylonians who were to devour Jerusalem, because they
kept foreign ways to serve God, except for Deut. 2c.

V. 8. who wear a foreign garment. Namely, in their idolatry, as
chasubles, choir robes 2c. For they have set up peculiar ways,
sacrifices, garments, to the displeasure of God in Jerusalem.

V. 11: Mill. Jerusalem, which now served mammon and the belly, and the
church had become a mill or kitchen and sought vain temporal goods with
its worship, as with us also 2c.

V. 12. on the yeasts. Sitting safely as

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"1 Kings 11:43.\"

a wine that will not be drained, and scoff at the prophets\' confidence.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 11. Exterminate. This is said of the gospel, which was to come after
the Babylonian prison, as has happened.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. city. That is, Jerusalem itself. For where God\'s word is most
preached, there it is most despised.

V. 4. sanctuary. God\'s word, which is holy.

interpret, sicut Papa: Do it Peter etc.. \[as the pope: \"You are
Peter\" 2c.\] \[Matth. 16, 18.\].

V. 9. lips. This is to preach the gospel of the grace of God to all the
world, which redeems us from our sin.

V. 11. Proud saints who boasted and relied on the temple, sacrifices,
fathers and other holy works, Rom. 9, and not on pure grace.

V. 15. Punishment. He will no longer be angry, but it shall be vain
forgiveness. And he calls the enemies law and evil consciences.

V. 17. Forgive. Not punish, nor impute sin, but cover and forget.

V. 18. Statutes. Who press the law on works, and not on grace, since the
law itself presses out, Gal. 3, 14.

**The prophet Haggai.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 13. angel, that is, messenger or preacher.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 8. comfort, that is, Christ, who was to comfort all the world through
the forgiveness of sins.

V. 10. Give peace. Happiness and salvation.

V. 13. if someone. Sacra non sanctificant profana, sed profana polluunt
sacra \[the holy does not make the unholy holy, but the unholy stains
the holy\].

V. 23. Turn back. I will disturb the Persians, if you are afraid; which
was done by Alexandrum Magnum.

1812 Erl. 64, 168-171. L.\'s marginal glosses on the prophet Zechariah.
W. xxi, 725\*-73o\*. 1813

**The prophet Zechariah.**

**Chapter 3.**

V. 7. Who are standing here. Angels guard and guide the pious,
especially priests and teachers.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 10. Tin measure. A straight edge or lead wood. For the building was
to be done by Zerubbabel, where and how he attacked it, if all the
heathen were sorry.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 3 Epistle. These are the counterfeiters of the Scriptures, who grieve
the pious hearts and praise the wicked, and hypocrites.

V. 6. Just as the letter above shows, this is also said of false
teachers, who measure and rake in consciences with laws and rights, but
in the end must come to Sinear 2c.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 12. Zemah means a plant, and is a prophecy of Christ, who is
signified by Joshua and Zerubbabel.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 3. Contain like the Nazirites. 4 Mos. 6, 2.

**Chapter 8. 1)**

V. 21. 23. we want. InEbraeo: Vadam etiam ego \[In Hebrew: I also will
go\], says one to the other.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 1. Hadrach, that is Syria.

behold. In Domino est oculus hominis et omnium tribuum Israel \[In
Hebrew: The Lord is the eye of man and of all the tribes of Israel\].

on the people. God punishes both Jews and Gentiles when they deserve it.

V. 8. stands, as the men of war go and stand in the camp in the guard,
and 1 Sam. 10, 5.: Statio Philistinorum 2) \[hence 1 Sam. 10, 5.: \"the
Philistine camp\").

V. 12. Today. Also for this time and this time, not only in the future.

1\) This caption is missing in the Erlanger.

2\) Erlanger: Vitistinorum.

V. 17. begets. The gospel is such a word that does not beget children in
the cradle, but when they are begotten, they are young companions and
virgins, fit for marriage, that is, to teach and to beget other
spiritual children.

**The 1V. Chapter.**

V. 3. goats. These are the priests and prophets among the people, whom
Christ later calls Pharisees.

V. 11. Sea of fear. That is, the narrow sea, as they passed through the
sea of red. We all have to go through such a narrow sea. Ex. 15, 19.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 1. Lebanon is Jerusalem, built of Lebanon and destroyed by the
Romans.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 5. served. In Hebrew: I am in bondage, from my youth, to a man.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 3. argue. Spiritus sanctus arguet mundum de peccato etc. \[The Holy
Spirit will punish the world for sin 2c.) This will be the dispute 2c.

V. 5. My mountains. These are the two pieces of the mountain of oil that
is split in two.

V. 7. day. The gospel shall not be a bodily day, nor light; and all
other things which have hitherto been bodily worship shall then be
spiritual.

V. 18. Neither shall it rain upon them. Greatest and most horrible
plague, to be deprived of God\'s word.

**The prophet Malachi.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 2. Blessing. Your goods and all your possessions, so that I had
blessed and gifted you.

V. 3. dung. He has taken the priesthood from them, as it is written
here, and has left the yeast or dung, so that they now count for
nothing.

V.14. This is what we say in German: Therefore you despise your dear
wife, whom the Lord has assigned to you and is your companion, to whom
you have committed yourself.

1814 **Erl. 64, 171-173. appendix. W. XXI, 730\*-736\*.** 1815

V. 15. Some. Abraham is the one, as Isaiah also calls him, for from him
all the Jews come. The same one took another wife, not for the sake of
his own pride, as you do, but so that he might beget godly children.

V. 16. Dress. Because she has been reviled by you, it is right that she
should be clothed by you in honor, as she was your wife, and not be so
shamefully cast into misery.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 6. does not lie. He who does not change it, who lets it stay that
way.

V. 8 is deceptive. You give the Levites and priests the least, and
probably nothing at all.

V. 11. eater. Anything that harms the grain.

V. 16: The Lord notices. He does not forget.

**The Wisdom of Solomon.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 10: The ear of the diligent is the ear of God.

V. 16. him. Death.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 2. about. That is \[as the crude people say\] 2): We are born without
God\'s providence or counsel.

V. 7. May flowers. That is, of our beautiful fresh youth need, before we
become old and unfit. Utendum est aetate etc. \[One must be aware of the
time 2c.\]

V. 9. prangen. To live in a buzz.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 7. Stubble are the heathen and the wicked.

V. 12. Wives. What is said here until the end of the chapter about wives
and children is to be understood prophetically, that is, about lands and
people, as the prophets call Babylon, Jerusalem, Israel a daughter or
wife, and fornication idolatry, beds churches and altar.

V. 15. The root of understanding. He that is well tried in the word of
God, and hath suffered much, shall flourish and green for ever. Ps. 1,
3.

1\) Erlanger: before.

2\) Added by us.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1 Work. His teachings and actions.

V. 16. reward. Your property and wealth.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 17-20. All the world knows these things of the several parts; but
only the faithful know that they are God\'s creatures and created by the
Word and wisdom of God.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 7. strength. That is, to be manly, courageous, confident and fteudig.

V. 18. work. That is, through their teaching and counsel.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 1. ff. Here the poet himself speaks and prays entirely in Solomon\'s
person, as an example for all princes to do so, and it is a beautiful
prayer.

See, wisdom comes from God alone, and without it no one is good for
anything.

V. 10. Without God\'s word, man cannot know what pleases God, but goes
and does everything in doubt and uncertainty.

V. 15. Scattered mind. Without God\'s word, reason judges and seeks many
ways and paths, thus scattering itself in much trouble, but still not
hitting it.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 1. Made at the first. Adam. Gen. 1.

V. 2. sin. By the word Gen. 3:15: \"The seed shall bruise thy head.\"

V. 3. unrighteous. Cain. Gen. 4.

V. 4. wisdom. Noah. Gen. 6. 7. 8. This was God\'s word and command to
build the ark.

V. 5. at the same time. That is, where he went he found idolatrous, evil
people, as Abraham\'s life shows, Gen. 12, 1.

V. 6. righteous. Lot. Gen. 19, 16. f.

V. 7. Unripe fruit. These are the apples of the dead sea, which are
beautiful on the outside and ashes on the inside, called sorba.

V. 10. Righteous. Jacob. Gen. 28, 2.

V. 12. Godliness is faith in the word of God or wisdom.

V. 13. righteous. Joseph. Gen. 37, 28. 39, 21.

V. 15. people. Children of Israel.

V. 16. servant. Moses.

1816 Erl. 64, 173-173. L.\'s marginal glosses on the wisdom of Solomon.
W. XXI, 736\*-742\*. 1817

**Chapter 11.**

V. 7. blood. When the water turned to blood in Egypt, Ex 7:20.

V. 23: Tongues. Just as it may be easy for the tongues to strike out, so
the world is small against God. Isa. 40, 15.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 5. murderers of their sons. The Cananites who sacrificed their
children. Ps. 106, 37. 1)

V. 14 Tyrant. Behold, how he directs all words, and censures tyrants, to
make them afraid.

V. 15. Not according to. How the tyrants make themselves think that they
need to use their power to harm others and throb 2c.

V. 17. bold. That is, at the Egyptians in the Red Sea.

V. 23. 24. Unrighteous. The Egyptians who worship the animals that the
Jews, their enemies, despise.

V. 25. The mocking plague was that they were plagued by the animals,
which were their gods and were supposed to help them.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 4: Power. This is the many works and virtues of the creature.

**The 14th chapter. 2)**

V. 25. trouble, that they put on the pious all trouble and vexation.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 19. These are the serpents that are also cursed in Gen. 3:14.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 6 Sign. The serpent of brass was this sign against the fiery
serpents.

V. 11: Wonders. So that they would not forget the miraculous signs that
had happened to them.

V. 17. water, in the downpour.

V. 20. all kinds of pleasure. That is, one could 3) make it whatever one
wanted, bake, roast, simmer, boil, dry 2c.

V. 26. Your word. Matth. 4, 4: \"Man does not live by bread alone\" 2c.

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"Ps. 77.\"

2\) This caption is missing in Walch and in the Erlanger.

3\) Thus the Weimar Bible. Erlanger: he can.

V. 27. From a low shining of the sun. Ex. 16, 21. when the bread of
heaven was melted by the sun.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 1. is missing. That is, their attacks against the righteous recede.
Ps. 66, 3: \"Your enemies are absent.\"

V. 7. 8. 2 Mos. 9, 11. The magicians also had the gland like other
people.

V. 10. 11. Conscientia mille testes \[Conscience is as much as a
thousand witnesses\].

**Chapter 18.**

V. 5. One. This is Moses, 2 Mos. 2, 3.

V. 9. In secret. Ex 12: They sacrificed the paschal lamb among
themselves alone, without the Egyptians.

V. 20. the wrath. Ex. 21 the fire in the people.

V. 24. Jewelry. The priestly beautiful clothes.

Honor. The twelve names of the twelve tribes of Israel.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 20. Food. The bread of heaven, which melts from the sun 2c.

**This also Jesus Sirach.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 1. fear God, love 2c. does not come off without contestation. 1 Petr.
1, 6.

V. 13. forgives. He does not look at how evil and unworthy we are.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 21. The humble. Seek, where you can, to become high, as the world
does. 4)

V. 28. Those who intrude, because they are unskilled or unqualified,
nothing good must come of it in the end.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 27. Confess the right freely. One should stand by the righteous, and
spare no journey for it.

V. 30. Those who have overcome their error or injustice to bring shame
do not do this.

4\) \"thut\" i.e. to become high.

1818 **Erl. 64, 175-177. Appendix. W. XXI, 742\*-747\*.** 1819

They do not want to give way for the sake of the other, but continue to
fool, and one fool always serves the other.

V. 34. First, they want to support the right with body 2c.; but after
that, they are good words 2c.

V. 36. to give. These are the meager landlords who overdo their servants
and give little food and wages.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 1. 1) To rebuke anyone. These are the splinter judges who forget
their beam.

V. 5. interprets for the best. He is wise and well taught who turns all
things to the best.

V. 10. Table friends. Friends in need go 25 to a pound; but if it is a
hard stand, they go 50 to a quart.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 7: Sedition. He who would be uplifted hangs people on himself and
makes a commotion, wants to make all things better and right all wrongs,
and thinks that God should look at his prayer and good opinion.

V. 16. arable work. Virgilius: Felices agricolas, bona si sua norint.
Sed non sunt digni nosse \[D, the happy country people! If they only
knew how good they had it. But they are not worthy that they should know
it\].

V. 28. Hostile. This is spoken in Jewish, because one wife bit out the
other. But with us it means as much as: Do not believe what is
blasphemed to you against your wife by evil mouths, who pretend to you
and are angry with her.

V. 37. To the dead to cover them and bury them honestly for the sake of
God and the resurrection.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 13. Fire. Do not provoke him to blaspheme without cause.

V. 20. Fools. Loose people who respect nothing.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 16. Move. Hypocrite and do not cling to him.

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 2.\"

V. 20. Peaks. As on high towers, because it is dangerous, and the
dizziness comes.

V. 23. journeyman. That is: stop collation, eat and drink 2c.

V. 25. Abrupt launderer. He who is full of guessing, yelling and
screaming, and who must be all talk.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 5. chancellor. As the next council, like Naaman to the king of Syria
2 Kings 5:1.

V. 14. falls away, that is, despises God\'s word.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 4. honor. When you must be resplendent in your majesty and power.

V. 24. 25. Do not speak. Let not the poor despair. A rich man shall not
be presumptuous.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 22. Hyena is a beast in Egypt that learns to call a dog by its name
like a man, and eats it.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 16. Sanctify. Give the priests their due sacrifice, as the law says.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 11. God did. These are the false teachers, who sell their error under
God\'s name, and swear that it is God\'s word, or that God must not
teach rightly 2c.

**The 17. 2) Chapter.**

V. 3. art. MaNieS aNd Misses.

V. 10. them. With Israel on Mount Sinai.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 3. worms. French, lice and other disease of beggars.

V. 5. roguishness. As Eulenspiegel, Vincentius, Psaff von Kalenberg.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 17. Faithful. He cannot respect his good deeds enough.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 5. violence. As the Scharrhansen and tyrants.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"The 12th Chapter.\"

1820 Erl. 64, 177-180. L.\'s marginal glosses on the book of Jesus
Sirach. W. xxi, 747\*-75i\*. 1821

V. 7. ungodly. Condemned and condemned to punishment.

V. 20. Speaks. His advice and concerns.

V. 25. peeks. Those in the council chambers listen and wait to hear what
is said or done.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 15. Sweat. Good journeymen and friends lead some into a bath 2c.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 14. In vain. Without harm to the neighbor.

V. 14. Curse. How the heathen swear by idols.

V. 20. To revile. To talk back and judge other people.

V. 24. people. Wherever he finds it, he often takes a nasty brat for his
beautiful wife.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 20. best myrrh. The best myrrh is the first sap that flows from the
myrrh tree itself and is called stackte, 1) drops. The other is called
bad myrrh, which flows from the cut from the tree.

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 34. This is said according to the law of Moses.

**Chapter 26.**

V. 9. Unequal, they rarely get rich.

Vr 22-24. He speaks of the lampstand and pillars in the tabernacle of
Moses.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 1. eyes off. That is, they do not respect the conscience.

V. 14. Tickle. Do them good, that they grieve others and do harm.

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 18. Wives. According to the law of Moses, when the bill of
divorcement was in force, many a woman was cast out without fault
because of such wicked mouths.

**The 29th chapter.**

V. 11. in time of need. Because the need is there.

V. 15. Place. Count it out what you intend to give from the other goods,
as Moses teaches, the

1\) Stackte d. i. staets (\<77\^7?/), any liquid flowing out by itself,
especially myrrh oil.

Tithing and setting aside for future good deeds, and S. Paul 2 Cor. 8,
14. 9, 6.

V. 28 \[or 25\] 2) Necessity. It is not a necessity to borrow or lend
except for the necessities of life, as for splendor, great construction,
or purchase. It means when one should borrow and lend, namely, in times
of need. Otherwise, many people raise big things, and want to do it with
borrowing and other people\'s burden.

V. 35 \[or 32\] This is also what happens to those who borrow, and start
great works and construction, and then have to leave the same to others.

**Chapter 30.**

V. 25. Nowhere. It helps nothing and makes no thing better, what is it
for?

**The 31st chapter.**

V. 7. sacrifice. Those who serve mammon \[Matth. 6, 24\], as S. Paul
also says that avarice is idolatry \[Eph. 5, 5\] 3), and the avaricious
are mammon\'s priests and servants.

V. 19. like a man, not like a sow.

**The 32nd chapter.**

V. 14. Lightning. The lightning before the thunder makes everything full
of light suddenly; thus shame soon makes favor with everyone. For all
the world loves a young man if he is shameful; and again all the world
is hostile to insolent youth.

V. 16. pochest. Beat the servants or wife, but play, that is, be merry
with them.

V. 21. Example. I do not see that evil befalls him who does not heed
God\'s word either 2c., yes, the worse rogue, the better fortune.

V. 26. bad. It seems that the wicked go on vain happiness, but at last
the way plunges them into abyss 2c.

**The 33rd chapter.**

V. 6. Hypocrite is the master of the fowl, who wants to be sharp in the
Scriptures and asks: why such and such is taught? Why is this day holy
and that day not holy? Why

2\) From verse 17 of this chapter on there is a different counting in
the editions of the Bible.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"Eph. 5, 4.\"

1822 **Erl. 64, 180-182. appendix. W. XXI, 7SI\*-7S7\*** 1823

water is a baptism of the soul? Why bread and wine must be Christ\'s
body and blood? 2c.

V. 17. Last. I have given a good answer to such fools\' plea, from the
holy day \[v. 7.\] 2c.

V. 31. 1) You there. That the other servants must keep their word for
your command.

> **The 34th chapter\...**

V. 3. 4. Impure. The dreams are false and unclean; what then should they
sanctify or make good?

V. 8. lie. Do not ask dreams what is good to do; you have God\'s word.

V. 28. They want to sacrifice and be pious, yet they do not refrain from
sinning. This means building and breaking at the same time, praying and
cursing at the same time.

**The 35th chapter.**

V. 6. Not empty. As they say, \"If good works are of no avail, we will
do nothing; what shall the priests do for us?

V. 11. give. To the priests and Levites.

**The 36th chapter.**

V. 12. It is only us, God is nothing.

V. 19. Blessing of Aaron. As Deut. 6, 23. f. says, that they should
bless the people in God\'s name.

**The 37th chapter.**

V. 5. shields. Where they know protection and favor, whether with God or
not.

V. 19. It is not enough to have good counsel; God must also give
happiness, otherwise it will not work; for He also wants to be with us
and be called upon, that is, without prayer, good counsel is one\'s own
counsel. That is, one\'s own suggestions that go the way of cancer.
These are the ones who give a lot of advice, and yet do not have the
grace to do so.

**The 38th chapter.**

V. 10. ff. Let from. First, become devout; second, pray for yourself;
third, have need of a physician.

V. 13, 14. Prayer helps more than medicine, and the priest does more
than the physician; but one does not like to be pious, therefore one
respects prayer and the priests less.

1\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 21.\"

V. 20. Transgression. Does not keep the measurements.

V. 21. to the end. As David did about his child and said: I must go to
him, he will not return 2c.

V. 23. Mihi heri, hodie tibi. \[Yesterday me, today you.)

**The 39th chapter.**

V. 1. Learn. A pastor or preacher should study and practice among all
kinds of books, and God will give him understanding; but he will leave
belly monkeys alone.

V. 22. In the Red Sea and Jordan.

**The 4V. Chapter.**

V. 2. concern, against GOD and the future life.

V. 4. wrath, against and among the people in this life.

V. 29. Beggars. These are the lickspittles, seekers, and greedy guests,
the lazy rogues who don\'t want to do anything 2c.

V. 30. sin. He must pretend, talk, praise what his Lord wants.

**The 45th chapter.**

V. 4. stood that he should care for God alone.

**The 46th chapter.**

V. 1. Jesus Nave. Jesus is called a savior or Siegmann, who is otherwise
called Siegmund, but wrongly.

V. 23. prophesied. This was not done by Samuel, as he thinks from the
Jewish mind, but by a spirit in Samuel\'s name.

**The 48th chapter.**

V. 7. punishment. 1 Kings 19:17 says how Hazael, Jehu and Elishaeus (by
the wind, quake, fire means) were to kill the godless people.

V. 16. None of this helped yet. What is supposed to help? The death and
the hellish fire.

**The 49th chapter.**

V. 12. Green. Are in honor and dignity.

**The 50th chapter.**

V. 25. Merry heart. Good conscience.

V. 28. Samaritans are false saints and spirits among God\'s children;
Philistines are evil neighbors and tyrants who do not

1824 Erl. 6t, 182-185. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 1st Book of
Maccabees. W. LXI. 787\*-763\*. 1825

Stop pursuing God\'s word; Sichern are the disobedient, rebellious
rabble who have and despise God\'s word.

**The 51st chapter.**

V. 3. f. false tongues. For the sake of God\'s word one must suffer all
kinds of things, such as false teachers, blasphemers, violence, fire,
imprisonment 2c. But from all this God faithfully helps.

V. 28. Not rejected, but chosen, dear and worthy before God and man.

V. 34. Nearby. Art now goes to Brod, but Brod will run after her again
and not find her.

V. 37. Shame. Confessing God\'s word is a disgrace before the world,
yes, harm and all driving.

**The 1st Also of the Waccaöäer.**

**Chapter 4.**

V. 59. Casleu is the month of November, reckoned by the moon.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 43. Ad ar is the month of Februarius, reckoned by the moon.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 28. Centner is called talentum, and three hundred talents makes one
hundred and eighty thousand crowns.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 20 Areus. Areus was the third king of Sparta before the last, and had
fought great wars with the kings of Macedonia, and had good fortune, and
helped those of Athens against Antigonum, and reached the time of
Antiochi magni. Shortly after this Areo Sparta came under the Romans.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 19. centner. One hundred talents make sixty thousand crowns.

V. 51. In the hundred and seventy-first year. Antiochus took the castle
in the hundred and forty-fifth year; so the Gentiles held it for
twenty-five years, until the hundred and seventy-first year.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 2. Arsaces. From this time on the Parthians became powerful in the
Orient, and the Grecians lost these lands; for Arsaces was a Parthus.

V. 24. pound. Taus end Minä make ten thousand crowns.

V. 27. Elul is the month of August.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 1. Antiochus. This Antiochus is called by the surname Gryphus, and
afterwards he also fought with the Jews, but did little.

V. 31. centner. All in house makes six tons of gold.

V. 35. centner. One hundred talents make sixty thousand crowns.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 14. Sabath is the month of Januarius.

**Pieces in Esther.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 1. ff. This piece wants to be read after the third chapter in the
book of Esther.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 1. to Cap. 3, 12. This piece may be read after the end of the fourth
chapter before the fifth chapter.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3-14. This piece may be a gloss of the beginning in the fifth
chapter.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1. to Cap. 6, 16. This piece may be read after the end of the eighth
chapter, before the ninth chapter.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 2 A margrave of Meissen said that a prince should not be so afraid of
those who are far away from him as of those who follow him on foot,
because they would like to step on his head.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. to Cap. 8, 6. This piece may be read first or last; for the dream
was before the story, and the interpretation after the story.

1826 **Erl. 64, 185-187. appendix. W. XXI, 763\*-766\*.** 1827

**Historia of Susanna and Daniel.**

V. 54. linden. In Greek, under a schino, which is Latin lentiscus
\[Latin mastic tree\], is the tree from which the gum fleusst, so called
mastic. But because the tree is not known to us Germans, another one has
had to be taken for it.

**Gospel of St. Matthew.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 1. Abraham and David are especially attracted because Christ is
specially promised to them.

V. 7. 8. S. Matthew leaves out some members and leads Christ\'s lineage
from Solomon according to the law; but S. Lucas leads it according to
the nature of Nathan, Solomon\'s brother. For the law also calls
\"children\" those who are born of brethren from a wife left behind.
Deut. 25, 5. 6.

V. 19. That is, he did not want to disgrace them before the people when
he had authority according to the law. And so Matthew praises Joseph\'s
piety, that he also forgave his right for love\'s sake.

V. 25. to. It is not to be understood that Joseph knew Mariam
afterwards, but it is a way of speaking in the Scriptures; as, Gen. 8,
7. that the raven did not return until the earth dried, the Scriptures
do not want the raven to come afterwards; so also here it does not
follow that Joseph knew Mariam afterwards. 1)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 1. wise men. The ones Matthew calls Magos were nature proclaimers and
priests.

V. 6. by no means. Bethlehem was small to look at, therefore also Micah
calls it small; but the evangelist has added \"by no means\" because it
was now and exalted when Christ was born.

1522 and 1524: And so the evangelist meets the figure: for Bethlehem
means Christianity, which, despised before the world, is great before
God.

1\) Missing 1524.

V. 18. out with them. This saying was especially chosen by Matthew to
show how Christianity is at all times. For it is always seen in the eyes
of the world that Christianity is finished, but they are miraculously
preserved by God against all the powers of hell. And one sees here in
these children how a truly Christian being is in suffering.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. This was to be a sure sign to the Jews that Messiah would come
when they heard one preaching, not in Jerusalem in the temple nor in the
synagogues, but in the wilderness, preaching thus, \"The Lord is
coming,\" as John did. 2)

1522 and 1524. v. 4. such locusts are eaten in some eastern countries,
as Jerome writes.

V. 15. All righteousness. All righteousness is fulfilled when we forgive
ourselves of all \"our righteousness and glory, that God alone may be
thought to be the one who justifies and makes righteous those who
believe. This is what John does when he expresses his righteousness and
wants to be baptized and justified by Christ as a sinner. This is also
what Christ does, if he does not accept his righteousness and honor, but
allows himself to be baptized and killed as another sinner.

1522 and 1524 has instead of: \"as another sinner\" the following: For
baptism is nothing else but death.

**Chapter 5.**

In this chapter Christ does not speak of the office or regiment of
worldly authority, but teaches His Christians a right life before God in
the Spirit. 2)

V. 5. Possess. The world thinks it owns the earth and protects its own
when it uses force, but Christ teaches that the earth should be owned
with meekness.

1522 and 1524: that the earth alone be kept by meekness without
violence.

V. 9. peacemakers. The peacemakers are more than peacemakers, namely,
those who make, promote and maintain peace among others, just as Christ
made peace for us with God.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1828 Erl. 64, 187-190. L.\'s Randglossen Über d. Evangelium St. Matthäi.
W. XXI, 766\*-77i\*. 1829

V. 13. The salt. When the teachers stop teaching God\'s word, they must
be invaded and trampled by man\'s laws.

V. 19. So the papists do, saying that these commandments of Christ are
not commandments but counsels.

Smallest called. That is, to be nothing and to be discarded.

1522 and 1524: That is, little respected, but rejected.

to be called great, that is, to be great and exquisite.

1522 and 1524: That is, to be greatly respected.

V. 20. The Pharisee. The Pharisee\'s piety is only in outward works and
appearances, but Christ demands piety of heart.

V. 22. Racha. Racha comprehends all the angry signs. Some think it comes
from the Hebrew rik, id est, vanum et nihil \[that is, vain and
nothing\], which is good for nowhere. But fool is harder, which is also
harmful, not only unfit.

1522 and 1524: Racha is the rough scraping in the throat, and
comprehends all angry signs.

V. 25. Willing. Just as he who has harmed another is guilty of
reconciliation, so he who has been harmed is guilty of forgiveness and
goodwill, so that no anger may remain on either side.

V. 29. Tear. To pluck up spiritually is commanded here, that is, when
the lust of the eyes is killed in the heart and taken away.

V. 34. Swear. All swearing and oaths are forbidden here that a man does
of his own accord; but if love, commandment, necessity, the benefit of
one\'s neighbor or God\'s honor demands it, it is well done. Just as
anger is forbidden, but still praiseworthy when it is required out of
love and for God\'s honor.

V. 39. Do not resist. That is, no one shall avenge himself, but the
authority of the sword shall do so. Rom. 13, 4.

1522 and 1524: That is, no one shall avenge himself, nor seek revenge,
even in court, nor desire revenge; but the authorities of the sword
shall do so by themselves, or by their neighbor, admonished and
requested out of love.

V. 46. Publicans are called publicani in Latin,

and have been, who had passed the Romans\' rent and duty 1); and were
commonly ungodly heathen, put there by the Romans.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 34. own plague. That is, daily work, and will, it be enough that we
work daily, shall care no further.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. Do not judge. Judging belongs to God; therefore, whoever judges
without God\'s command takes away God\'s honor; and this is the beam.

V. 6. sanctuary. The sanctuary is God\'s word, by which all things are
sanctified.

Are dogs that pursue the word.

They are swine who, drowned in carnal lust, do not respect the word.

V. 24. Here Christ also demands faith, for where there is no faith, the
commandments are not obeyed, Rom. 3:27, and all good works according to
appearance, done without faith, are sin. On the other hand, where there
is faith, right good works must follow. This is what Christ means by
\"doing\" from a pure heart. But faith purifies the heart, Apost. 15:9.
2) And such godliness stands firm against all winds \[v. 25\], that is,
all the power of hell; for it is built on the rock of Christ through
faith. Good works without faith are the lamps of foolish virgins without
oil \[Matt. 25:5\].

**Chapter 8.**

V. 2. if you will. Faith does not know, but trusts in God\'s grace.

1522\. v. 4. about them. Moses calls the law a witness against the
people. Deut. 31, 19. For the law accuses us and is a witness against
our sin. So here the priests, if they testify that Christ has cleansed
them, and yet do not believe, they testify against themselves.

V. 9. when I say. That is: If my words are so powerful, how much more
powerful are your words?

V. 11. of the morning. That is, the Gentiles are accepted because they
believe.

1\) exist - lease.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"Act. 15, 19.\"

1830 **Erl. 64, 190-192. appendix. W. XXI, 77V\--77S\"** 1831

The Jews and saints of works are rejected. Rom. 9, 30. f.

V. 14. fever. This is den Ritten in German; Fieber is Latin. 1)

V. 19. Where you are going. Some do not want to follow Christ, because
they are sure of where they are going. Therefore Christ rejects this
one, as not wanting to trust, but to be sure of the matter first.

V. 22. Buried. Some reproach good works for not wanting to follow or
believe, but Christ interprets them as dead and lost good works.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 1. His city. Capernaum.

V. 2. gouty. The small or half blow, the gout. 1)

1522 and 1524. v. 13. not in the sacrifice. Christ says that he eats
with sinners to show mercy, and tells the Pharisees to show mercy and
not to despise sinners, because these alone are good works that benefit
the neighbor. God does not respect singing, fasting and sacrifice.

not the pious. That is, all men, because no one is pious, Rom. 3, 23.
Pharisees think they are pious, but they are not. And 1 Tim. 1, 15. Paul
says that Christ came into the world to save sinners.

1524 Christ rejects all human piety and wants us to build on His piety
alone; therefore He also says here that He alone calls sinners; and in 1
Tim. 1 Paul says that Christ came into the world to save sinners.

V. 15. Bear suffering. It is two kinds of suffering, one accepted by our
own choice, as the monks rules 2c., as Baal\'s priests pricked
themselves, 1 Kings 18:28. Such suffering is held by all the world, and
the Pharisees, even John\'s disciples, considered it great; but GOD
despises it. The other suffering sent by GOD, without our choice.
(Addition 1522 and 1524: as shame, death 2c.) This willing suffering is
right and pleasing to GOD. Therefore Christ says that his disciples do
not fast while the bridegroom is still with them, that is, while God has
not yet sent suffering to them, and that they should not suffer.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

Christ was still with them and protected them, they did not invent
suffering for them, for it is nothing before God. But they had to fast
and suffer, since Christ was dead. Thus Christ rejects the hypocrites\'
suffering and fasting, accepted by their own choice. Item, where Christ
shows himself friendly as a bridegroom, there must be joy; but where he
shows himself otherwise, there must be mourning.

V. 16. 17. No one mends. That is, one cannot understand this new
teaching with old 2) carnal hearts, and where one preaches it to carnal
people, it only becomes worse. As can be seen now, when spiritual
liberty is taught, the flesh of liberty presumes on its own will.

1522 and 1524: With these words he rejects them as those who do not
understand his teaching of such freedom of his disciples, and says that
one cannot mend old clothes with new rags; for they do not hold the
stitch, that is, one cannot hold this new teaching 2c. \[As above.\]

V. 23. pipers. Which was needed to the corpse, as in our country they
ring and sing to the dead; signifies that death is witnessed and felt by
the law. 3)

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 3. Lebbaeus is the pious Judas. 3)

V. 9. have. This means to have, as the miserly have mammon, who are
attached to it with their heart and care for it, which hinders the
ministry of preaching. But for necessity and custom Christ himself had
money, bags and baskets of bread. 3)

V. 14. Shake. So take nothing at all from them, that you also shake off
their dust from their shoes, that they may know that you have not sought
your profit, but their blessedness.

V. 23. As if he wanted to speak: I know well that they will persecute
you. For this people will persecute the gospel and will not be converted
until the end of the world.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 11. the least. Christ.

V. 12. Suffers the kingdom of heaven. The Ge-

2\) Walch and the Erlanger: \"allen\".

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

[1832 Erl. 64, 192-194. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Gospel of St.
Matthew. W. XXI, 775\*-780\*. 1833]{.underline}

know that when they hear the gospel, they are added that no one can
resist them.

V. 25. Such. The gospel and faith. 1)

V. 30. My yoke. The cross is a light burden to those who taste and feel
the gospel.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 8. About the Sabbath. He who believes in Christ is above all laws and
is not accused by the law.

1522 and 1524: So much is the understanding of all commandments in love
that even God\'s commandment does not bind where it demands love and
need.

1522 and 1524. v. 31. against the Spirit. Sin against the Holy Spirit is
contempt for the gospel and its works; while it stands, it is not the
counsel of any sin, for it fights against faith, which is the
forgiveness of sins. But when it is taken away, faith may come in, and
all sin may fall away.

V. 32. nor in that. That here Matthew speaks (neither in this world nor
in that), Marcus says \[Cap. 3, 29.\] thus: He is guilty of an eternal
debt.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 12. Who has. Where the word of God is understood, it increases and
improves man; but where it is not understood, it decreases and angers
man. 2)

V. 31 Mustard seed. There is no word more despised than the gospel, and
yet none more powerful; for it justifies those who believe in it, law
and works do not. \'

V. 33. Leaven is also the word that renews man.

V. 44-46. Treasure. The hidden treasure is the gospel, which gives us
grace and righteousness without our merit. Therefore, when you find it,
it gives you joy, that is, a good, happy conscience, which you cannot
bring about by any works. This gospel is also the pearl.

V. 52. taught to the kingdom of heaven is, to promote the kingdom of
heaven, to teach others and bring them to heaven. 3)

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) Missing 1522.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

New. The Gospel.

Old. The law.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 1. tetrarchs. Judea with its tributaries was divided into four
dominions, which is why the lords are called tetrarchs.

called.

V. 25: Night watch. In ancient times, the night was divided into four
watches, each of which had three hours.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 5. if I. 8i6 (Others like this): Should 4) that be useful to you,
which I have to sacrifice? more useful. 5) That is: GOD will give you
many other things in return. 1522 and 1524: GOD given 2c. or: It is more
useful to you if I give it for sacrifice, as the canons now teach of
wills and endowments.

V. 13. All plants. All doctrine and works that God does not work in man
are sin; and here one sees how free will is not able to do anything.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 3 Sign. By signs, Christ means His miraculous deeds that were
proclaimed to take place in Christ\'s time. Isa. 35, 5. 6.

V. 18. Peter. Kepha in Syriac, Peter in Greek, is called a rock in
German. And all Christians are Peter\'s because of the confession that
Peter makes here, which is the rock on which Peter and all Peter\'s are
built. Common is the confession; therefore also the name.

Gates of Hell. The gates of hell are all violence against Christians,
such as death, hell, worldly wisdom and violence.

V. 28. Death. That is, he who believes in me will not see death. Joh. 8,
51. 11, 25. 12, 25.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 26. Free. Though Christ was free, yet he gave the interest to will to
his neighbor. So a Christian is free of all things for his own sake, and
yet willingly gives himself to his neighbor\'s service.

4\) Erlanger: \"Shall.

5\) Erlanger: \"Nützet\".

6\) \"Through\" set by us according to the Weimar **Bible** (1686)
instead of: \"The\" in other editions.

1834 Erl. \"1, 194-197. Addendum. W. XXI, 780\*-784\*. 1835

V. 27. stater is a lot; if it is silver, it makes half a florin. 1)

**Chapter 18.**

V. 20. my name. By my command and in my honor. So it all turns out well.
1)

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 8. severity. Some laws teach, some resist; those teach the best,
these resist evil, lest it become worse. Therefore they forbear much
evil, as the secular sword also does.

V. 12. Himself. The third cutting must be spiritual, namely willing
chastity, otherwise it would be the same as the other, which is bodily.

V. 17. I am good. Just as Christ says Joh. 7, 16: \"My doctrine is not
mine; so also here: I am not good. For he speaks of himself according to
humanity, through which he always leads us to God.

V. 21. Perfect. Perfection is actually keeping God\'s commandment.
Therefore it is clear that this young man has basically not kept the
commandments, as he nevertheless thinks. Christ shows him this by
holding up the right works of the commandments to him and judging that
no rich man will be saved, of which this young man is also one. Now
those who keep God\'s commandments will be blessed.

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 22. The cup, that is, suffering. But the flesh always wants to be
glorified before it is crucified; before it is exalted before it is
humbled.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 9 Hosanna. Hosanna means in German: Ach hilf, or: Ach gib Glück und
Heil.

V. 31. rather. It is much more possible for harlots and knaves to become
wicked than for hopeful saints. For the latter must at last feel their
sin 2c.; the latter die in their own holiness, if they are not
miraculously converted. 1)

V. 44. All things must fall against Christ, some for the better, some
for the worse.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

**The 22nd chapter.**

V. 11. Wedding garment is faith. For this gospel rejects the works
saints and accepts the faithful.

**The 23rd chapter.**

V. 2: To sit in Mosi\'s chair. If one teaches otherwise and more than
Mosiah\'s law, he does not sit on Mosiah\'s throne; therefore he also
rejects their works and man\'s teachings afterwards.

V. 13. The keys are the power to teach the kingdom of heaven; which they
taught not, but with doctrines of men hindered them that would gladly
have heard the right doctrine.

V. 24. seiget. That is: You make narrow consciences in small pieces, and
pay no attention to large pieces.

V. 25. Means, how they have snatched everything to themselves and have
lived in the feast, nothing asked, where God or the souls remained. The
bowls and cups are beautiful, but the food and drink inside is robbery
and food. 2)

V. 35. This Barachias has two names. For 2 Chron. 24, 22, he is called
Jehoiada, as is the custom of two names in Scripture and everywhere.

1522 and 1524. v. 39. until you speak. This still happens daily when the
Jews are converted, and is not to be understood that they will receive
him again bodily.

**Chapter 24.**

V. 15. Abomination. This abomination before God must have a beautiful
outward appearance of holiness before the world, so that the right
holiness is desolated, like the Pabst\'s regiment, and before times the
Jews and Gentiles were idolatry.

V. 20. In winter. This is spoken in a proverbial way, meaning: See that
you flee at the proper time. For it is not good to wander in winter, and
the Jews were forbidden to wander on the Sabbath.

See, here is v. 23. These are the sects and orders that seek a good life
in outward things or with works, but-

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1836 Erl. 64, 197-199. L.\'s Marginal Glosses On the Gospel of St.
Matthew. W. LXI, 784\*-788\*. 1837

Now the chambers \[v. 26.) are all spiritual monasteries, but the
deserts are the pilgrimages and field foundations.

V. 28: Where there is a carcass. This is a proverb that means, \"We will
find each other together; where I am, you will be also. Just as a
carrion and an eagle will be found together, and must not indicate any
place in particular.

V. 34. 1) Be done. That is, all these things will begin to happen at
this time, because you are alive. 2)

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 3. Their lamps. The lamps without oil are the good works without
faith, which must all go out. But the oil vessel is faith in the
conscience on God\'s grace, which does good works that endure. But as
here the oil gives none to the others, so each one must believe for
himself.

V. 15. Centner. The cents are the commanded word of God; he that doeth
it well hath much of it, and teacheth many others; he that forsaketh it
hath little of it. For in himself it is one word; but it worketh by some
more than by others. Therefore it is now called five, now two cents.

**Chapter 26.**

V. 10. Good work. Here we see that faith alone makes the work good, for
all reason would have condemned this work, as the apostles themselves
did. For the works are the best, which one does not know how good they
are.

V. 12. bury. Let it go; it is the last one 3) she gives me, for I am to
die.

1522 and 1524: This is and will be fulfilled, since the gospel has been
preached in all the world, which buries the old Adam with Christ.

V. 29. Drink. That is, we will henceforth have no bodily intercourse
with one another, and this shall be the valete. 4)

V. 49. Greetings. This is wicked German. So we greet in German: Guten
Abend, Glück zu 2c. 5)

1\) Erlanger: V. \"44.\"

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) Letze -Abschied, Lebewohl.- Erlanger: \"last\".

4\) Missing 1524.

5\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 52. Takes. To take the sword from those who need it without proper
force.

perish. That is, he has fallen into the judgment of the sword, although
sometimes the mighty ones of the sword do not execute such judgment
because of his repentance or other cause. So Christ confirms the sword.

V. 53. legion. Legion is a number of about 6000.

**Chapter 27.**

V. 16. Matthew wants to say that Pilate wanted to propose the worst
murderer, so that the Jews could not pray for him. But they would have
asked the devil himself to be released before they would have released
the Son of God. Sic et hodie agitur et semper

\[This is also done nowadays and all the time). 6)

V. 17. Christ. Pilate speaks scornfully to the Jews and says: You say
that this is Christ, that is king (as you call it); but I see that he is
a poor, innocent man, so also Marc. 15, 9. 6)

V. 22. Let him be Christ. John interprets these words thus: Shall I
crucify your king? 6)

V. 33: The place of the skull is called the gallows, Rabenstein 2c.,
because many heads of the dead lie there. 6)

V. 51. 52. Here it turns and becomes a new being 2c., juxta illud \[Is.
11, 10\]:

Et erit requies ejus gloria (according to the words Is. 11, 10.: \"And
his rest will be glory\"). 6)

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 1. evening. The Scriptures begin the day on the last evening, and the
end of the evening is the morning after. So here Matthew says that
Christ rose in the morning, which was the end of the evening and the
beginning of the first feast. For they counted the six days after the
high paschal feast all holy, and began at the next after the high
paschal feast.

**Gospel of St. Marci.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 22. Powerful. That is, his preaching was as one who is in earnest,
and what he said had a force and lived,

6\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1838 **Erl. \"4, 199-201. appendix. W. XXI, 788\*-79I\*.** 1839

as if it had hands and feet; not like the ragamuffin preachers, who spit
and slobber about it, so that one gains disgust and abomination.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 25. 26. Abiathar is Abimelech\'s son, therefore the Scripture says
that it happened under Abimelech that they were priests at one time.

Schaubrode. This is Hebrew panis facierum, bread that should always be
before our eyes, as the word of God should always be before our hearts
day and night. Ps. 23, 5: Parasti in conspectu meo mensam \[You prepare
a table before me.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 17. Bnehargem, that is, children of thunder. Means that John was to
write especially the right gospel, which is a mighty sermon that
terrifies, breaks and turns all things and makes the earth fruitful. 1)

V. 21. of the senses. They are afraid he will do too much work, as they
say: You will make his head mad. 2)

V. 22. Beelzebub is as much as an arch-fly, bumblebee or fly king. For
thus the devil lets himself be despised by his own, as the great saints.

1522 and 1524: Beel means a man, Zebub a fly; thus the Jews called the
idol of Asod 3) a fly man, out of contempt; after that the devil is so
called.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 13. Oil. This oil healed the sick, from which afterwards a sacrament
is composed for the dying; which would be much better called Magdalene
ointment, since she also anointed Christ to the grave, Matth. 26, 12. 4)

V. 39. Tables full. Ten tables in length and five in width.

V. 52. Nothing more understandable. That is, from such an example they
should have become strong in faith so that they would not have to fear a
ghost.

1\) Missing 1522.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) It will probably read \"Ashdod\" according to 1 Sam. 5, 1. -
BaalSebub was the idol at Ekron, L Kings 1, 3.

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 2. common. The law calls holy that which was set apart for worship,
but common that which was unclean and unfit for worship.

V. 11. Corban means an offering, and in short it is: Dear Father, I
would gladly give it to you; but it is Corban. I put it on better to
give it to God than to you, and it helps you better.

1522 and 1524 has in the text: \"Corban, that is, it is given to GOD\",
with the gloss: GOD given 2c. or: It is more useful to you if I give it
to sacrifice. Corban but Hebrew means a sacrifice.

V. 22. Unreasonableness. That is, rudeness and immodesty toward one\'s
neighbor; as those who are rude and proudly despise others. 5)

V. 24. Trees. He still sees darkly, as from a distance people are seen
as trees or trunks. So also our beginning to recognize Christ is weak,
but becomes stronger and stronger. 5)

V. 25. called him to see again. That is, he said, \"How do you see now?
5)

**Chapter 9.**

V. 49. To be salted. In the Old Testament all sacrifices were salted,
and of all sacrifices something was burned with fire. Here Christ shows
this and interprets it spiritually, namely, that through the gospel, as
through a fire and salt, the old man is crucified, consumed and well
salted. For our body is the true sacrifice. Rom. 12, 1. But where the
salt becomes dull, and the gospel is corrupted with the doctrines of
men, there is no more seasoning of the old man; there maggots grow. Salt
bites; therefore it is necessary to have patience and peace in the salt.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 21. One. That is, you are completely lacking, because you want to be
pious, and yet not leave your goods for my sake, nor suffer with me.
Therefore Mammon is surely your god, and you prefer him to me. 7)

5\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

6\) Erlanger: \"will\".

7\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1840 Erl. 64, 201-203. L.\'s marginal glosses on the Gospel of St.
Marci. W. xxi, 7si\*-796\*. 1841

V. 29. Persecution. He who believes must suffer persecution and do all
he can; yet he has enough. Wherever he goes, he finds father, mother,
brothers, goods, more than he could ever leave.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 5. This penny would make almost thirty Meissen lion pennies, or three
and a half of our pennies. 1)

> **The 15th chapter.**

V. 9. king. Pilate speaks mockingly as if he should say: \"If you
complain that this poor man is king, you are mad and foolish, as above
Matth. 27, 17: Qui dicitur Christus \[of whom it is said that he is
Christ\]. 1)

V. 25. Third hour. That is, they began to act so that he would be
crucified. But about the sixth hour he was crucified, as the other
evangelists write. Some think, however, that the scribes have gone
astray here, that instead of the letter which in Greek means six, the
letter X 2) is put, which means three, because they are not almost
unequal to each other. 3)

**Gospel of St. Luke.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 28. Gebenedeiete. This is in German, you highly praised one. 3)

V. 30. found grace. That is, you have a gracious God. 3)

V. 77. Knowledge of salvation. That they should know how to be saved,
not by the works of the law, but by the forgiveness of sins rc. 3)

V. 78. Exit. Christ according to the Godhead is the exit on high from
the Father.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 1. estimated. To estimate here is that each one has to give a place
of guilders from each head.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) We have designated the two number signs for six and three by the
large letters 7\^(Digamma) and r (Gamma), because only on these
Luther\'s remark fits: \"that they are not nearly unequal to each
other\". Walch and the Erlanger have instead c and 7, which is also
correct according to the numerical value, but the letters have no
similarity; the Hirschberger Bible (wrong) 5 and /.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1522 and 1524: Estimation is here that each one has to indicate how much
he was able to make of the property.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 14. Pleasure. That men may delight in it and love God and one
another, and accept it with thanksgiving, and forsake and suffer all
things with joy.

V. 29. Go with peace. That is, now I want to die happily.

V. 14: Violence. Violence is a public outrage; injustice is when a
person uses evil tricks to deprive another of his rights and to pervert
his cause.

V. 23-38. Philo and Josephus write of these, and Matthew leaves some of
them outside.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 22. Joseph\'s son. How is it that Joseph\'s son can teach and speak
like this, the poor servant? 4)

**Chapter 6.**

V. 1. Just as we call Tuesday After Monday, so the Jews called the other
day after the high Sabbath the After Sabbath, as this is to be taken
from Matth. 28, 1.

V. 35: Enemies. He who lends or benefits his enemy teaches himself that
he can neither hope nor expect anything in return. But no one does this
except a Christian. 4)

V. 40 Disciple. That is, if the disciple is like the master, it is
right. 4)

**Chapter 7.**

V. 37. Anointing. That is, with delicious water. 4)

**Chapter 9.**

V. 31. Exit. This is what he would take for an end. 4)

V. 51. Here Lucas begins to describe the procession of Christ to
Jerusalem.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 36. neighbor. The neighbor is not only the one who does good, but
also the one who needs good; for we are all neighbors among ourselves.

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1842 **Erl. 64, 203-205. appendix. W. XXI, 7S6\*-799\*.** 1843

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 33. selling, abandoning, renouncing, hating, not possessing, not
treasuring, not having anything 2c. is all said on the opinion that one
should not love nor seek it above GOD and His word, but, as S. Paul says
1 Cor. 7, 30., tanquam non habentes \[as if they did not possess it).

1522 and 1524: Sold. A Christian should have everything in common and at
the service of his neighbor that he has, is able and is, where and how
he is needed, as Christ has done for him.

V. 48. Fire. He speaks according to the proverb: I will kindle a fire,
that is, I will cause a disturbance through the gospel 2c., and would
that it were already done. But I must first set my life to it, and I
long for it.

V. 56. If you can see how the creatures are doing, why do you not also
see where you are lacking?

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 2. 3. perish. The Jews considered that whoever was well in time would
be pleasing in the sight of God; and again, if he was ill, he would be a
sinner. 1)

V. 24. Strive. These are those who, without faith, labor by works to get
to heaven. 1)

V. 33: I do not flee for Herod\'s sake, but otherwise I must walk to
carry out my office. 1)

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 33. ab says. No one can stand before the divine judgment, but he
despairs of all his ability, and seeks mercy and asks for help from
Christ.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 9 Mammon. Mammon is Hebrew and means wealth.

V. 11. 12. Unjust. Mammon is called unrighteous because it is subject to
unrighteous custom; strange because it does not remain like the
spiritual good, which is eternally ours and true. To be faithful in
mammon is to use its divine good for the benefit of one\'s neighbor.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

He who does not do this will be much less faithful in the spiritual,
indeed, he will have none.

V. 29. They have. Here it is forbidden to believe the poltergeists and
appearing dead.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 10. Here Christ speaks in the most simple way of outward works, in a
human way. For otherwise no one can do as much as he owes in the sight
of God, who is not content with works.

V. 20. External. That is, God\'s kingdom is not in works bound to place,
food, clothing, time, person, but in faith and love freely.

**Chapter 18.**

V. 5. overbear. That is, so that it does not torment and torture me, as
they say of the horny ones: 2). How does man plague me so well! 3)

V. 14. before him. That is, that one did not go home righteous, but
damned. Ebraismus est et negative dicitur, sicut. Ps. 18, 9. 4) \[it is
a Hebrew way of speaking, and a negative one, as it says in the 118th
Psalm, v. 9.) \"It is good to trust in the LORD before trusting in
princes,\" that is: not in princes. Hoc efficit ebraea litera Mem (The
Hebrew letter Mem does this). So also Matth. 21, 31.: 4) \"Harlots and
knaves will go to heaven before you.\" \"Before you\", that is: You do
not. 5)

V. 22. One. That is, you lack .everything, as above Matth. 19, 21. But
selling is, as above Luc. 12, 33. 6)

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 4. mulberry tree. *συχάμινος* morus est supra cap. 17, 6.;
συχομορέα*,* ficus aegyp- tia, non caprificus, a ficu et moro. Vide
Athenaeum, lib. 2 *\[συχάμινος supra cap.* 17, 6. is.

the mulberry tree; συχομορέα the Egyptian fig tree, not the wild fig
tree, from ficus (fig) and morus (mulberry). See Athenaeum, book 2).

2\) \"Horny\" an impudent beggar who will not be refused.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

4\) In Walch and in the Erlanger: \"Ps. 118, 8.\" and \"Matth. 21, 32.\"

5\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

6\) Erlanger: \"Luc. 12, 21.\" - Missing 1522 and 1524.

1844 Erl. 6t, 2W-S08. L.\'s Randglossen Über d. Evangelium St. Lucä. W.
XXI, 79S\--803\*. 1845

**Chapter 21.**

V. 19. Grasp. That is, do not let your soul become impatient. 1)

V. 24. Gentile time. Jerusalem must be among the Gentiles until the
Gentiles are converted to the faith, that is, until the end of the
world. For the temple will not rise again, Matth. 23, 38. 2)

**The 22nd chapter. 3)**

V. 16. Do not eat. He always indicates how he deals with dying. 4)

V. 38. That is enough. That is, it is no longer necessary to fight with
the sword of the flesh, but to suffer for the sake of the gospel and to
bear the cross. For one cannot fight against the devil with iron;
therefore it is necessary to put everything on it, and to grasp only the
spiritual sword, the word of God.

V. 51. So far away. Let them exercise their courage as far as they are
judged; everything has its judge, so that we may not avenge it
ourselves.

V. 52. captains. These were the ones appointed by the Jews around the
temple to keep peace from the mob. 4)

**Chapter 24.**

V. 13. emmaus. Forte est ebraice He- maos \[Perhaps in Hebrew it is
Hemaos\], little castle, stronghold, fortress. 4)

**Gospel of St. John.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 9. All men. That is, Christ is the light of the world, who enlightens
all men through the gospel, for it is preached to all creatures and
presented to all who are and will be men. 4)

V. 16. Grace for grace. Our grace is given to us for Christ\'s grace,
which is given to Him that through Him we might fulfill the law and know
the Father, that hypocrisy might cease and that we might become true,
righteous people.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) \"Hagg. 1.\", which is in the 1545 edition, does not fit.

3\) This caption is missing in the Erlanger.

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 28. Bethabara, or Bethbara, Richt. 7, 24., 5) ut mysterium consonet
\[that the secret interpretation may agree\]. 6)

V. 41. Messiah. Christ Greek. Anointed German and Messiah Hebrew is One
Thing.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 4. Woman, what have I to do with you? Forte \[about\]: What is it to
me and to you? 6)

V. 6. measure. Metreta in Greek. In our language, two metreta make
almost a bucket of wine. 6)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 5. reason, nature, free will 2c. knows nothing of God\'s graces and
works; indeed, it shuns it, silent that it should desire it, as this
text clearly proves.

V. 8. blows. The two parts belong together, word and spirit, just as in
the wind the two parts are with each other, soughing and blowing. 6)

V. 33. Seals it. That is, he feels as a seal pressed into his heart,
namely the faith, how God is true, and confesses it and witnesses it
also outwardly. When he says Cap. 7, 17: \"He who does the will of the
Father knows whether this teaching is from God\" 2c.

V. 34. According to measure. Although the gifts and works of the Spirit
are distributed according to measure, Rom. 12, 3 and 1 Cor. 7, 17, the
Spirit Himself is poured out in all Christians abundantly and without
measure, so that He swallows up all sin and death beyond measure. Tit.
3, 6.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 27. with her. With a Samaritan and Gentile woman. 6)

V. 34. My food. His food is to do the will of the Father. But the
Father\'s will is that through his suffering the gospel should be
preached to all the world. This was now present, just as at that time
the harvest was near.

V. 38. others. The prophets sowed. 1 Pet 1:12: \"They have not offered
it to themselves, but to us.\" 6)

5\) Erlanger: \"Jud. 7, 14.\"

6\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

[1846 Erl. 64, 208-210. Addendum. W. XXI, 803\*-807\*. 1847]{.underline}

**Chapter 5.**

V. 2 Bethesda. In German this means as much as a hospital, where one
does good to the poor people, from Hesed, id est, eleemosyna,
misericordia (from Hessä, which means alms, mercy); which was at the
pond, where the sacrificial sheep were kept, and the sick waited there
for such good deeds in the pond. 1)

V. 17. works. That is, my father does not keep the Sabbath, therefore I
do not keep it either, but always work like my father. 1)

V. 27. is the Son of Man. The judgment must be held publicly before all
men; therefore the judge must also be man, who can be seen, and yet also
God, because he is to possess God\'s judgment seat.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 27: Work with food. Handle such food.

sealed. That is, gifted with the Holy Spirit and prepared so that he
alone is presented before all as Master and Helper, as the one according
to whom everything is to be judged and kept.

1522 and 1524: This is endowed with the Holy Spirit, that whoever eats
the food (as follows) should also receive the Spirit and live.

V. 50. This chapter does not speak of the sacrament of bread and wine,
but of spiritual food, that is, faith that Christ, God and man, shed His
blood for us.

V. 62. What will become when I reign from heaven and perform the words
and reach in?

1522 and 1524. v. 61. aergert euch das, das ich jetzt sprech auf Erden,
was will denn werden 2c. (As above.)

**Chapter 7.**

V. 19. thut. Accomplishes, keeps, Rom. 8, 3.: \"Which was impossible for
the law\" rc. 1)

V. 23. Sabbath. Sabbath keeping is the law of Moses; circumcision is the
law of the fathers. These are contrary to one another, if anyone is
circumcised on the Sabbath, and one must be

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

The fulfillment of the law does not stand on the letter, but in the
spirit.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 25. First. That is, I am your preacher. If you believe this first,
you will know who I am, but not otherwise.

1522 and 1524 have in the text: \"Eben der\" 2c. with the gloss: Eben. I
am just the word that speaks to you.

V. 51. My word. This is said of the word of faith or gospel.

V. 56. Abraham. All the saints from the beginning of the world had the
same faith in Christ that we have and are true Christians.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 8 Beggar. Some texts have here thus: \"that he was blind\". 2)

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 24. How long. They say this out of a false heart, that they would
accuse him and kill him, when he confessed Christ against the
prohibition. 2)

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 5. At that time, a penny was worth almost thirty lion pennies of our
Meissen mint. 2)

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 16. apostle means a messenger or emissary.

V. 34. New commandment. I will not burden you with many laws, as Moses
did in the Old Testament, but these shall be all the laws of the New
Testament, that ye love one another. Therefore it is a new commandment
and of the new testament, set apart from all the old.

1522 and 1524: The gospel is actually a sermon about the grace of God
that justifies without works; after that it also indicates what such
justifiers should do, namely love, as Paul also does in his epistles,
that they prove faith. Therefore it is a new commandment, given to new
men who are justified without works.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1848 Erl. 64, 210-212. L. \'s marginal glosses on the Gospel of St.
John. W. XXI, 807\*-sio\*. 1849

**The 14th chapter.**

1522 and 1524. v. 2. not. The dwellings are prepared from eternity, and
it is not permitted that he should prepare them; yet he goes to prepare
them, that is, he becomes a Lord over all, that he may prepare us for
such dwellings. For as long as we are not prepared, the dwellings are
not yet prepared for us, even though they are prepared in themselves.

V. 16. Comforter, Paracletus means an advocate, intercessor or counselor
in court, who comforts, strengthens and helps the guilty. So the Holy
Spirit also does us in conscience before God\'s judgment, against sin
and the devil\'s accusation. 1)

V. 22. What is it. How does this work? What is it supposed to be? 1)

V. 31. So do. The world must learn that Christ alone does the will of
the Father for us. Rom. 5, 19: Per unius inobedientiam peccatores, per
unius obedientiam justi multi etc.. \[Just as through one man\'s
disobedience many became sinners, so also through one man\'s obedience
many become righteous 2c.\] 1)

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 9. In my love. That you may feel how dear I am to you. This happens
when you remain in me and keep my words, no matter how bad things get.
1)

V. 22. No sin. This is said in the way Ezek. 18:4, that every man shall
die for his own sin. For through Christ original sin is abolished, and
according to Christ no one is condemned in the future, except he who
will not leave it, that is, he who will not believe.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 8. 9. about sin. The world, nature, reason 2c. does not know that
unbelief is sin and faith is righteousness, and God\'s judgment condemns
everything that they and the devil judge against Christians under the
appearance of divine service and name; therefore the Holy Spirit in the
Gospel condemns everything that is not faith as sin.

1522 and 1524. justice, and God\'s judgment be strict, but with wer-

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

At the end is added: and must be condemned by God\'s judgment.

V. 30. Someone ask. That is, one must not ask you, because you come
before with answer, as the one who sees the heart and everything secret.

1522 and 1524: That is asking you to teach something about it.

> **The 17th chapter.**

V. 9. Not for the world. That is, I do not ask you to please the world
and the unbelievers. Just as Moses 4 Mos. 16, 15. asks that God should
not accept the sacrifice of Korah. And Ps. 59, 6: Non miserearis omnibus
operantibus iniquitatem \[Be merciful to none who are so boldly
wicked\]. Otherwise, pray for the world to be converted. 2)

> **Chapter 18.**

V. 15. Here should stand the verse: \"And Annas sent him bound unto
Caiaphas the high priest,\" below \[v. 24.\] Is transposed by the scribe
in the overturning of the leaf, as often happens. 2)

V. 29. It is a wonder what you can complain about such a pious, famous
man. 2)

V. 38. What is truth? Ironia est \[It is a mockery\]: if you want to
speak of truth, you are lost. 2)

**The 20th chapter.**

V. 8. He believed that he was taken away, as Magdalene had said to them.

V. 17. Not ascended. Because she did not yet believe that he was God, he
would not allow herself to be touched; for to touch means to believe;
and S. John is especially careful of the spiritual interpretation before
other evangelists, yet Matthew Cap. 28, 9. writes that he let the women
touch him.

**The apostle history St. Lucä.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 2. He had commanded what he would command, that they should be his
apostles and preach to all the world. 2)

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1850 **Erl. \"4, 212-214. appendix. W. XXI, 810\*-816\*.** 1851

V. 8. mine, not Mosi\'s witnesses, but grace alone in Christ. 1)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 17. All flesh. Both in and apart from the law; for in Christ they are
all alike, called to grace without all works and merit. 1)

V. 38. Repentance. Behold, these become godly by the word, without
works, and there must atone for their former holiness. 1)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 12. Merit. Holiness or worthiness. 1)

V. 15. princes. Who is the head and the first to be raised from the
dead, and by whom we all come to life. 1)

V. 16. through him, because through Christ we believe in God. 1)

V. 20. refreshment, and not to fright or shame. 1)

V. 25. Covenant. He is silent about the covenant of Moses and the law,
and calls the covenant of Abraha, which was a covenant of grace and not
of works. 1)

V. 26. Wickedness. Apart from faith he calls all holiness vain
wickedness, for he speaks to all Jews, both pious and wicked. 1)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 12. No other name. That is, the works of righteousness pure and fine
set aside. 2)

V. 33. strength. With great courage, very bold and joyful. 3)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1. 2. This piece applies to the false clergy, who possess the goods
of the church out of avarice and do nothing for them. 3)

V. 17. high priest. Nota \[Note\], Annas is a Sadducee who is high
priest this year, Cap. 4, 1.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 20. money, At papatus omnia vendit pecunia \[But the papacy sells
everything for money\]. 3)

1\) Missing in 1322 and 1524.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: raised. - Missing 1522 and 1524.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 33. length of life. This is how long he shall reign, which is
forever. 4)

**Chapter 9.**

V. 1. snorted. Was fierce, stormy and sprayed. 4)

V. 6. Paulus vocatus et illuminatus, tamen ad Ananiam mittitur, ut
testes habeat etc.. \[Paul was called and illuminated, yet is sent to
Ananias that he might have witnesses 2c.\]. 4)

V. 12. That he might regain his sight.

Non ergo mittitur, ut vocetur, sed sanetur \[So he is not sent that he
may be called, but that he may be healed. 4)

V. 27. led him to the apostles. Testimonium oportet habere propter
falsos fratres \[One must have testimony for the sake of the false
brothers. 4)

V. 35. converted verbo, sine lege et \'operibus \[by the word, without
law and works. 4)

V. 36. Disciple. First she is a believer and a disciple, then she does
much good.

1522 and 1524: deer, δορκάς graece \[Greek scl.\], latine slatin\] ibex,
a chamois.

**The 10th chapter.**

See, this Cornelius is a Gentile and uncircumcised, and without law, yet
he has faith in the coming Christ, who teaches him to do good works,
even though he is a warrior, and is enlightened to the faith of the
appearing Christ. 4)

**Chapter 11.**

V. 15. Equal. Without distinction of merit and without law.

V. 21. Converted. Without law they come to Christ. 4)

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 4. fourth part. A group of servants was divided into four parts, each
of which had to watch over the fourth part of the night, one by one. 4)

V. 5. Without ceasing. Stopped at prayer, did not cease, as a right
prayer should be. 4)

V. 15. angels. Hi credunt angelos esse ministros hominum \[These
\"believe\" that the angels are servants of men\]. 4)

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1852 Erl. 64,LIS-L17. L.\'s marginal glosses on the apostles\' story.
W.XXI, 816\*-821\*. 1853

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 6. Bar Jehu. That is in German a son of GOtt. For the Hebrew language
calls GOD Jehu, which is the name tetragrammaton. 1) of which the Jews
write many miracles. So this magician will have used also the same name,
as now the magicians of the cross and other holy 2) words and signs use.

1522 and 1524 Addition: But how Bar Jehu is interpreted: Elymas, is
still hidden, and not certain whether the text is changed.

V. 8. Elymas in Hebrew is almost as if he called himself Elimessia, that
is, God\'s king, or an anointed one of God. For the Jews, and especially
such people, use high, divine names. 3)

V. 12: Bailiff. He is a Christian and holy even without law and merit,
though he is a pagan and a worldly lord. 3)

V. 20. three hundred. 4) Some texts have four hundred; but the histories
and account of the years do not suffer it. This is the error of the
scribe who wrote four for three, which is easily done in Greek. 5)

V. 27. See that one can talk a lot about Christ and still deny and kill
him. 5)

V. 48. were believing verbo; sine lege et operibus hi convertuntur \[by
the word; without law and works these are converted\]. 5)

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 9. No difference. That is, to be saved without law or merit. 5)

V. 12. Gentiles. Who were uncircumcised and without law. 5)

V. 17. Name. That is, those who are called by my name, as a people of
GOD, a congregation of Christ, a servant of the LORD. 5)

V. 24. Notice that the Holy Spirit is the work of the Holy Spirit.

1\) tetragrammaton = the name of God in four letters.

2\) \"other saints\" put by us instead of: \"other saints\".

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

4\) In the first editions is: \"four hundred and fifty\". In the
editions from 1541 on, this is changed to \"three hundred and fifty,\"
and this gloss refers to that.

5\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

and teachers of the law, but calls them confusers and deceivers of
Christians. 6)

V. 31. Consolation. To be free from the law. 6)

**Chapter 16.**

V. 1. Disciple. Without law and uncircumcised, a right Gentile, yet a
Christian. 6)

V. 4. Of freedom from the law. Apost. 15, 28. 29. 6)

V. 34. This man becomes godly even without works and law, through faith.
6)

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 18. Spermologos in Greek is the name of lottery boys, theriacs,
freemen, 7) and of the servants who feed themselves now and then in the
country with useless gossip. 8)

V. 28. That is, we are descended from him as from the Father or Creator.

V. 34. Believing. Without law and works; for they were Gentiles. 8)

> **Chapter 18.**

V. 8 Corinthians. They also come without law and work. 8)

V. 27. That one should not believe the lurkers without letters. 8)

> **The 19th chapter.**

V. 18. Aligned with preaching, teaching and other fruits of the gospel.
8)

V. 19. Fifty thousand groschen. That makes over six and a half thousand
florins. One penny is worth thirty lion pennies.

> **Chapter 21.**

V. 15. That is, we laid down our utensils and left them there, that we
might walk the more ready. 8)

**The 25th chapter.**

V. 19. Of their superstition. How mockingly and contemptuously the proud
pagan speaks of Christ and our faith. 8)

> **Chapter 27.**

V. 17. Syrtes are eddies on sandy oerterns in front of Africa.

6\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

7\) \"Freihet\" = vagabond, tramp. (Dietz.) The Weimar Bible (1686)
offers: \"Freiharten\".

8\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1854 Erl. 64, 217-219. Appendix. W. XXI, 82I\*-826\*. 1855

**The 28th chapter.**

V. 11. Gemini. Now those who are called a star in the sky were
considered by the pagans to be gods who would be gracious to the
sailors, and they are called Castor and Pollux.

**The Epistle of St. Paul to the Romans.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 4: After the Spirit. The Spirit of God is given after Christ\'s
ascension, from then on he sanctifies Christians and glorifies Christ in
all the world, that he is the Son of God, with all power, in words,
miracles and signs.

V. 17. By faith. Out of the weak faith begun into the strong. For faith
does not celebrate. 1)

V. 18. It is revealed from heaven (otherwise all the world would not
know about it) that no man is righteous before God, but all are ungodly,
sinners, unrighteous, that is, children of wrath, ut infra cap. 3: Non
est justus etc. \[as below Cap. 3, 10: \"There is none that is
righteous\" 2c.\]. And even if they know or hear something about God,
they are so wicked that they neither thank nor serve Him, therefore they
also have to slur in all kinds of vices as punishment rc. 1).

V. 21: Poetry. Where there is no faith, reason falls from one to the
other, until it is even blinded in its poetry, as happens to all wise
and sharp minds.

V. 25. God\'s truth. That is: They have made idols out of the right God.

V. 30. God despisers are the right epicureans who live as if there is no
God.

glorious. Those who boast a lot and want to be praised as if they were
something special, and yet they are not.

Harmful. Those who seek day and night to do harm and damage to other
people are also skilled and quick to find such practices.

1522 and 1524: 2) financiers. They raise much more new money than is
seen among merchants, lawyers and courtiers.

V. 31. unreasonable, which is called

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) In the text: \"financiers\" instead of: \"harmful\".

a rough man: Hans Unvernunft, with the head through 2c. 3)

Troublesome. Unbrotherly, wolfish, doglike, having neither desire nor
love for wives, children, brothers, sisters, even parents. 3)

Unreconcilable. Those who cannot forgive, cannot be reconciled. 3)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 4. long-suffering. In Latin tardus ira \[slow to anger), and is
rendered Arech Appaim in Hebrew, and is actually a virtue that is slow
to anger and punishes wrong. But patience is the one who bears the evil
in property, body and honor, even if it happens with injustice 4).
Kindness is the bodily goodness to one another and a friendly nature.

1522 and 1524: Long-suffering is when one is slow to anger, whether or
not he is irritated, right and powerful. In Latin - - happened. Kindness
is the friendly company among each other and a friendly nature.

V. 14. 15. By nature. The natural law is: Whatever you want to be done
to you and to be done to you by another, you also do to and do to
another. In this is the whole law of Moses, as Christ says Matth. 7, 12.
In which law the Gentiles do no more than the outward work, as the Jews
did in the law of Moses. And the accusation and excuse is that one sin
is greater than another against the law.

V. 22. You are a thief of God, for God\'s is the glory that all works
saints take from him.

V. 26. foreskin. Thus Paul calls the Gentiles because they are
uncircumcised.

V. 29. Spirit means what God works in man over nature; letter means all
doing of nature without spirit.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 4. wrong. God certainly holds; but he who trusts in men lacks. 5)

V. 7. 8. becomes more glorious. David speaks

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

4\) \"Injustice\" set by us according to the Weimar Bible (1686) instead
of: \"Right\" in the other editions.

5\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1856 Erl. 64,SI9-SSI. L.\'s marginal glosses on the epistle to the
Romans. W.XXI, 826\*-830\*. 1857

(Ps. 51, 6.^1^ )\]: \"To you alone have I sinned and done evil in your
sight, so that you may be righteous in your words and overcome when you
are judged\" 2c. This reads as if one should do sin so that God may be
just, as S. Paul also indicates here, and yet it is not so; but we are
to recognize the sin that God blames us for, so that He may thus be
truly and justly confessed in His law. But over this recognition the
works saints quarrel with God, and do not want their works to be sin,
and so God must be their liar and be judged in his words. Thus S. Paul
wants that not the sins praise God (otherwise it would be better to sin
than to do good), but the confession of sins praises God and His grace.
Thus, God remains true and all men lie who do not want to confess this;
and their unbelief does not make God\'s faith false. For he still wins,
and remains true.

V. 23. Notice that when he says, \"They are all sinners,\" 2c. it is the
main and central point of this epistle and of all Scripture, namely,
that everything is sin that is not redeemed by the blood of Christ,
being justified by faith. Therefore understand this text well. For here
lies down the merit and glory of all works, as he himself says here, and
only God\'s grace and glory remain.

V. 25 until now. Neither the law nor any good work could take away sin.
Christ and forgiveness had to do it. 2)

V. 31. Faith fulfills all the laws; works do not fulfill a tittle of the
law. \[Jac. 2, 10.\]

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3 and 6. 2c. Here he proves with two examples that merit is nothing,
but only God\'s grace.

V. 9. 10. For Abraham believed and was commended as righteous before he
was circumcised, Gen. 15:6, that grace must ever precede works.

V. 16. All the seed. Both of the Jews and Gentiles. For the believing
Gentiles are Abraham\'s seed as well as the Jews. 2)

1\) Erlanger: \"Ps. 51, 7.\"

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 20. Gives glory to God. He who believes in God gives Him glory, as if
He were true, almighty, wise, good. Thus, faith fulfills the first three
commandments and makes man righteous before God. This, then, is the true
worship of God.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 4. Experience. Experience is when one is well tried and can speak of
it as one who has been there. 4)

V. 6. 4) According to time. For from eternity all believers are provided
to be delivered from the weakness in which they have been for a time.

V. 11. We also boast of God, that God is ours, and we are his, and have
all goods in common from him and with him in all confidence.

V. 14. Image. As Adam corrupted us with strange sin without our fault,
so Christ has made us blessed with strange grace without our merit.

V. 18. by one thing. Notice that here he spoke of original sin, which
came from Adam\'s disobedience, so everything about us is sinful.

V. 19: As Adam\'s sin became our own, so Christ\'s righteousness became
our own.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 3. into his death. That we also die (like him). For we do not die to
sin altogether, but the flesh also dies bodily.

V. 12. Let not sin reign. Notice, the saints still have evil lusts in
the flesh that they do not follow.

V. 14. Under grace. As long as grace reigns, the conscience remains
free, compelling sin in the flesh, but without \[the\] grace it reigns,
and the law condemns the conscience.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 4. The law. The old man owns his conscience with sins, as a man owns
his wife. But when the old man dies by grace, the conscience becomes
free from sins, so that even the law is no longer a burden to him.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

4\) Erlanger: V. 5.

1858 **Erl. 8t, 221-224. appendix. W. XXI, 83v\*-835\*.** 1859

more sin can rise up and make the old man subservient. 1)

V. 18. 19. Do. To do here does not mean to accomplish the work, but to
feel the lusts stirring. But to do is to live without lust, completely
pure; this does not happen in this life.

V. 22. Inward. The inward man is called here the spirit born of grace,
which in the saints contends against the outward, that is reason, sense
and everything that is nature in man.

V. 24. 2) This death. Death here he calls the sorrow and trouble in the
strife with sin, as Ex. 10, 17. Pharaoh says, \"Take this death (that
was the locusts) from me.\"

**Chapter 8.**

V. 1-4. Damnation. Though sin still rages in the flesh, it does not
condemn it, because the Spirit is righteous and contends against it.
Where the Spirit is not, the law is weakened and transgressed by the
flesh, so that it is impossible for the law to help man, except to sin
and death. Therefore, God sent His Son and put our sin on Him, and thus
helped us fulfill the law through His Spirit.

V. 6. To be carnally minded is to ask nothing of God or to disregard Him
and understand nothing of Him.

V. 22. anxious. Like a woman in childish distress.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 28. Though the remnant fall away and remain unbelievers, he will not
leave them all to fall away, but will preserve those who remain, and
through them will extend his word and grace the more abundantly, so that
they may be justified and glorified. 3)

V. 32. Christ justifies without works; they do not believe him, so they
take offense at him and are angry.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 5. Live in it. That is, he avoids the outward penalty of the law by
outward works, but that is nothing before God.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) Walch and the Erlangeners: V. \"34.\"

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 6 He that believeth not that Christ died and rose again to save us
from sins saith, Who is gone up to heaven, and is entered into the deep?
But this is what those do who want to be justified by works and not by
faith, even though they say this with their mouths but not in their
hearts. Emphasis est in verbo \[There is an emphasis on the word): in
the heart.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 2. It is not all God\'s people that are called God\'s people;
therefore, not all of them are cast out, although the several parts are
also cast out.

V. 7. The election, that is, those who are chosen among the people of
God.

V. 15. To take life from the dead is nothing; how could the life of the
Gentiles come from the fact that the Jews are fallen and dead? Rather,
the dead Jews are to be stimulated to life by the example of the
Gentiles, as it says above \[v. 11\]: Ut illos aemulentur etc.. \[\"That
they might emulate them\" 2c.).

1522 and 1524: Loss. As the law was not given for the sake of sins, but
to make them known, so the Jews did not fall for the sake of the
Gentiles\' correction, but to make them zealous to follow the Gentiles,
as he also confesses above that the law is good, which nevertheless was
a cause of more sins, so again the Jews\' case is evil, but nevertheless
it became a cause of good among the Gentiles.

V. 29. repent. That is, they are unchanging and he does not change them.
4)

V. 32. concluded. Note this main saying, which condemns all works and
human righteousness, and only exalts God\'s mercy to be obtained by
faith.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 1. Reasonable. Paul calls all sacrifices, works and services
unreasonable if they are done without faith and knowledge of God.

1522 and 1524: The law has victims of various unreasonable animals, all
of which are

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1860 Erl. 64, 224-S26. L. \'s marginal glosses on the epistle to the
Romans. W. XXI, 835\*-83g\*. 1861

in which some sacrifices become full, 1) that we ourselves are
reasonable people.

V. 7. similar. All prophecy that leads to works and not to Christ alone
as the only consolation, however exquisite it is, is not similar to
faith; as there are the revelations of the poltergeists who seek to
establish masses, pilgrimages, fasting and holy service.

V. 7. 8. teach. One teaches those who do not know and admonishes those
who know before.

1522 and 1524. Addition: that they continue.

V. 20. coals. To put fire on the head is to make the enemy angry with
himself for having done us such evil.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 5. Conscience. Worldly power is for the sake of temporal peace;
therefore the conscience, out of dutiful love, is guilty of being
subject to it.

V. 6. give the womb. Behold, how good it is to give and obey the womb,
that ye may help thereby, to protect the upright, and to punish the
wicked. Therefore do not be displeased. 2)

V. 14. That is, do not torture the body over power with infallible
holiness, 3) fasting, freezing, as the hypocrites do.

1522 and 1524 has in the text: \"und thut nicht nach des Fleisches
Klugheit\", with the gloss: Klugheit. These are the false wicked wiles
and wiles of the carnal and worldly hearts in all kinds of things.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 1. Confused. There are two kinds of Christians, some strong in faith,
some weak. The former despise the weak too insolently; the latter take
offense at the strong too easily. Both of them, therefore, should be
guided by love, so that neither offends nor judges the other, but does
and does not do what is good and necessary for the other.

V. 5. Certain. That is, he does not waver or doubt in his conscience,
but is certain,

1\) \"become full\" will be as much: as \"find their fulfillment,\" in
that 2c.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) \"Holiness of watchfulness\" 2c., that is, holiness, which is to
come from watchfulness, fasting 2c. Is supposed to come from.

that before God there is no sin, he eats or does not eat 2c. 4)

V. 11. me. So Christ must be right God, because this is to happen before
his judgment seat. 4)

V. 14. Common is as much as unclean, as that which is not consecrated or
sanctified.

V. 16. treasure. The gospel is our treasure. That it is blasphemed is a
source of annoyance to the weak by those who insult Christian liberty.

V. 23. By faith. Note that this is a common saying against all works
done without faith; and beware of false glosses 5) which have been
invented here by many teachers.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 1. Weak ones. This chapter speaks of the infirm in life, as those who
fall into public sin or error, that they also should be borne and not
rejected until they grow stronger; just as the previous chapter teaches
the weak consciences to act.

V. 8. Summa Summarum of this epistle: Both Jews and Gentiles shall be
saved 2c. 6)

Servant of the circumcision, that is apostle, preacher, messenger to the
Jews, and not sent to the Gentiles personally.

V. 14. 15. That is, though you have no need of my writing, yet my
ministry impels me, that I have the grace of God to teach and admonish
you and everyone.

V. 17. Serve, that is, I am his priest. 6)

V. 20. not known. Because you were taught before, I hastened to you the
less, because otherwise there was room when Christ was not yet preached.
6)

V. 27. Notice the apostolic manner; how politely and neatly S. Paul
seeks this tax from the Romans.

V. 28.. sealed. That is, faithfully and well kept delivered. 6)

**The 16th chapter.**

V. 17. 7) Those who cause division and trouble. This is said against all
kinds of human doctrine.

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

5\) \"false\" put by us instead of \"false.\"

6\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

7\) Erlanger: \"V. 15\".

1862 **Erl. 64, SS6-SS8. app. W. XXI, 840\*-844\*.** 1863

**The 1st epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 9. fellowship, that is, you are co-heirs and co-partners in all the
goods of Christ. 1)

V. 10. Keep yourselves from being separated. 1)

1522\'and 1524. v. 22. has in the text: \"Where are the explorers of
this world?\" with the gloss: Explorers. Explorers of the world are the
natural masters, who with reason want to find the nature and truth.

V. 25. Divine foolishness and weakness is the gospel, which is foolish
in the sight of the wise, heretical in the sight of the saints, but
mighty and wise in the sight of Christians.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 5. Therefore, doctrines of men cannot be a ground of conscience or
faith.

V. 7. Hidden, because it is hidden under foolishness and the cross, and
does not appear in honor and riches.

V. 14. Natural. The natural man, as he is apart from grace, with all
reason, art, senses, and faculties, is also skillful in the best way.

V. 15. judges. Understands, feels, finds, is certain 2c. which reason is
not able to do, also knows nothing, which is faith or gospel. 1)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 4. Here S. Paul condemned the papacy and all sects.

V. 12. 13. gold, silver. This is said of preaching and teaching, which
are taught for the betterment or lessening of faith. Now there is no
teaching in death, the last day and all hardships; it is consumed unless
it is the word of God; all this is well in the conscience.

V. 21. All yours. Therefore no man has power to make laws over
Christians, to bind consciences.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. Secret, that is the gospel, in which the divine goods are
presented to us hidden.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1522 and 1524. v. 4. not aware of anything. No one can consider himself
righteous by his works and good life, or judge anything, nor be judged
by the prizes of men, but it is all in God\'s grace.

V. 8. rich. Ironia \[mockery\]; he mocks them and means the
contradiction.

V. 13. curse, sacrifice of purgatory. Curse, in Greek χά&αρμα*,*
purgatory περίφημα*,* Latin

piäoulum, was the name of a man who had committed such an evil deed that
it was thought that God would curse and destroy the land and its people
because of it. Therefore, when they removed him, they thought they had
removed the curse and cleansed the land. Such a curse was the prophet
Jonah, when he was thrown into the sea. Sometimes they would take an
innocent man when there was such a great plague in the land and,
thinking they were sweeping the land clean of such a plague with such
death or sacrifice, throw him into the sea and say: Thou shalt be our
sweep-offering, that we may be healed and redeemed. So the world thinks
that the apostles and preachers of the gospel are the worst and most
harmful people on earth; if it were rid of them, it would be well, and
would be rid of all misfortune and curses, and would have done great
service to God. Joh. 16, 2. 2)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 7. New dough. There is still remaining sin in the saints to be swept
out; therefore he says: Ye are unleavened, that is, holy; but make ye to
sweep out all, and to become wholly clean, a wholly new dough.

V. 9. 10. Dreaming of the world. Whoever did not want to be among evil
people would have to avoid the whole world. That is why he wants evil
Christians to be shunned, so that they do not have the name or have to
mend their ways. For the unchristians do not have the name.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 4. Despised. These are the pagans, whom one does not leave with the
Christians to Christian things, as Sacrament 2c. 2)

V. 17. one spirit, as those are one flesh. 2)

**Chapter 7.**

V. 10. 11. Reconcile. No cause separates husband and wife except
adultery. Matth.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1864 Erl. 64, S28-S3I. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 1st epistle to the
Corinthians. W. XXI, 844\*-848\*. 1865

19, 9. Therefore in other matters of anger they must either become one,
or remain without marriage, where they divorce over it.

V. 14. Sanctified. Just as all things are pure to the pure, Titus 1:15,
so also an unchristian spouse is pure to a Christian, that he may be
with him without sin, and not to reject the children as impure, whom he
should not or may not suffer. For marriage and the care of children
remain right, whether pagan or Christian.

V. 18: Foreskin. That is, no one insists that foreskin or circumcision
is necessary, but let it be both without need and free to everyone.

V. 35: Use this to consider what is best for you. 1)

Rope. Paul does not want to forbid anyone to marry, as is now done by
laws and vows among priests, monks and nuns.

V. 37. Free will, that is, to consent to it. He is free, because God\'s
commandment does not force him to do so.

1522 and 1524: That is, that she is willing and at ease.

V. 38. better. Not that he thereby becomes higher before God, before
whom alone faith exalts, but, as he says above \[P. 32. ff.\], that he2)
can wait for God in this life.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 1. Blows up. Here he begins to praise love against the weak in faith.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 9. Take care. God cares for all things, but He does not care for the
oxen to write, for they cannot read.

V. 12 not used. Behold, the apostle so nearly spares the weakness of
others that he also abstains from all these things, since he has power
as an apostle, as well as the other apostles. See Paul

He does not want to boast about his preaching, because that is what he
owes, but that he preaches for free without pay, he considers that a
special reward and glory. 3)

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) Instead of \"he\" probably wants to read \"she\" \[the daughter\].

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 26. To the unknown. Just as a fighter who runs off to the side must
miss the mark, and he who fights and makes blunders strikes the air in
vain: so it is with all who do almost many good works without faith. For
they are uncertain as to their turn with God; therefore they are all
false runs, false strikes, and false works.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 12, so that he will not fall. Therefore, no one despises another,
however strong or weak he may be; who knows how long he himself will
remain?

V. 26. of the Lord. Christ is Lord and free, so also all Christians in
all things.

V. 29. Let him judge. He may judge me, but my conscience shall be
unjudged and uncaught, whether I outwardly yield to his service.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 10. Power. This is the veil or covering, so that it may be seen to be
under the man\'s power. Gen 3:16.

V. 28. Examine, that is, each one see how he believes in this supper,
what and for what purpose he receives it.

1522 and 1524: To examine oneself is to feel one\'s faith, and not to
judge or despise others.

V. 29. does not distinguish. The body of Christ is handled as if he
respected it no more than other food.

1522 and 1524: Who respects Christ\'s body a little more than other
food.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 2. that you were Gentiles. That is, when you were Gentiles, you knew
nothing either of Christ or of the Holy Spirit; but now you should know
the gifts of the Spirit, without which no one knows Christ, but rather
curses him.

V. 4. 8. 9. 10. various. There is in all Christians one spirit, wisdom,
knowledge, faith, power 2c. But to practice and prove these things to
others is not everyone\'s thing, but to speak wisdom to those who teach
to know God; to speak knowledge to those who teach outward character and
Christian liberty; to prove faith to those who publicly confess it in
word and deed,

1866 Erl, 64, 231-833, app. W. XXI, 848\*-853\*. 1867

as, the martyrs; spirits discern, who test the prophecies and teachings.

V. 13. Drinking. We drink one sacrament, so that we also receive one
spirit, just as we received one baptism, so that we celebrate one body.
1)

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 2. All faith. Although faith alone makes righteous, as St. Paul
teaches everywhere, where love does not follow, faith would certainly
not be right, even though it performs miracles.

V. 5. ungeberdig, as the angry, stubborn, impatient heads do. 1)

V. 8. 1545 has in the text: Love does not grow weary, with the gloss:
not weary. That is, it does not cease to do good, to do it love or harm,
but perseveres in doing good and does not change. 1)

V. 9: Piecemeal. Although in faith we have and know all that God is and
gives us, this knowledge is still fragmentary and imperfect compared to
the clarity that is to come.

V. 13. The greatest love does not make righteous, but faith. Rom. 1, 17.
But because faith and hope act against God, and only receive good
things, they must cease, but love acts against the neighbor, and only
does good things, it remains forever, it is greater, that is, wider,
more active and truer.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 2. In the spirit means: with himself. 1)

V. 4 Speaking in tongues. To speak in tongues is to read or sing psalms
or prophets in church, not to interpret them, though the reader
understands them. To prophesy is to take the meaning of God and give it
to others. (V. 5.) To interpret is to give the meaning to others. So
Paul means that speaking with tongues does not improve the church, but
prophesying and interpreting improve the church.

V. 15. With the sense. To speak with the mind is just as much as to
interpret, and to transfigure the mind to others. But to speak in the
spirit is to understand the meaning itself, not to interpret it.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 19. sense. This is to interpret the meaning with preaching.

V. 22. For signs. By many tongues unbelievers are converted to the
faith, as by other signs and wonders; but by prophecy believers are
corrected and strengthened, as by signs, by which they test their faith
and learn that it is right.

V. 30-32 Subjects. Some think that because they have the mind and the
gifts of the Spirit, they should not yield to anyone, nor should they be
silent, because sectarianism and discord follow from this. But S. Paul
says here that they should and may well depart, since the gifts of the
Spirit are in their power not to use them against unity, so that they
must not say that the Spirit drives and compels them.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 3. according to the Scriptures, for before reason apart from the
Scriptures everything is to be heard audibly. 2)

V. 29 over the dead. To confirm the resurrection, the Christians were
baptized over the tombs of the dead, pointing to them that they would be
resurrected.

V. 33. Chatter. That is, evil company, where often very angry words are
spoken against faith, and corrupt good consciences. \[Jos. 23, 12. f.\]
2)

V. 44. A natural body is one that eats, drinks, sleeps, feeds, gains and
loses weight, begets children 2c. Spiritual, which is not allowed to do
these things and yet is a true living body of the Spirit, as can be
understood from Genesis 2:7.

V. 55. 3) devoured. That is, death lies down, and now has no more power,
but life lies up and says: Here won! Where are you now, death? rc. 4)

**The 16th chapter.**

V. 9. door. When the door is opened wide, he means that there are many
listeners, as if the gospel were entering the gate by force, and they
diligently cling to the gospel, as there was hardly a window or crack in
Jerusalem. 4)

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 54,\"

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

[1868 Erl. 64, L33-S35. L.\'s marginal glosses on the 2nd epistle to the
Corinthians. W. LXI, 853\*-856\*. 1869]{.underline}

V. 22. anathema. Bann in German, Anathema in Greek, Maharam in Hebrew is
One Thing. Moth, however, means death. Now S. Paul wants to say: Whoever
does not love Christ is banished to death. See Deut. 27, 29.

**The 2nd epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.**

**The 1st chapter.**

1522 and 1524. v. 11. many people. These are. Young and old, masters and
servants, husband and wife. Ps. 148.

V. 20. Amen, that is, certainly and truly.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 5. me. That is, he did not grieve me for you, but for you. For what I
have grieved, it was not for my sake, but for yours. 1)

V. 6 is enough. Here he speaks of the one whom he punishes in the first
epistle Cap. 5 and wanted to give to the devil, commanding him to be
accepted again after the punishment.

V. 17. Adulterate. For the sake of belly and avarice, as a Kretzmer
adulterates wine. 1)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 4. Trust that we have prepared you for the letter.

V. 6. letters. To teach letters is to teach the mere law and works
without the knowledge of God\'s grace. Thereby everything is condemned
and found guilty of death, what man is and does, because he cannot do
anything good without God\'s grace.

Spirit. To teach the Spirit is to teach grace without law and merit;
thereby man becomes alive and blessed.

V. 15-18. Ceiling. The covering of Moses is not recognizing the letter
and its teaching. The uncovered face of the Lord is clear knowledge of
grace and the Spirit, who sets us free from the law, the letter and its
works, so that their clarity and works must cease.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 18. is reflected. As the mirror sees an image, so our heart sees the
knowledge of Christ.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 2. Secret shame. He stings the false apostles, who outwardly shine
beautifully, but inwardly they are full of filth. Matth. 23, 25. 27. 2)

V. 4. God. The devil is the prince and god of the world, for it serves
him and is under him.

V. 6. Enlightenment would arise. That is, we are to shine and preach how
God\'s grace is to be known, shown to us in Christ. Others may shine
works and law 2c. 2)

Face. Knowledge of Christ, not the face of Moses, which is knowledge of
the law. For through Christ we know God. Joh. 6, 68.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 11. Drive beautifully. That is, we do not tyrannize nor drive the
people with bans and other wicked regiments, for we fear God, but teach
them neatly that we do not support anyone.

V. 13. We do too much. That is, though we deal harshly with people, we
serve God by it; but if we deal with them cleanly and moderately, we do
it for the service of the people, so that it is right and well done
everywhere.

V. 16. According to the flesh. To no longer know Christ according to the
flesh is to seek or wait for nothing carnal in Him, as the disciples did
before the passion, but to be satisfied with His word, in which they
have spiritual and eternal good.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 12. From the previous epistle, the Corinthians were terrified and
hardened because they had offended the apostle. Now he comforted them,
saying that his heart and mouth were glad and enlarged; therefore they
should not be afraid or angry, as if he were unhappy with them. But that
they should harden themselves, there is no cause in him; but as good
children they harden themselves out of a good heart, because it is not
needful.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1870 **Erl. 64, 335-238. appendix. W. XXI, 856\--86V-.** 1871

1522 and 1524 Addition: those who do not, who are servants and do not
wait for the eternal reward, of which the children are sure, therefore
they have reason to rejoice.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. spirit. That is, of doctrine and faith defilement, as the false
apostles taught. 1)

V. 16. I can\'t spoil it with you. 1)

**Chapter 8.**

V. 10. You were the first who wanted to do it and did it.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 5. stinginess, that is, meagerness and giving little. 1)

V. 11. simplicity, that the good deed is not done for the sake of
enjoyment, reward or honor, but out of pure, free love and desire.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 14. We would not boast too far; but it would be boasting too far\],
2) where we would not have come as far as you, as those do, and boast of
other people\'s work, which is ours. 3)

**Chapter 11.**

V. 10. Stuffed. As running water, so shall my fame run, and go
unstopped. 3)

V. 21. After dishonor. That is, we want to present ourselves as the weak
ones that you should carry, which is a disgrace for us, since we should
carry you.

V. 29. Weak. With the weak in faith he did and left much that he had
power to do otherwise, as he says in 1 Cor. 9:12 and 12:21 ff. and
burned, that is, it made him angry when the weak were angered.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 7: Stake. Stake here does not mean the temptation of the flesh to
unchastity, but great plagues and terrors from the devil. For stake is
when people are impaled, crucified or hanged. 3)

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) Inserted by us.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

V. 9. mine. With this word Christ comforts all who are in weakness or
suffering; for he cannot prove his strength in us, because we are weak
and suffer. 4)

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 4. Live with him. That is, if I come, I will prove that I live in
Christ, even though some of you think I am nothing. 4)

**The Epistle of St. Paul to the Galatians.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 3. 4. See how he judges all words against his own righteousness.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 5. 5) One hour. For at that time they would have reason to give way
to the stiff-necked, so that they would not be angry.

V. 6. The false apostles claimed that the twelve apostles had walked
with Christ Himself, so they were considered more than Paul. S. Paul
refutes this and says that it does not depend on how great or glorious
they are. In the Gospel, one preacher is like another. 1 Cor. 3, 8.

V. 7. foreskin. He calls the Gentiles foreskin because they are not
circumcised.

V. 17: Servants of sin. He who wants to become godly by works does so as
if Christ, through his ministry, preaching and suffering, first made us
sinners who must become godly through the law; that is, he denied
Christ, crucified him, blasphemed him and restored the sin that was
previously removed through the preaching of faith.

V. 19. The law. Through faith, which is a spiritually living law, we
have died to the law of the letter, so that we are no longer guilty of
it. Rom. 7, 4.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 19. God promised Abraham the inheritance, that is, righteousness and
eternal life, by grace; what good is the law? Answer: The law reveals
and increases sin, because it demands much that we are not able to do,
and therefore reveals it, so that we may be able to

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

5\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 4.\"

1872 Erl. 6t, 238-240. L.\'s marginal glosses on the epistle to the
Galatians. W. LXI, 860\*-863\*. 1873

that God justifies by grace. If the law alone were enough to make us
righteous, what should we expect from the promised grace?

The law was given to the people through a mediator, Moses, who was the
mediator between God and the people. But there would have been no need
for a mediator if the people had been able to hear the law, Ex 20:19 and
Deut 5:25. If they could not hear it, how could the law make them
devout?

1522 and 1524 Addition: There was no lack of God, who is united and
without change, but there was a lack of the people.

V. 20. But God is one, that is, he is alone and has no equal, therefore
without a mediator it is not possible to deal with him, as Job also
says. 1)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 3. guilty. For without faith no heart is pure; without purity of
heart no work is right and pure.

V. 13. Space prayed. This is what those do who say, \"Because faith does
everything, we will do nothing good and rely on faith.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 4. Not in another. False teachers do not seek how to become
righteous, but only that they may have much fame with others, and their
thing stands alone on strange chance and following; for they are greedy
of honor, and not righteous.

1522 and 1524 That is, he should not boast that he is stronger and more
pious than his neighbor, but hold himself against himself, and boast of
his faith and of the grace of God.

V. 16. rule. This rule is not the doctrine of men, but the gospel and
faith in Christ.

V. 17. Marks. The marks are not the scars on Christ\'s body, but all the
suffering we bear in our bodies for Christ\'s sake.

**The Epistle of St. Paul to the Ephesians.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 10. God wills all things to be subject to Christ, and for one Lord
and one God.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

Ps. 8:7, so that whoever does not have him shall not have God.

1522 and 1524: That under Christ as Lord all things might be brought
together, which before were much scattered in various idolatries and
regiments.

V. 22. over all. Christ is such a head of the church that he is
nevertheless Lord over all things, over devils, over the world 2c. 2)

V. 23. Christ is and works all works in all creatures, therefore all his
creatures are full. So also his common Christianity is his fullness,
that it is together with him a whole body and a complete multitude.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 15. 3) The law. The law was the enmity between Gentiles and Jews,
because the Jews wanted to be better because of it. But now that without
the law we all have the Spirit through Christ, such enmity is ended, and
one is like another. 4)

V. 15. 1522 and 1524 have in the text: \"namely the enmity, so that
through his flesh he abolished the law of the commandments\", with the
gloss: Christ did not abolish the law so that one should not keep it,
but gave the Spirit, who does everything freely, so that he does not
need the written law (which the carnal do) and is not driven by it. Now
the Jews were puffing themselves up against the Gentiles because of the
written law and its works; but now that the same Spirit has been given
to both, the puffing up of the law ceases, and they become friends in
Christ.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 10. the principalities. The angels in heaven, even though they are
full of God, experience daily new graces and gifts from Christians,
which God gives out daily; just as Christ speaks in Luc. 15:10 that the
angels rejoice over one sinner who repents.

V. 15. Children. All angels, all Christians, and even the children of
all people are children of God, because he created them all. 4)

V. 18. 5) the breadth. Love proves that faith is righteous; the same is
true of faith.

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) Walch and Erlanger: \"V. 14.\"

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

5\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 17.\"

1874 **Erl. 64, 240-242. appendix. W. XXI, 863\*-867\*.** 1875

grips then that nothing so broad, long, deep, high fei, since Christ
does not have power and could help, and does not fear neither sin, death
nor hell, it is broad, long, deep 2c., as Ps. 139, 7. also says: Quo ibo
a spiritu tuo? \[Where shall I go before thy spirit?\]

V. 19. To love. It is a much greater thing to love Christ than to be
able to preach much. 1 Cor. 8:1: \"Knowledge puffs up, loving
improves\"; item, if someone loves God, he is known by Him. Joh. 21, 6.
f.: Petre, amas me? etc.. \[Peter, do you love me? 2c.\] 1)

God\'s fullness. That God alone may rule and work in you, and that you
may be full of Him.

**Chapter 4.**

V. 8. The prison, that is, sin, death and conscience, that they should
not see us nor hold us.

V. 10. Fulfilled all things, that he might work all things in all
things, and that without him nothing might be done, spoken, or thought.

V. 12. Prepared, that is, well equipped and provided for everywhere, so
that nothing is lacking for the ministry of Christianity rc. 1)

V. 14. Mischievousness. This is how the rogues deal with the dice, so
they deal with the Scripture, pretending the doctrine of men.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 16. Evil time. A Christian encounters so many obstacles and causes to
miss useful business that he almost has to tear himself away like a
prisoner and steal the time at once, and perhaps also redeem it at a
high price, with disfavor 2c. as one says: Amici fures temporis
\[friends steal one\'s time\].

1522 and 1524: For the world and this life are full, full of evil
examples, irritation, annoyance, both spiritual and physical sins.

V. 18. Disorderly, as we see that the drunkards are wild, insolent,
impudent, and most of all naughty, with words, shouts, gestures, and the
like.

V. 32 Secret. Sacrament or mystery means secret or hidden thing, which
nevertheless has its meaning from the outside.

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

So Christ and his church are a mystery, a great, holy, hidden thing,
which can be believed and not seen. But it is signified by man and woman
as by an outward sign, that as man and woman are one body and have all
things in common, so also the church has all that Christ is and has.
Col. 1, 20.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 15. To preach the gospel of peace, that is, to preach, confess and do
all that pertains to the gospel. 2)

**The Epistle of St. Paul to the Philippians.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 14. Without doubt. That they do not grumble against God in
impatience, nor waver in faith. 2)

V. 17. To be sacrificed. That is, if I must die because I have made you
God\'s servants and sacrifices through the gospel and faith, it will not
take me long, but I will do it with joy, and you also shall grant me the
same with joy. 2)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 2. Circumcision. He calls the false preachers circumcision because
they taught circumcision as necessary for salvation, so that the hearts
would be cut off from faith.

V. 12. taken hold of. That is, Christ has called me and thus brought me
to his grace; I would like to do enough for him and also take hold of
him. 2)

V. 16. a rule that such revelation is not contrary to faith and
spiritual unity. 2)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 3. Faithful companion, that is, my special faithful companion before
others, who means to preach the Gospel from the heart as I do. But I
think he means the most distinguished bishop of Philippians. 2)

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1876 Erl. 64, S4S-S44. L.\'s marginal glosses on the epistle to the
Colossians. W. XXI, 867\*-871\*. 1877

**The Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 4. speeches that are according to reason and even, as the doctrine of
works rc. 1)

V. 10. Perfect, that is, you have it all; if you have Christ, you must
look for nothing else. 1)

1522 and 1524. v. 13. foreskin of yours. That is, fleshly life is the
right foreskin spiritually, which is signified by the fleshly foreskin.

V. 14. Handwriting. Nothing is so hard against us as our own conscience,
that we may be convinced, as with our own handwriting, when the law
reveals sin to us, that we may have such handwriting written. But Christ
redeems us from such all by his cross, and also casts out the devil with
sin.

V. 23. Honor. God wants the body to be honored, that is, to have its
food, clothing 2c. for need, and not to be corrupted with infallible
fasting, labor or impossible chastity, as the teachings of men do. 1)

**The 3rd chapter. 1)**

V. 15. rule. That is, he be master, and sustain you in all temptations,
that ye murmur not against GOD, but defy GOD; in mundo pressuram, in ins
passiv sts. \[in the world you are afraid, in me peace 2c.\] 3)

V. 16. lovely, that is, comforting, delightful, gracious 2c. 3)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 6. lovely, comforting, as above. 3)

**The 1st epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians.**

**Chapter 3.**

V. 3. set, that is, it will not be otherwise. 3)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 12. None of them. That is, feed yourselves and do not lie on
people\'s necks,

1\) Missing in 1522 and1524.

2\) This caption is missing in Walch and in the Erlanger.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

like the lazy mendicants, Anabaptists, and hobos. For such are useless
people and annoy the unbelievers. 4)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 13. Peaceful. Do not insult them, do not judge and murmur against
them, do not master them or overcharge them. 4)

V. 19. Do not suppress. Although the spirits are to be judged by the
congregation, 1 Cor. 14:29, they are not to be subdued or cast out
unrecognized, but interrogated and tested; so also prophecy and all
doctrine.

V. 23. whole, that is, in all things, as, in faith, love, hope, word,
works 2c. 4)

**The 2nd epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 4. sits in the temple. Sitting is the regiment in Christianity of the
antichrist, so that he makes his commandment to be kept above God\'s
commandment and service; and the apostasy \[v. 3\] is to step from the
faith to the doctrine of men, as also 1 Tim. 4, 1. says.

**Chapter 3.**

V. 2. naughty. These are the wild, troublesome, whimsical, heretical
minds. 4)

**The 1st Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 18. This commandment, that is, to preach of Christ, as he says here,
that he came into the world 2c. 4)

Divination, that is, the teaching you received beforehand, which is
written in the prophets. 4)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 8. Doubt that they do not grumble against God nor doubt His grace in
their conscience. Phil. 2, 14. 4)

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1878 **Erl. 64, 244-247. appendix. W. XXI, 87I\*-876\*.** 1879\'

V. 15. abide. Read \"abide\" or \"remain\" equally. For it is spoken of
wives in general, not of children in addition, as some torture
themselves here without cause. 1)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 16. in the Spirit. The Holy Spirit glorifies Christ in the gospel and
faith, whom otherwise all the world condemns and blasphemes.\"

**Chapter 4.**

V. 13. elders, that is, the priests or priesthood. 1)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 5. lonely, that is, having no one to care for and being alone. 1)

V. 11. horny, as those whom the food stings, because they live well on
the common alms, go idle and become lazy. 1)

V. 21. It is against doctrine and order to be conceited, so that you do
not give in to or overrule a cause or person for love. As when one wants
to advise his own cause or conceit, or help over a person, against the
law. 1)

V. 24. 25. Obvious. Some heretics and wicked people are so obvious that
they cannot deceive anyone with hypocrisy; some deceive for a while, but
at last it comes to light. So again, some teach and live godly, which is
evident and corrects everyone; but some do not let their words and deeds
be good, until time afterwards makes it evident that they were good. 1)

**Chapter 6.**

V. 4. darkened, attonitus, who walks drowned in his thoughts, and no one
pays attention.

seuchtig. Lying is always sech, and may much Flickens and Glofsirens. 1)

V. 5. Trade. A little trade, so that one may seek honor or good, and not
serve God alone. 1)

V. 10: Sorrows. Namely, with worries, anxiety and restlessness day and
night for the good, so that they will never be glad of it. Just as
Christ compares the riches to thorns, because of these pangs and
worries. Matth. 13, 22. 1)

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

**The 2nd epistle of St. Paul to Timothy.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 7. discipline. The little word Zucht, which Paul often uses, means,
which we say in German, moderately, finely, neatly, sensibly drive by
gestures. 2)

**The 2nd chapter. 3)**

V.15. He does not mix the law and the gospel together, but drives the
law against the rough, the hard, the wicked, and casts them under
secular law or under ban; but the stupid, the afflicted, the pious, he
comforts them with the gospel. 4)

V. 19. nameth, that is, preacheth, praiseth, calleth. 4)

V. 23. useless, quae nec valent ad disciplinam nec doctrinam \[which
serve neither to improve life nor to teach\]. 4)

**The Epistle of St. Paul to Titum.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 7. stubborn, who has his own head, no one gives way, one must give
way to him as one speaks: with the head through.

chaste. Reasonable, moderate 2c. 4)

V. 12. one. Epimenides.

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 2. disciplined. Wherever discipline or chastening is mentioned here,
you will hear that they are to be sensible, moderate and refined. For I
must not use the word reasonable. 4)

V. 12. chastening. That is, moderately, reasonably rc. 4)

V. 15. Serious. This is that they know it is God\'s command, and not a
joke; he wants it to be serious. 4)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 1. 2. mild. These are those who turn and interpret or accept all
things for the best. 4)

V. 8. Firmly, so that people will know and believe that what you teach
is certain and serious,

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) This caption is missing in Walch and in the Erlanger.

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1880 Erl. 64, L47-24S. L.\'s marginal glosses on the epistle to
Philemon. W. XXI, 876\*-88i\*. 1881

and not unnecessary, lazy or doubtful, as if they were fairy tales or
loose theidings. As Christ, Matth. 7, 29, also teaches mightily, not as
the Pharisees 2c. 1)

They are found in a state of good works. That they can be used in
offices that are not useless people, who are good for nothing, as monks,
acolytes 2c. 1)

**The Epistle of St. Paul to Philemon.**

V. 11. Onesimus. Onesimos Greek means useful in German. This is what S.
Paul says when he says he is useful to me and to you, that is, an
Onesimus.

**The 1st Epistle of St. Peter.**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 4. Imperishable, since there is no fear nor worry that it 2) will
come to an end. Undefiled, which is not mixed with any sadness or
unhappiness. Imperishable, which is never tired nor weary, but remains
eternally pure and fresh. Worldly joy is the antithesis. 3)

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 2. Reasonable, that is, spiritual milk, which is the gospel, if it is
grasped with faith, not with a carnal mind. For this makes it false and
impure milk. 3)

V. 12. In the end no virtue nor vice remains hidden, 1 Tim. 5, 25.
\"There is nothing secret that will not be revealed\", Matth. 10, 26. 3)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 4. Unwavering that they are pure and righteous in the faith. 3)

V. 6. Shy. Women are naturally shy and easily frightened. But they
should be firm, and if an affliction arises, they should not be so
womanishly frightened. 3)

V. 7. Instrument. All Christians are God\'s instruments, but the woman
is both weaker in body and strength than the man. Therefore, to be
sparing with reason is not to be

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

2\) Luther, as one can see from the conclusion of this gloss, had
\"joy\" in mind as the subject of this sentence.

3\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

If disunity arises, all prayers will be prevented.

V. 21. covenant, *stipulatio,* that God commits Himself to us with grace
and we accept it. 4)

**Chapter 4.**

V. 8. covers. He who loves his neighbor will not be angered, but will
bear all the sins that are committed against him. This means to cover
the multitude of sins. 1 Cor. 13:7: \"Love endureth all things.\"

V. 12. Heat, that is persecution, which proves us, as fire proves gold.

V. 15: Foreign ministry. The devil mostly drives the vice in the false
Christians, who always want to have a lot to do and rule, since they are
not commanded; as the bishops and clergy do, they rule the world, item,
the rebellious and forward preachers, harmful and dangerous people. 4)

**Chapter 5.**

V. 3. about the people. Cleros means a lot or a portion, which is
assigned to each one by lot. So here Peter calls the parish people a
lot, that is, a portion that is ordered to his parish lord. 4)

V. 5. Firmly, that humility be bound together and intertwined, that the
devil may not separate them with any cunning or power. 4)

**The 2nd Epistle of St. Peter.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 13: Alms. The foundations and prebendaries, because they do nothing,
mock you for it. For entryphontes are actually called, qui pro ludo et
deliciis habent, who mock the people as fools, to their detriment,
wanting to have their sin unpunished. 4)

V. 18. Fornication, as the pope by forbidding marriage has filled the
world with all wanton life and abominable carnal sins. 4)

**Chapter 3.**

V. 3. Scoffers are our Epicureans and Sadducees who believe neither this
nor that,

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1882 **Erl. 6t, 249-251. appendix. W. XXI, 881\--885.\"** 1883

live according to their own pleasure, or, as Peter says, according to
their own lusts, doing what they want and even desire, as we see before
our eyes. 1)

V. 6. the same, word and water. 1)

**The 1st Epistle of St. John.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 16. lust of the flesh is fornication, lust of the eyes is avarice and
riches, hopeful living is greed, violence, praise, and going on top. 1)

V. 18: The one called the end-Christ is the anti-Christ.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 6: The Spirit is truth. Where the Spirit is, there is no hypocrisy,
but all that he speaks, does, and lives is righteous and true with him.
Where there is no spirit, there is hypocrisy and lies.

V. 8. The three are together, that is, where one is, there is also the
other. For Christ\'s blood, baptism and the Holy Spirit testify, confess
and preach the gospel before the world, and in every man\'s conscience
who believes. For he feels that through the water and the Spirit,
obtained with Christ\'s blood, he is justified and saved.

V. 16. Sin unto death is the sin against the Holy Spirit, of which read
Matth. 12, 31.

**The 2nd epistle S1. John.**

V. 9. No God. Notice that apart from the faith of Christ, all worship in
all the world is lost. ^1^)

**The Epistle of St. Paul to the Hebrews.**

**The 2nd chapter.**

V. 1. sail. As a ship shoots away to its doom before approaching. 1)

V. 7. lack. In Hebrew this verse reads: \"You made him lack a little
time of God, that is, you left him three days of his suffering, as if
there were no God with him. But where God is not, there is also

1\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

No angel, nor divine help, as before, when he did great miracles.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 11. unintelligent, coarse, and unskilled, who cannot hear nor
understand, though they have long learned. 2)

V. 12. He calls the teaching of the law milk, as it is the discipline of
children. But Peter calls the gospel milk, as of the new testament
children\'s food. 2)

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. 2. Melchizedek in German means a king of righteousness;
Melchisalem means a king of peace. For Christ gives righteousness and
peace, and His kingdom is righteousness and peace before God through
faith. Rom. 1, 17. and 5, 1.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 35. Do not throw it away, do not throw it to the wind. 2)

V. 38. He who will not hold, nor wait for the pranks, but draws back,
and slinks away. 2)

**Chapter 11.**

V. 3. Finished, that is, it is brought into pregnancy, that it goes and
sees 3) according to God\'s word, without ceasing, unhindered and
without stopping. 4)

from nothing. This is called: invisibilibus, we call: nothing, and is
still nothing until it happens. 4)

V. 34. Weakness. In suffering they became stronger. 2 Cor. 12:9: \"My
strength is made strong in weakness.\" 4)

**Chapter 12. 5)**

V. 27. Made, namely, with hands. He means the tabernacle of Moses. 6)

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 9. food, that is with men laws that teach of food and clothing, not
of faith.

To handle, that is, to want to serve God with it. 6)

2\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

3\) Walch: \"seek\". Erlanger: \"siehet\".

4\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

5\) This caption is missing in the Erlanger.

6\) Missing in 1522 and 1524.

1884 Erl. 64, 251-254. L.\'s marginal glosses on the epistle St. Jacobi.
W. XXI, 885\*-89v\*. 1885

**The Epistle of St. Jacobi. ^1^)**

**The 1st chapter.**

V. 8 Doubters. He who is not steadfast in the faith, lifts up many and
various things, and yet does not abide in them. 2 Tim. 3:7: \"Learning
always, and yet never coming to the knowledge of the truth.\"

**Chapter 4.**

V. 2. This is not the way to acquire goods and become rich, if one hates
the other, envies, and strives among each other, quarrels, is stingy and
deceives 2c.

V. 5. 6. abundantly. With envying, covetousness, wars, deceit among
yourselves, you will not obtain what you desire, but follow the Spirit,
and you will have all grace and fullness.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 5. slaughter day, as one slaughters for a wedding or a feast. Luc.
15, 23: \"Slaughter a fatted calf.\" Matth. 22, 4.: \"My oxen and
fatlings are slaughtered.\"

**The Epistle of St. Jude.**

V. 7. Others, that is, the unnatural way in fleshly sins. Gen. 19, 5.

V. 16. Complain. It never works out the way they want, they know how to
judge all things, they blame, and if nothing is good enough for them,
they know it all better.

V. 22, 23: Some. That is, some comfort, some punish, but with fear, not
with iniquity, that ye may deliver them out of the way of eternal fire
and damnation.

**The Revelation of St. John.**

**Chapter 4.**

V. 1. 2c. Door. This image is Christianity on earth in its form and
peaceful nature, which shall suffer such future plagues and yet remain.

**Chapter 5.**

V. 1. book. This book has the future stories in it, which will be
revealed through Christ.

1\) All glosses on the Epistle of St. Jacob, the Epistle of St. Jude,
and the Revelation of St. John are missing from the editions of 1522 and
1524.

**Chapter 6.**

V. 2. White^2^ ) horse. This is the first plague, the persecution of the
tyrants.

V. 4. Another horse. This is the second plague, war and blood.

V. 5. black horse. This is the third plague, theurung.

V. 6. measure of wheat. This measure, called chönix, holds a jug or two
knobs, which is half a mead, and a penny holds thirty lion pennies.

V. 8. Pale horse. The fourth plague, pestilence and death.

V. 9-11. Here he comforts the Christians in their suffering.

V. 12-17 These are all kinds of plagues, so that the land and the people
will be changed with turmoil and discord until the last day.

**Chapter 7.**

V. 1. Here come the spiritual tribulations and plagues, the heresies;
and first he comforts the Christians, that they may be marked and kept.

**Chapter 8.**

V. 2. Seven angels. There the seven heretics come one after the other,
and go but before comfort of prayer 2c.

V. 7. The first angel, that is Tatianus and the Encratites, who forbade
marriage and were work saints, like the Pelagians afterwards.

V. 8. Other angels, that is Marcion, Manichaeus, with his cataphrygis.

V. 10. Third angel, that is Origen.

V. 12. Fourth angels, that is Novatus and the Cathari, who deny
repentance and are special saints above others.

**Chapter 9.**

V. 1. Fifth angel. The first woe is the great heretic Arius, who does
not believe Christ to be God.

V. 11. Abaddon, Apollyon, spoiler.

V. 13. Sixth angel. The other woe is Mahomet with the Saracens.

**The 10th chapter.**

V. 1. strong angel, that is the Roman pope in spiritual essence.

2\) Walch and the Erlangers: \"V. 1.\" and \"black\".

1886 **Erl. 64, L54-S56. appendix. W. XXI, 89v\*-895\*.** 1887

V. 6. No time. Everything that wants to be saved is to come under the
pope. Apart from the papacy there is no Christian; he alone will be the
head.

Note that the doctrines of men are outwardly sweet and pleasing, but
they corrupt the conscience. Psalm 5:10 and 10:7.

**Chapter 11.**

V. 1. Here they are outwardly grasping Christianity with such laws.

V. 3. These are all right, pious preachers who keep the word pure for
the comfort of Christians.

V. 7. The secular pope, below Cap. 12.

**The 12th chapter.**

V. 1-17. Here comes the secular pope, but first he comforts the
Christians from such an abomination.

**The 13th chapter.**

V. 1. The third woe, the papal abomination in the worldly being.

V. 2 Imperium romanum, desertum a Graecis, translatum ad Germanos per
Papam \[The Roman Empire, abandoned by the Greeks and transferred to the
Germans by the Pope\].

V. 5. The beast is the Roman Empire, and did so while it was still
pagan.

V. 11. The pope restores the kingdom.

V. 15. spirit and speech is that it is busy, and not a dead image, but
has its rights and offices going on.

V. 18. That is six hundred and six and sixty years. That is how long the
secular papacy stands.

**The 14th chapter.**

V. 1. ff. Here he comforts the Christians that such woe and abomination
shall be overthrown by the gospel.

V. 14. ff. A model of judgment.

**The 15th chapter.**

V. 1. Seven angels. These are all the preachers who help to spread the
gospel.

**Chapter 16.**

V. 13: Frogs. The frogs are the talkers, who now pretend to the princes
and lick against the gospel, 1) and yet accomplish nothing 2c.

1\) cackle \-\-- scream like jackdaws.

V. 16. Armageddon, in German, damned warriors, accursed armor, or
wretched men of war, of herem and gad.

**The 17th chapter.**

V. 1. Here he shows the Roman church in its form and nature to be
condemned.

V. 5. mystery, that is the spiritual great Babylon 2c.

V. 8. The Roman Empire is, and yet is not; for it is not the whole, but
is raised up again after its fall by the pope.

V. 10. Five, toward morning in Greece.

One, that is Germany.

The other. This is Hispania now.

V. 11. Thier. Roma or Welschland.

V. 12. Ten kings, which are the other kings, as, Hungary, Bohemia,
Pölen, France.

V.16. They hold on to the pope and protect him, but they scrape him so
that he must become bare and lose the goods, Defensores Papae
devoratores ejus \[The defenders of the pope devour him\].

**Chapter 18.**

V. 2. This is the shout of joy over the fallen pope.

V. 3: Pleasure, will to please.

**The 19th chapter.**

V. 11. 13. The word of God lies against the patrons of the pope, and no
defense helps.

**The 20th chapter.**

The thousand years must have begun when this book was written, for the
Turk did not come until after a thousand years. However, the Christians
remained and ruled without thanks to the devil. But now the Turk wants
to come to the aid of the pope and exterminate the Christians, because
nothing will help.

V. 8. Gog, that is the Turks, who come from the Tartars and are called
the Red Jews.

**Chapter 21.**

V. 17. An hundred and four and forty cubits. This is the thickness of
the walls.

End of marginal glosses.

1888 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1889

**B. Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. \*)**

> Motto: It is a fine thing about the German proverbs, and are strong
> proofs, and would be, if someone had read them together. (Luther.)

**a. German Sayings.**

Evening red. Morning beautiful. 7, 273, § 8.

Indulgences are a divine fraud. Old ed. 15, 1826, § 167.

All things last a while, and everything has its time. 8, 959, § 99.

All beginnings are difficult. 12, 1804, § 4.

All mine, or let it be. 22, 485.

All-too-sharp becomes chippy. 10, 872, § 25.

Old friends the best. 8, 1761.

Old dogs cannot be tamed, old peelers cannot be made pious. 8, 989, §
48.

Old debt does not rust. 2, 1116, § 242. § 244.

Age does not help against folly. Old edition 14, 32, § 5.

Age does not help against foolishness. 22, 1141.

The dogs learn to eat the leather on the rags. 22, 1642.

A lot of own thoughts and tense cloth. 8, 61, § 134. Old edition 3,
1620.

You don\'t break a fox in the wild. 22, 971.

Other man, other luck. Alte Ausg. 5, 1195, § 29.

Changing is easy, improving is difficult. Alte Ausg. 21, 509, § 4.

Poor Hoffahrt, the devil wipes his butt. Alte Ausg. 5, 1271, § 170.

Art does not leave from Art. 8, 1738.

On a full belly stands a cheerful head. 13, 1848.

A good bite should be followed by a good drink, so that body and soul
come together. Alte Ausg. 3, 752, § 51.

Sunshine is usually followed by a downpour. Alte Ausg. 3, 1454, § 30.

Sensation is the best. 1, 1723, § 249.

Out of the frying pan and into the fire. Old issue 9, 1221.

Uebel wird Aergeres. 10, 365, § 11.

A ready and willing gift is a twofold gift. 1, 1263, § 167.

Keep me, GOD, from a reconciled friend. 13, 2232, § 16.

The bird is recognized by its song, for it sings as its beak has grown.
11, 160, § 15.

The staff is good for jumping. Old edition 9, 1111.

If you are something, be it, but let other people be something too. 13,
830, § 6.

Stay gladly alone, then your hearts remain pure. 7, 385, § 74.

Evil cats that lick in front and scratch in back. 13, 2229, § 10; 13,
2235, § 4.

Evil mind, evil heart. 22, 1039.

Guarantors shall be strangled. 8, 933, § 33.

Cunrad is also evil. ^1^) 10, 1947, § 33.

When the sick man recovered, he was never angry. 22, 1295.

After that one wrestles, after that one succeeds. 11, 54, § 20.

The beer tastes like the keg. 2, 1415, § 246.

Bread given to strange dogs and strange children is lost. 8, 571, § 188.

The egg teaches the chicken. 7, 129, § 23.

The evil of the fall is for the one who does it better than he can. Alte
Ausg. 5, 1218, § 74.

The field wants eyes, the forest wants ears.

The estate belongs to the clergy. 11, 374, § 202.

The good meaning makes a lot of people cry. Alte Ausg. 5, 1206, § 49.

1\) Opinion: If you attack someone, you must also be prepared for blows.

\*) The numbers indicate the volume and columne of our edition, unless
otherwise stated.

**1880Appendix . 1881**

This is a speech about the snow that fell a year ago. Old edition 17,
853.

This is a stitch that does not bleed. Old ed. 5, 1264, § 157.

That means swilled sows, said the devil, and drowned a wagon full of
monks. 22, 968.

The heart makes eloquent. 1, 1005, § 153.

The highest right, the highest wrong. 1, 843, § 53.

He who has been wronged by his neighbors must praise himself. 8, 136, §
26.

The shepherd generally gets the best of them; they like to be beaten:
Alte Ausg. 3, 1062, § 26.

The peasants are to be left alone to celebrate their church feast. 13,
1288, §3.

Carrying the tree on both armpits, and blowing cold and hot from one
mouth, 7, 554, §127.

The tree should be bent when it is young; when it grows old, it wants to
be unbent or it breaks. Old edition 5, 1291, § 205.

The bow does not hit everything it aims at, indeed, it rarely hits it.
Old edition 21, 125, § 9.

The conceit makes the dance good. 12, 1257, § 6.

The first wrath of the best. 8, 1760.

The donkey wants to be beaten, the rabble wants to be ruled by force.
Old edition 16, 115, §37.

He is afraid of his scheme. Old edition 5, 1574, § 63.

The rooster is not good to drive from his muck, and one man can do more
in his house than four outside. Old ed. 5, 971, §2.

The housemother\'s eyes boil well. 8, 454, § 430; 2, 1241, §49.

The heroes\' children are vain plagues. Alte Ausg. 5, 1206, § 48.

The executioner leads away one who wants to do better than he can. 22,
639.

The master himself must be the servant, if he wants to have it right in
the house. 1, 1724. § 249.

He is wise and well-learned,

Who turns all things to the best. 8, 1818.

The game of cats is the death of mice. Alte Ausg. 14, 337, § 8.

The shillelagh is tied to the dog\'s neck. 12, 420, §25.

The jug goes to the well until it breaks once. 13, 822, § 18.

March whole, April by the tail, May new rarely keep faith. 22, 1316.

Friend to the person, enemy to the cause. 22, 1286.

The priest testament is a sausage, remains a sausage, and becomes a
sausage. 11, 369, §168.

Sin is always associated with foolishness. 2, 1121, § 254.

The devil is a thousandfold. 20, 762, § 1.

The father needs the rod to punish the child and then throws it into the
fire. Alte Ausg. 6, 3097, § 10.

The Whales\' devotion and the Germans\' fasting would both be paid for
with a bean. 12, 1278, § 2.

The path passes in front of the door. Alte Ausg. 16, 2802, § 278.

The host is not at home. Alte Ausg. 5, 1195, §28.

The master\'s eye makes the horse fat, the master\'s footsteps fertilize
the field. 10, 411, § 74. 8, 454, § 430. 1, 1723, § 249.

The devil\'s martyrs suffer more than Christ\'s martyrs, and hell must
be earned more sourly than heaven. 20, 2281, §20.

The devil\'s martyrs find hell more sour than God\'s martyrs find
heaven. 22, 123.

The bread we eat, the song we sing. 22, 1474.

The brothers are rarely one. Alte Ausg. 3, 1683, § 269.

Christians live far from each other. 10, 383, § 14.

The pious must suffer much. Old edition 5, 1597 § 3.

The clergy have good days. 11, 373, § 202.

The opportunity should be grasped at the front, for it is bare at the
back. 22, 1642.

The learned, the perverse. 22, 1512. Old ed. 5, 1206, § 49.

It is twice as sour for the wicked to earn hell as it is for the godly
to earn heaven. 13, 809, § 16.

The greatest merchants are the greatest thieves. 11, 1448, § 4.

1892 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1893

The saints must have much contestation. Old edition 5, 1625, § 54.

Hell is paved with vain clerics and monks. 7, 648, § 145.

The chickens that are in the basket would like to be out, but those that
are out would like to be in. 1, 1071, § 261.

Kill the chickens that go home to eat but lay eggs elsewhere. 7, 554,
§128.

The cap covers many a rogue. Alte Ausg. 8, 2110, § 239.

The cat drops the light and runs after the mouse. Old ed. 5, 1199, § 37.

The petty thieves are hanged on iron chains, the great public thieves
are let go in chains of gold. 11, 1330, § 32.

The small thieves are hanged on gallows, but the big thieves go in in
mardern Schauben. Alte Ausg. 3, 1672, § 248.

Love is blind, falls as fchier on a cow dung than on a lily pad. Old
edition 3, 568, § 11.

The night, love, plus wine, can be a guide to nothing good. 22, 1564.

The night is nobody\'s friend. 2, 772, § 119. 12, 1070, § 12.

The night makes many a rogue. 12, 1646, § 12.

The oxen stand on the mountain. Alte Ausg. 3, 1049, § 3. 1208, § 6.

Speech is an image of the heart. 7, 179, §91.

The sow teaches the cook to dress. 8, 9, § 19.

The cobwebs catch the small flies, but the millstones (bumblebees) pass
through them. 10, 1370. Old ed. 3, 1672, § 248.

Those who lie from distant lands lie by force, because they cannot be
denied by experience. 11, 301, § 18.

The world is false and full of infidelity. 12, 342, §36. Old edition 9,
692.

The world wants to be deceived. 22, 661.

The addition is greater than the purchase. 22, 1790.

You are just of the court cloth that he is. 11, 1236, § 5.

You are too young to make old peelers religious. Old edition 6, 3105, §
6.

You drank to the eyes, drink once to the ears. 2, 1986, § 196.

You had a good angel today. 10, 1028, § 15.

Thou holy St. Martin, they sacrifice a penny to thee and steal a horse
from thee. 8, 1757. Thou wouldst have to lift thyself high, that thou
shouldst escape a rogue. Old edition 9, 477, § 74.

Thirst is a good waiter, and hunger is a good cook. 8, 83.

Honor and virtue it is. Pious fallen. 22, 603.

It\'s royal when we do it well and people talk badly about it. Alte
Ausg. 5, 1261, § 151.

Egg teaches the chicken, and the sow masters God, and Phormio equips
Hannibal. Old ed. 5, 1194, § 26.

Own praise stinks. 8, 136, § 25.

Own stops rarely turn out well. 8, 61, §134.

Haste broke the neck. 8, 1758.

Haste gets tired and soon lets up. 8, 1758.

A monkey, even if it had royal clothes on, would still be a monkey. Old
ed. 5, 1198, §35.

An evil branch wants a hard wedge. 22, 1627.

A thief is nowhere better than on the gallows, a monk in the monastery,
and a fish in the water. 22, 1220.

One donkey may not call another sack bearer. 11, 1236, § 5.

A lazy thief is better than a lazy servant. 2, 1231, § 25.

A curse has a good sense, as it goes out, it goes in again.

A prince is a game animal in heaven. Alte Ausg. 5, 1276, § 183.

An ungodly person cannot be thoughtful. 20, 821, § 142.

Ein gut Wort findet eine gute Statt. 8, 1755. Old ed. 3, 787.

A good council never came too late. 19, 1888, § 2.

Every mameluke or apostate is a persecutor of his order. 1, 689, § 17.

Let every man do his own work. 22, 668.

A young doctor must have a new churchyard. 1, 847, § 68.

A young angel, an old devil. 10, 624, § 68. 1, 585, § 91.

A lawyer, a wicked Christian. 22, 1512.

**[1894 Appendix. 1895]{.underline}**

A liar must be thoughtful. 1, 334, § 119.

A liar should have a good memory. 20, 821, § 142. 1, 334, §119.

A man, not a man. 19, 1237, § 37.

A man can suffer all things without good days. Old ed. 6, 3126, § 47.

One neighbor (citizen) owes another a fire. Alte Ausg. 16, 119, § 45. 3,
2277, § 3.

It is a fool who takes a wife. 8, 1028.

One fool can ask more questions than ten wise men can answer. 20, 1050,
§ 396.

A fool makes her ten. 8, 1054, § 60.

A paternoster on the neck, and a mischief in the heart. Old issue 9,
1124.

One prankster takes after another. 8, 12, § 26.

One devil does not chase out another. Alte Ausg. 4, 2295, § 11.

One father can feed ten children, but ten children cannot feed one
father. 22, 174. Old ed. 3, 1651, §205.

A hidden treasure is a useless treasure, because one runs over it, like
over the dung in the alley, that one does not pay attention to. 13, 52,
§ 3.

A woman is a necessary evil. 1, 1372, §11.

A woman is a very annoying commodity. 1, 1372, §11.

A wise man does no small folly. Old ed. 5, 1206, § 49.

A white field, in it is black seed, many a man passes by who does not
know what stands there. Old edition 3, 2784, § 6.

A willing horse should not be driven too hard. Alte Ausg. 3, 2312, § 6.
Erl. exeg. opp. XIII, 281.

One wolf does not scare the other. Alte Ausg. 4, 2294, § 11.

One word, one man. Old ed. 9, 1120.

A jackdaw does not hedge doves, and a fool does not make a wise man. 10,
483, § 54.

A mended friendship will not be whole again, and a broken bow will
always retain a scar. 13, 2228, § 9.

One hand washes the other. 13, 742, §14.

One crow does not peck out another\'s eye. 8, 12, § 26.

One lie gives birth to another seven, so that one must fever^1^ ) and
decorate the first one. 1, 335, §119.

An obvious lie is not worth an answer. Old edition 14, 303.

One swallow does not make a summer. 1, 54, §125.

Every man\'s way pleases him, therefore the world is full of fools. Old
edition 9, 1350.

A load of hay must give way to a drunken man. Alte Ausg. 16, 63, § 7.

One sows, the other reaps. 11, 1981, § 12.

One man\'s speech, half a speech. Alte Ausg. 3, 2444, § 37.

Vain teaching is a mutier of all vices. 7, 1080.

Vain grace is the greatest disgrace. Old ed. 5, 1189, § 18.

Narrow right, wide wrong. 10, 872, § 25.

If you escape me, you will not escape the executioner. Old edition 14,
31, § 4.

He is afraid of his own eye star. 19, 855, § 89.

He hangs his coat to the wind. 22, 1340.

He probably heard ringing, but did not beat up. Lösche, Anal. Luth, p.
296.

He is so lazy that he does not like to eat because of laziness. 8, 1757.

He can do in writing what the donkey does on the lyre. Old ed. 15, 1679,
§ 13.

He sticks to it like dung to a wheel. 8, 495, § 27.

He shines like the dirt in a lantern. It may stink, but it does not
glow. 7, 1605, § 144.

He knows as much about the Scriptures as a goose knows about the
Psalter. Old edition 15, 1746, § 30.

He turns the coat to the wind. Lösche, Anal. Luth, p. 377.

It takes a lot to honor. 7, 616, § 75.

It is better preserved than lamented. De Wette 6, 646.

It is better to be crippled in heaven than healthy in hell. 7, 900.

It is better to run to hell than to trot to heaven. 22, 1614.

1\) In our edition, 1. 6. \"fiebern\" is to be read instead of:
\"füttern\". The Wittenberg edition (1569), vol. X, p. 1121\" offers:
\"fidern\". Cf. St. Louis edition, vol. XIX, 1913, tz 54. vol. VIII,
1102, § 27.

1896 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1897

It is better to have red eyes than empty pits. 7, 900.

It is better to suffer injustice than to do injustice. 2, 1147, § 314.

It is evil to count money from an empty bag and to drink from an empty
candel. 7, 2452.

It is not the man. Old ed. 5, 1195, §28.

It is the accident of one in this world that from pious parents come
harlots and knaves. 19, 1890, § 5.

It is thought of, but not given to you. Old edition 14, 34, § 3.

It is a simple-minded good man who does not commit heresy there. 7, 898.

It is a dance for high mass. 11, 861, § 24.

No office is so small, it is worth hanging. Alte Ausg. 5, 1276, § 183.

There is no tree that was not a shrub before. 22, 15. 36.

There is no more hopeful animal than a louse in the grind. 1, 980, §51.

There is no fidelity in the world. Old ed. 3, 1683, § 269.

No one is so evil, a more evil one comes over him. Old edition 16, 2504,
§ 28.

All that glitters is not gold. 19, 1718, §68.

It is beautiful 1) evil. 20, 2186, § 69.

It is as pure as if the doves had selected it. Old edition 3, 242.

A pious man may well go over the stairs, since a rogue lies underneath.
22, 1040.

It comes from a dear hand. 11, 1098, § 13.

It soon bends what wants to become a hook^2^ ). Alte Ausg. 3, 1061, §
25.

It all depends on a good interpreter. 13, 1898, §4. 2, 1053, §89.

They must be strong legs that should carry good days. 6, 3126, § 47.

It must be a bold man who is allowed to take a wife. 10, 677, § 7.

It must be genarret once. 10, 624, § 68.

1\) In our edition, vol. XI, 30, should read \"beautiful\" instead of
\"already.\'\'

2\) In the Eisleben edition: \"a hoe\". But \"hoe\" or \"Hacken,\" that
is, hook or hook, is always masculine in Luther. Cf. Ourvuwl 86 prasdst
ste. j

No pious child has to become a wife, unless she has become a whore
before. 10, 790, § 73.

Sometimes the string has to give way to the tree. Old ed. 5, 1407, § 94.

It would have to be a poor devil to whom they should pray off a soul.
18, 900.

It would have to be a cold winter for one wolf to eat another. 8, 12, §
26.

There are no greater fools than kings and princes. 19, 275, § 113.

It is not all cooks who carry long knives. 8, 611, §10.

Let no one take another for a trusted friend unless he has first eaten a
bushel of salt with him. 22, 1646.

It lasts one dance or high mass. 7, 1573, § 78. Old ed. 3, 1362, § 2.

It lasts one dance to the high mass. 13, 80, § 5.

The dog is beaten so often over the nose, he becomes shy once. Old issue
21, 9.

Nothing is more expensive to buy than what is given as a gift. Old
edition 3, 387.

It gets warmer by one skirt. Old ed. 3, 1074, § 3.

Some are those who work, others enjoy the work. 2, 203, § 213.

Missing is human, defending is diabolical. 8, 1762.

Dark churches and light hearts are commonly with each other. 1, 839, §
42.

French have no brain. 18, 964.

French lack brains. 22, 254.

Strangers do more good than one\'s own friends. 8, 1761.

Peace nourishes, discord consumes. Old ed. 21, 577.

Friends in need go twenty-five to a pound; but if it be a hard estate,
fifty of them go to a quintal. 8, 1818.

Friends in need go a lot on a lot. Old edition 9, 1165.

Frogs must have storks. 10, 403, § 52.

Rise early, and early (young) free, that shall no one regret. 10, 624,
§66. De Wette 6, 419.

Princes do not like to be lawyers. 22, 1226.

Letters to princes should be read three times. 22, 544. 1069; 2, 1055, §
189.

**[1898 Appendix. 1899]{.underline}**

Prince\'s Grace, April Weather. Alte Ausg. 5, 34, §3.

Gebers Nehmers. 19, 1405.

Thoughts are duty-free. 10, 398, § 44. 22, 1878.

Captured man, poor man. 19, 1908, § 44.

Money has honor, said the frog, and sat on a penny. Alte Ausg. 3, 2893,
§ 141.

Money makes peelers. 7, 547, § 113.

Coerced services are not pleasing to God. 18, 1562, § 276.

Justice is dead, faith suffers need. 2, 1745, § 260.

A gift is the most expensive thing to receive. 13, 831, § 8.

Gevatter over the fence and back again. 18, 1479, § 78.

Violence prevails over law. Old ed. 6, 3111, § 18.

Doing violence and injustice is vinegar. 2, 207, § 207.

Forced oath sorry to God. 10, 698, § 6.

Do not believe everything you hear; do not say everything you know; do
not do everything you like. 22, 501.

Like and like go together. 2, 690, § 22. Old ed. 14, 304, § 3.

Like for like, said the devil, cursing a black sow. 22, 1619.

Gleichzu gives a good racer, or:

Gleichzu makes a good Reuter. Lösche, Anal. Luth. , p. 266.

Gleichzu likes to pound the head. Lösche, Anal. Luth. , p. 266.

If it does not glisten, it does not apply. 11, 2119, § 4.

God often meets us, who could greet him. Old ed. 3, 766, § 14.

GOtt beschert, GOtt beräth. 8, 1754.

God gives gifts overnight. 11, 1315, § 7.

GOD is finally bringing the lies to light after all.

God gives rotten hands the glands. 22, 1644. 2, 319, § 178.

God give him what he wants, who is hostile to me without cause. Old
edition 14, 323.

God greets many who could thank him. Old edition 9, 1390.

GOD has consulted. 11, 1315, § 7.

God still has more than he ever forgave. 2, 1698. § 123.

God helps the boldest. 10, 413, § 79.

GOtt is the peeling GOtt. 11, 1412, § 23.

God is near to us at times, at times he disappears. 11, 832, § 6.

God controls the great trees so that they do not grow into the sky. Old
ed. 3, 1475, § 8.

God punishes one bad boy with another. Old ed. 16, 76, § 27.

Grab it because it\'s time. 22, 1644.

Grimm and anger overthrow reason. 18, 963, § 9.

Big thieves hang the little thieves. 13, 1524, § 23.

Great masters\' children rarely turn out well. 1, 313, § 65.

Favor and love fall as sheerly on the frog as on the purple. 11, 263, §
76.

Gut Acker, gut Korn. 10, 1743, § 18.

Gut macht Muth. 11, 1447, § 3. 2, 121\'8, § 36.

Good makes courage, poverty hurts. 8, 1753. old ed. 3, 1406, § 11.

Good makes courage, courage makes high-mindedness, high-mindedness makes
poor-mindedness, but poor-mindedness hurts, hurting seeks good again.
Old edition 6, 3126, § 47.

Good provokes evil. 11, 1447, § 3.

Good swimmers like to drown, and high climbers like to fall. 11, 54, §
28. 22, 1611.

Good words and nothing behind them. Erl. 52, 165.

Good courage is half the body. 22, 827. 1825. Old ed. 3, 1320, § 20.

Hader macht Hader. 22, 1095.

Hans (Unreason) with his head through it. 7, 370, § 45. 8, 1855.

Hans, take yourself by the nose. 7, 590.

Wait until a roast chicken flies into your mouth. Alte Ausg. 4, 1875, §
3.

Pick it up, it will probably take place. 13, 1725, § 14.

Lord\'s favor and April weather 2c. soon reverse. 13, 2726, §20.

Joy of heart is above all joy; sorrow of heart is above all sorrow. 8,
467, § 458.

Friend today, enemy tomorrow. Alte Ausg. 5, 34, §3.

Here, Doctor Spieß^1^ ) has been. Alte Ausg. 5, 1199, § 37.

1\) About \"Doctor Spieß\" Luther says l. c. § 36: \"I have seen one of
them who could do everything. If one spoke of wars, he had slain
Hannibal, I do not know how many; if one spoke of law and wisdom, he had

1900 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1901

To drive here with a cart, there with a wheel. 7, 362, § 25.

Marriage is a short pleasure and long displeasure. 8, 1034, § 9.

Hofleben, Sauleben. Alte Ausg. 5, 1281, § 189.

Hunger is a good cook. Alte Ausg. 3, 763, § 10. Erl. 52, 67.

Beware of cats that lick in front and scratch in back. Erl. 52, 165.

Beware of the deed; the lies will be well advised. 8, 1761.

Beware of can\'t. If you strike a single barrel, it sounds bright, but a
full barrel, it does not sound very. 22, 691.

I am not afraid of their ten when I am alone. 8, 736, § 274.

I have enough bread and grain, if you want to have it, create it for
yourself. 13, 806, § 7.

I cannot have peace any longer than my neighbor wants it. 12, 357, § 67.

I cannot learn more from my master than he knows himself. 11, 1283, §
30.

I live and don\'t know how long, I die and don\'t know when, I go and
don\'t know where, It\'s a wonder I\'m happy. ^1^) 11, 2007, § 68.

I have to believe for a long time that a roasted dove will fly into my
mouth. 11, 1308, § 12.

I know where the shoe pinches you. Alte Ausg. 15, 1682, § 23.

I know what I have, but not what I will get. Alte Ausg. 21, 509, § 4.

I will forgive him, but I will not forget. 13, 2229, §9.

There is only one servant in the house, the master. 22, 1226.

In the free city of Rome there must be free tongues. Alte Ausg. 5, 1261,
§ 151.

In God\'s name, all misfortune is lifted up. 11, 1412, § 23. Old edition
3, 1606, § 119.

In big waters, you catch big fish. Alte Ausg. 3, 1057, § 17.

he fifteen Solomon in the mouth, in the heart a whole swarm of fools; no
one was anything (jchtes), he was it all; therefore they call him Doctor
Spieß, because he was a nobleman and a Reuter.\"

1\) In this rhyme, Luther says, a Christian should change the last two
verses and rhyme like this:

I go and know, praise God, where;

I am surprised that I am so sad.

Old ed. 9, 1427. cf. St. L. ed. 7, 1883. 8, 310.

If the shillelagh is with the dog, it stays with the house and fends off
the wolves. Old edition 9, 1241.

If one is good, they are all good. 7, 218, §86.

The older, the worse. Alte Ausg. 14, 32, § 5.

The older, the poorer, the longer, the poorer. 7, 551, §123.

The angrier the prankster, the better the luck. Alte Ausg. 3, 1595, §
98.

The better the land, the rougher the people. 22, 1619.

The greater lord, the greater thief at court. 7, 2435.

The greater the rogue, the better the luck. 2, 507, § 130. 22, 1534.

The more crooked wood, the better bridge,

> The angrier the prankster, the better the luck. Preger,
> Schlaginhaufen, p. 53, No. 160.

The dearer the child, the sharper the ruth. 2, 1460, §59.

The more children, the more happiness. 22, 148.

The more we have, the more we want. 22. 1641.

The closer Rome, the angrier Christians. 7, 1091.

Beyond the mountain are also people. 10, 1947, § 33.

Young used, old done. 8, 1757.

Can I eat a whole lamb at once, said the wolf, should I not also be able
to devour a mosquito? 8, 737, § 277.

Return each one to his own door. 10, 1744, § 21.

No misfortune alone. 10, 2044.

No love without suffering. 8, 1755.

Going to church does not delay, almsgiving does not impoverish, unjust
goods do not wilt. 11, 1391, §43.

Clipping is part of the trade. 2, 257, § 22. Old edition 16, 2409, § 30.

If you come out of my sight, you will also come out of my heart. 13,
2263, § 12.

When day comes, so comes council. 7, 578, §175.

If they could drown us in a spoon, they would not take a Zober to do it.
Alte Ausg. 3, 1018, §23; 1192, §5.

If we could not all write poetry, let us all judge. 10, 1299.

Crawling and sneaking is also something, since you can\'t go any
further. 22, 636.

**1902 Appendix. 1903**

Crawl into the word and stay in it, like the hare in its stone crack.
11, 164, § 26.

Art goes to Brod. 2, 451, § 208. Old ed. 14, 1369.

Kunz Hildebrand,.der große Walfisch, trägt die Welt auf dem Schwänze.
11, 344, § 122.

Country road is safe, logging road is dangerous. 8, 1754.

Long at court, long in hell. Alte Ausg. 3, 1057, § 18.

Slowly going au\^fern. 8, 1758.

Let go as it goes, there is no other way, because it goes. 22, 634.

If one leaves a hand\'s breadth to the rogue, he takes a cubit\'s
length. 20, 159, § 76.

Suffer and avoid. 22, 501.

If you deny, it is also a lie, even if you tell the truth. Old edition
16, 2494, § 5.

To love and not to enjoy would annoy the devil. 11, 1633, § 14.

Dear smock, do not tear, lord service does not inherit, prince grace 2c.
Alte Ausg. 5, 1228, § 95.

Praise you, cuckoo, with your song, you can hear by your cry what kind
of bird you are. Old edition 3, 1673, § 249.

May easily \[be found\] what adorns a man, as that one says, and puts a
louse on the sleeve. 19, 1902, § 33.

You must not paint the devil over the door. 10, 1022, § 4.

Some are considered evil, and some good, since both are wronged. 8,
1757.

Some people are called a pious man and others a rogue, and yet they do
injustice to both. 8, 612, § 11.

You can fill their bellies, but not their eyes. Old ed. 9, 1111.

One cannot give anyone without his will, but one can certainly take from
him without his thanks. 19, 850, § 76.

You can\'t turn it all into bolts. 22, 369.

One can hunt every day, but hunting does not happen every day. 1, 54, §
125.

A bird is known by its song and feathers. 18, 1256.

One must always put two lights on the devil, as one only puts one on
God. 22, 1430. 2, 103, §237.

One should not paint the devil on the wall or ask him to be one\'s
godfather; he comes of himself. Alte Ausg. 3, 2445, § 41.

Women should be praised, be it true or false, they need it. 10, 791, §
73.

One should buy because the market is at the door. 1, 1262, §163.

One should not accept all gifts, not even from everyone, not even all
the time. 1, 1474, § 309.

One should not go overland to give medicine and advice, because it is
dangerous. 22, 1670.

One should not rub oneself against old boilers, otherwise one will get
raw meat. Old edition 3, 1523, §24.

Some condemn their souls for the sake of their wives and children, or
for the sake of the misery of their goods. Old ed. 3, 2513, § 104.

Many a man speaks evil of women who does not know what his mother is
doing. 10, 791, § 73.

Some want to escape the rain and fall completely into the water. 18,
1938. old ed. 3, 1062, § 27.

More souls go to heaven from the gallows than from the churchyard. 7,
2002.

Do you think there\'s still a guy in this guy? 8, 1207, § 229; 1230, §
272.

Mild hand never torn. 22, 493.

No one owes me or you any favors; that is the fault of both of us. Old
edition 14, 323.

It\'s good to hike with a good journeyman. 7, 843, § 37.

Singing is good with a good compan. 11, 2188, § 26.

Gentlemen are not good at cherry-picking; they throw stones at each
other. 13, 2726, §20.

With leisure and stopping, one brings it to the end. 8, 1758.

Middle inne safest. 1, 1438, § 203.

Morgenroth leugt nicht, dicke Magd teugt nicht, ist\'s nicht Regen, so
ist\'s Wind, ist\'s die Magd nicht fett, so ist\'s ein Kind. 7, 273, §
8.

You thirsted for blood, so drink blood. 22, 917.

Only after the damage is done do you become wise. 1, 1462, § 277.

Fool, take a wife, and your joy will end. 8, 1034, §9.

Fools must be loused with pistons. 8, 1801.

[1904 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1905]{.underline}

Fools should not be placed over eggs, they break them. Alte Ausg. 3,
2441, §33.

Neidhart, Eigennutz, junger Rath Jerusalem, Troja, Rom verstöret hat.
Alte Ausg. 5, 1270, § 168.

Nothing is good in the eyes. Old ed. 8, 2654, § 110.

Nothing dearer on earth than women\'s love, wems kann werden. 8, 1762.

No one is satisfied with his fate. 22, 1253.

No one can have peace longer than his neighbor wants it. Alte Ausg. 17,
1809, § 6.

No one can be his own judge. 10, 547, § 4.

\"No one,\" even if he sins, does so in a sorry manner, for he is afraid
and ashamed, and would not like his sin to become known. 1, 1226, § 61.

No one becomes the highest all at once. 22, 1535.

Never-doing is the highest penance, and a new life is the best penance.
Old edition 15, 1747.

Necessity breaks iron. 19, 1673, § 22.

Noth has no commandment. Alte Ausg. 3, 1802, § 39.

Noth teaches to pray. Old edition 3, 1212, § 16.

Nothwehr penetrates thoroughly. Preger, Schlaginhaufen, p. 138, No. 542.

Peter\'s little ship sways, but it does not sink. 22, 918.

Pfaffengut, Raffengut. 22, 220.

Law finds. Old ed. 9, 1465.

Judging, praising, avenging: the three R\'s belong to God alone. Old ed.
3, 2777, § 72.

Rips, raps in my sack, another have what he likes. 11, 1199, § 11.

Boast, little herb, your father\'s cabbage would like to be big. 8, 139,
§ 30.

Boast, Rüplin, your father was a cabbage worm. 20, 264, §163.

Sauer macht essen. 2, 1087.

Schade wakes, the people sleep. Alte Ausg. 14, 337, § 9.

If you strike one devil out of a woman, you strike two into her.

Beautiful people are snotty. 19, 1890, § 5.

Selbst ist der Mann. 8, 454, § 430.

Blessed is the mother who gave birth to a child that became a spiritual
person. 22, 243.

They go from the smoke into the fire. 2, 362, § 12.

They pick up a spoon and crush a bowl. Old ed. 5, 1197, § 31; 1221, §
83.

They give us hell and make the devil black. Alte Ausg. 6, 3103, § 2.

They sacrifice a penny to our wives and rob her of a horse. 11, 1585,
§\'26.

They want to have God as a soft wax, from which they may make a sow or a
raven, whatever they desire. 19, 1740, § 30.

No man will be that smart, the devil will give him a beating. 10, 1041,
§ 9.

Many a country, many a custom. 2, 478, § 51; 1184, § 60.

If it is to be true, it is a big lie. 1, 1533, §151.

Saving is harbored for too long when there is nothing left. 22, 1642.

Still waters run deep. 19, 540, § 48.

Proud courage, secret envy and childish advice destroyed Rome and Troy.
22, 1886.

Strife the devil. 1) Old ed. 5, 1262, §153.

Strict law is the greatest injustice. Old ed. 5, 1189, § 18.

Day and time alleviate the sorrow and the anger. 2, 830, §42.

Taus Eß has not, Sees Zing does not give, Quater Three that help free.
2) 8, 1722.

Do as the others do, and you will not be fooled. Old edition 3, 2522, §
122.

Trauwohl rode the horse away. Alte Ausg. 5, 1267, § 163.

Fidelity is unfortunate. Alte Ausg. 3, 1683, § 269.

Drink and eat, do not forget God. 22, 762.

Drunken joy, sober sorrow. 8, 1755.

Badly won, badly lost. 22, 1386.

Unequal, they rarely get rich. 8, 1820.

1\) This proverb was said by a preacher when he spoke of the rabbit\'s
streak, that the head was evil to streak; but he meant the princes and
lords.

2 s We assume that this saying is taken from the dice game and that
corrumpirte French number names were used in the same. Taus or Daus -
deux (Daus \"the two on the die\". Dietz, p. 4145). Eß-as, the one from
the die. Sees-six; Zing - einti; Quater - ouatrs. \"Three\" kept German
because of the rhyme. The opinion would be: The low have not, the high
give not, the middle class must do it.

**1906 Appendix. 1907**

Unrecht Gut gedeihet (druhet)^1^ ) nicht. 10, 1410, § 41.

Injustice property does not come to the third heir.

13, 2133, § 13.

Infidelity beats its master. 8, 1755.

Leave comes afterwards. 19, 930, § 54.

Father and mother can earn heaven and hell from the children. Old ed. 3,
1640, § 184.

Forgiveness of sins is the best right. Old ed. 16, 2220, § 17.

Pleasure is also work. 22, 1325.

Lost son, üngerathen child. 19, 1890, § 5.

Lost as the soul of a Jew. 20, 2091, § 150.

Accident is the best thing in the game. Alte Ausg. 5, 1291, § 204.

Despair makes a monk. 7, 374, § 53. 2, 1408, § 224.

Much shouting and little wool. 22, 1340\^

Many words, nothing behind them. 2, 720, § 268. 8, 1755.

Fourteen crafts, fifteen misfortunes. 8, 1754.

A lot depends on thoughts. 8, 985, § 38.

Fishing before the yarn. 10, 548, § 9.

Fishing before the Hamen. Old issue 8, 2027.

No dancing before eating. 13, 1848.

What evil happens in our own homes, we learn the very last. 22, 170.

What comes to the ears of the women, that falls out again to their
mouths. Binds. coli. I, 422.

What the world has to create, there must be a monk with it, and he
should be painted for it. 10, 267, § 2.

What you can\'t lift, leave lying around.\' Old ed. 5, 1218, § 74.

What kind of man he is, that\'s what he talks about. 11, 159, § 15.

What is it to the Romans that the Greeks die? 1, 337, § 126.

What gives, that takes. 22, 881.

What God wills happens. 18, 1695.

What is big does not stand for long. 13, 1229, §20.

What is good, everyone reaches for. 1, 878, §8.

1\) druhen - to stay in the chest (drue - box).

What is good belongs to the Pfaffen. Alte Ausg. 9, 1331, § 17.

What Hans doesn\'t learn, Hans doesn\'t learn either. 22, 1644.

What has been wrong for a hundred years has not been right for an hour.
19, 252, § 39.

What one likes to do comes easily. 13, 437, § 15.

What you can\'t earn, you can get at last. Erl. 55, 296.

What one sees before one\'s eyes, one does not praise. 1, 1118, § 442.

What I love, no one suffers me. 11, 263, § 76.

What is right, that you shall also perform in the right way. 2, 874, §
60.

What should the cow Musealen, she eats probably Haberstroh. 22, 15.
1619.

What is too mean is despised. 1, 1118, § 442.

Wash my fur and don\'t get it wet. Preger, Schlaginh., p. 117, No. 442.

Fight the evil when it starts, because where it gets out of hand, help
comes too slowly. Old edition 5, 1291, § 204.

He who is helped from the gallows brings one up. 22, 207.

He who cannot be advised cannot be helped. 13, 820, §13.

Whom God wants to blind, he first closes his eyes. Jen. (1566) 5, 147.

If the good is there, one does not respect it, but if it is gone, one
seeks it. 8, 207.

When the donkey is too comfortable, he goes dancing on the ice and
breaks a leg. Old ed. 3, 2584, § 64; 1441, § 8.

When the rope holds hardest, it breaks. Alte Ausg. 14, 74, § 2.

When the apples are ripe, they should be broken off; if you put it off
for a long time, they will go. 22, 1643.

If youth were wise, and age strong, it could not be paid for with gold.
Old edition 3, 1523, § 24.

When the mouse is full, the flour tastes bitter. 12, 1189, § 23.

When the string is stretched to the utmost, it likes to break, and when
the weather is coldest, it breaks. Old ed. 3, 1052, § 10.

1908 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1909

When the wise fool, they fool grossly. 12, 89, § 89.

If you were to carry one on your back all the way to Rome and set him
down rudely, all thanks would be lost. 1, 1337, § 101.

When a thing is most unpleasant, one should love it, it will not last
long. Old edition 9, 1234.

If a thing is cheap, it should be kept nice. 13, 1725, § 12.

When an angel becomes a devil, he becomes evil. 2, 629, § 43.

If I do (and believe) like other people, I am not fooling. 13, 1112, §
1.

When vice becomes a habit, it is done. Old ed. 5, 1291, § 204.

If one wants to the dog, he has eaten the leather. Old ed. 14, 327, § 8.

If you let the dog chew on the rag, it will soon eat the meat as well.
22, 955. If you have a thing, no matter how good it is, you do not
respect it and get tired of it. 22, 209.

If a piglet is hunted, he should open the sack. 22, 1644.

If one strikes at a spirit, one wounds or strikes oneself. 22, 1387.

When one throws among the dogs, he who is hit cries out. 22, 668.

If only a pious man takes a pious maid, they will be well fed. 22, 1178.

If our Lord God greets one, he shall thank him. 22, 1644.

When our Lord God wants to punish, he puts on woolen socks so that he
walks quietly and cannot be heard. 13, 822, § 19.

He who wanted to avenge all evil would never have to take a sword. Alte
Ausg. 5, 1190, § 20.

He who builds by the wayside has many masters. 7, 129. §23.

He who soon believes is easily deceived. 22, 1646.

Whoever flies there is hunted down. 19, 540, § 48.

Whoever spurns the small, the great will not. 22, 1642.

He who is entitled to the game is best at it. Alte Ausg. 5, 1182, § 5.

Whoever helps the other from the gallows, the same would gladly bring
him up. Alte Ausg. 16, 1126, § 11. ibid. 3, 1444, § 15.

He who disdains the head will not get the chicken. 22, 1642.

He who does not respect the penny will not be the master of a guilder.
22, 1642.

He who has the damage must not provide for the mockery. 22, 642.

He who does not have Silent Friday and Easter Day does not have a good
day in the year. 12, 1591, § 22.

He who tells lies lies even more. 18, 895.

He who does not understand language must lack understanding. 8, 478, §
484.

He who tells the truth has nowhere to hide. 8, 254, § 260.

He who does not keep a small thing in counsel perpetually corrupts.
(Sir. 19, 1.) 22, 1642.

He who misses an hour may well miss a whole day. 22, 1642.

He who digs a pit for another falls into it himself. 11, 1820, §10.

If you can\'t lift a big stone, let it lie. 22, 1243.

He who is once invented a rogue remains suspicious in everything. Alte
Ausg. 16, 2395, § 2.

He who loves to laugh tickles himself. Old edition 17, 1647, § 4.

He who likes to lie must also lie when he tells the truth. Old edition
17, 1647, § 4.

If you like to dance, you can easily whistle. 20, 803, § 97.

He who likes to hear a lot, hears a lot that he does not like to hear.
8, 1764.

He who serves God has enough. Old edition 4, 1874, § 1.

Whoever has God as a friend, no creature can harm him. 12, 1560, § 3.

Who holds the other here? said Rost at the neck iron. 19, 422, §27.

He who holds when he has, finds when he may. 13, 1725, § 14.

Who put the man to the sword here? 18, 1281.

He who is industrious in the least is also industrious in the greatest.
22, 1642.

Whoever does not become beautiful in his twentieth year, strong in his
thirtieth, wise in his fortieth, or rich in his fiftieth, must not hope
after that. 22, 1141.

**1910 Appendix. 1911**

Those who like to steal when young, like to go begging when old. 10,
1410, § 41.

He who is lax in his deeds is a brother of the one who corrupts himself.
(Sir. 18, 9.) 22, 1642.

He who thinks many things thinks nothing and does nothing good. 10,
1401, § 16.

If you want to see a tit, you have to whistle on a tit\'s leg, and if
you want to see a Christian, you have to learn to talk like a Christian.
Old edition 17, 1396, § 179.

He who cannot see through his fingers cannot govern. 10, 412, § 76.

Those who do not have money pay with their skin. 8, 1755.

If you don\'t have lime, you have to wall with dirt. Alte Ausg. 5, 1202,
§ 44.

He who cannot defend himself will not be able to feed for long. Alte
Ausg. 5, 1223, § 88.

He who cannot sing always wants to sing. 10, 603, § 11.

He who cannot overlook or overhear cannot govern. Old ed. 5, 1191, §22.

He who does not advertise, spoils. 22, 1917.

He who does not hear well, rhymes well. Alte Ausg. 6, 3094, § 4.

He that heareth not well shall think well. 8, 51. He that defileth
preachers and women shall not prosper. 22, 844.

He who feeds on harlots and rides in carts is bound for misfortune. 8,
1753.

He who burns himself so often becomes shy at the last. 2, 1772, §61.

He who is afraid of hell goes into it. 12, 249, § 9.

He who is strong and able puts the other in the sack. 22, 129.

He who works faithfully prays double. 10, 1394, § 2.

He who is among wolves must howl with them. Alte Ausg. 3, 2522, § 123.

He who escapes from his father and mother does not escape from the
executioner. 13, 742, § 13.

He who strikes again gets (is, or: has) wrong. 10, 547, § 4. 7, 470, §
251.

He who strikes again makes trouble. Alte Ausg. 16, 68, § 7.

Whoever wants to keep his house clean, let him keep priests and monks
out of it. 22, 670.

He who wants too much will get nothing. 2, 588. §145.

If you are lucky, you will lead the bride home. Alte Ausg. 5, 1259, §
149.

He who does not do it in youth, does it in old age. 10, 624, §68.

When the heart is full, the mouth overflows. 11, 159, § 15.

As is prayer, so is incense. Old ed. 14, 336, § 7.

As the master, so the servant. Old ed. 17, 349.

Like the pot, like the soup. Old edition 15, 1679, § 14.

The way you do it is the way you get paid. 22, 742.

Reconciliation makes strife. 7, 470, § 251.

Willfulness makes friends, truth makes enemies. 8, 905, § 159.

Arbitrariness breaks land law. 8, 1321, § 7.

If you want to be with the wolves, you must howl with them. Alte Ausg.
3, 911, § 169.

If you want fire, you must also have smoke. 12, 544, § 6.

If you want to walk safely and well, do not plead too high; if you plead
too high, you burn the feathers. 22, 676.

We are all One Kitchen. 11, 1236, § 5.

Where your heart looks, there the eyes also look. 12, 308, § 48.

Where the fence is lowest, there the devil wants to climb over. 1, 1424,
§ 159.

Where there is fire, there is also smoke. 1, 1354, §148.

Where God builds a church, the devil comes and builds a chapel next to
it. 8, 98, § 212. Old ed. 5, 1198, § 36.

Where skin and hair are not good, there is no good fur. 20, 756, § 64.

Where one does not have horses, one must plow with oxen. 2, 385, § 62.

Where one makes oneself too mean, one is despised. 1, 1442, §216.

Where one blows too hard, blood follows, and where one urges anger,
strife ensues. Old edition 16, 2197, § 4.

Where man does not punish, God punishes. 22, 656.

Where there is no advice, there is no help. 18, 1302.

Where there is nothing inside, nothing comes out. Old edition 5, 1199, §
37.

**[1912 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings.
1913]{.underline}**

Where our Lord God builds a church, there the devil builds a Kretschmar
or Wirthshaus with it. 13, 790, §1.

Where there are many ways, none is good. 7, 886. 2, 2035, § 342.

Time brings roses. 8, 63.

Time makes hay from grass. 8, 63. old ed. 9, 1465.

Trembling does not help before death. 12, 249, § 9. Too sharp makes
chipped. Jen. (1566) 5, 147. discipline and honor, faith and eye no
joking suffers, one has all three soon spoiled. Old ed. 4, 2017.

A woman\'s image is more adorned by discipline than by all her clothes.
Old ed. 3, 1368, § 14.

Two fools are not good for one house. 12, 417, § 17.

Two brothers-in-law with one sister. Alte Ausg. 16, 2773, § 235.

Onions they carried away, garlic they bring back. Old ed. 5, 936, § 27.

**b. Latin proverbs.**

(The translation is often in Luther\'s own words.) A baculo ad angulum =
That fits like a glove. 20, 1640.

A cibo to cocto, ab amico reconciliato, a muliere barbata libera me,
Domine = From warmed food, from a reconciled friend, from a bearded wife
keep me, dear HErre GOtt. 13, 2232, § 16. A novem crabonibus seu oestris
occiditur equus = By nine hornets or horseflies a horse is killed. 7,
332, § 31. Ab amico reconciliato cave = Beware of a reconciled friend.
13, 2228, § 9. Abusus non tollit substantiam = Abuse does not cancel the
essence of a thing. 22, 579.

> Ager non producit, sed annus = time brings roses. 8, 63, §136.

Aliena semper nobis plus placent = What other people have, we like best.
22, 1640.

Aliquando compunguntur et mali = The wicked get their punishment in the
end. Old ed. 16, 2699, 122.

Alter mulget hircum, alter supponit cribrum - To draw water with a
sieve. Erl. Gal. ΙΠ, 202.

Amantium irae, amoris redintegratio = The lovers\' strife fortifies
love. Jen. (1566) 4, 242 in margin. .

Ambitio est mater omnium vitiorum = vain doctrine is a mother of all
vices. 7, 1080.

Amici fures temporis = Friends steal one\'s time. 8, 1874.

Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur = friend in adversity, friend in
death, friend behind one\'s back, these are three rare pieces; or: a
certain friend is recognized in adversity. 10, 1683, § 126.

Arcadicis asinis rudiores = They are coarser than the donkeys that dwell
in Arcadia. 18, 1491, § 106.

Ars artem fallit - One trick deceives another. 2, 312, §162.

Asperius nihil est misero, dum surgit in altum: If a poor man gets goods
and honors, he cannot be resisted; he causes misfortune and strife, and
overthrows many a pious man.

11, 2394, § 19.

Aut regem, aut fatuum nasci oportuit = Either a king or a fool had to be
born. 19, 255.

Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus esse, quod hic est = Either we are,
or were, or can be, what this is. Old ed. 9, 1143; 3, 2149.

Beneficium in pulvere scribitur, in marmore noxa = Beneficence is soon
thrown to the wind, but if one has done something to annoy another, that
can be remembered for a long time. Old edition 3, 1014, § 14.

Canonista purus, magnus asinus = He who can do nothing but spiritual law
is a great ass. 18, 1815, § 171.

Cibus, onus et virga asino = Give your donkey its food, its burden and
its beating. Old ed. 16, 166, § 3. (Sir. 33, 25.)

Cito fit, cito perit = haste broke the neck. 20, 522.

Consuetudo est altera natura = habit is second nature. Old ed. 16, 2696,
§ 117.

Crede parum, tua serva, et quae periere relinque = Do not believe soon,
keep what is yours, and what is there, let it go. 22, 1645.

**1914 Annex. 1915**

Cruore sanctorum rigatur ecclesia - By the blood of the saints the
church comes to bloom. 22, 1100.

Cum fex, cum fimus, cum res turpissima simus, cur superbimus? Nescimus,
quando perimus = Since we are dust and ashes and stinking maggot sacks,
why are we hopeful We do not know when it has an end with us. 22, 677.

Curvum se praebet, quod in uncum crescere debet = What wants to become a
hook bends at times. 2, 81, § 178.

Dat Deus omne bonum, sed non per cornua taurum = God gives all good, but
does not allow it to be forced from Him. 13. 758, § 19. Old ed. 3, 1324,
§ 26.

Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas - Small thieves are hanged,
the big ones are left to louse it up. 22, 1224.

De male quaesitis non gaudet tertius heres = Unjust property does not
come to the third heir. 13, 2133, § 13.

De occultis non judicat ecclesia = The church does not judge what is
secret and hidden. 10, 398, §42.

Deest remedii locus, ubi quae vitia fuerunt mores fiunt = When vices
become a habit, it is done. Old ed. 5, 1291, § 204.

Deo non placent coacta servitia = Compelled services do not please God.
18, 1562, § 276.

Deus non uni cuncta dat = God does not give everything to one. 22, 1619.

Diaboli martyres longe majore labore et molestia acquirunt inferos, quam
martyres Christi coelum = The devil\'s martyrs find hell more sour than
God\'s martyrs find heaven. Erl. Gal. II, 294. Old ed. 8, 2597.

Dolus, an virtus, quis in hoste requirat? (Virg. Aen. II, 390) = Who
wants to look for it in the enemy, whether he used guile or strength? 2,
877, § 64.

Domi leones, foris lepores =- **In the** house they are lions, outside
as stupid and despondent as hares. 2, 162, § 107.

Dulcia non meminit, qui non gustavit amara - Those who have not been in
thirst taste nothing. 8, 83.

Dulcis inexpertis cultura potentis amici = Inexperienced people like to
have powerful friends; or: It is not good to eat cherries with
gentlemen, they throw you with the stones. Old edition 14, 1371.

Dum mare siccatur, dum daemon ad astra levatur,

Tunc clero laicus fidus amicus erit:

> When the sea dries up, and Satan is taken to heaven, Then the Lai and
> the Wett
>
> Made friends of the servants of God. 22, 659.

Duo idem opus facientes non faciunt idem = If two do the same work, they
do not do the same. Witt. (1553) 3, 458^b^ in margin.

Est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra = Crawling and creeping is
also something, since one cannot go further. 22, 636.

Est aurum Tolosanum = It turns into Tolos gold. ^1^) 18, 1488, § 101.

Et genus et formam regina pecunia dat = Money can make people noble and
beautiful. 2, 1787, § 15.

Ex actibus saepe iteratis fit habitus = **If** one does something often,
it becomes a habit. Old ed. 9, 1097, 1221.

Ex duobus malis minus eligendum est - Choose the least of two evils.
Erl. Gal. II, 273. Old ed. 8, 2560, § 329.

Familiaritas parit contemtum = Where one is too mean, one is despised.
7, 1236.

Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum = He is a wise man who can
mend another\'s accident. Old edition 14, 1372.

Fertilior seges est vicinis semper in hortis, Vicinumque pecus grandius
uber habet:

> The neighbor\'s garden is more fertile than ours, and his cattle are
> in better condition than ours. 22, 1640.

Festina lente = Hurry up. 8, 1758.

Fiat justitia, pereat mundus = What is right must nevertheless remain
right, and whether the world would perish over it. 10, 863, § 7.

1\) i.e. it becomes a deadly poison.

[1916 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1917]{.underline}

Foris sapere, domi desipere = \"lazy joke,\" that is, to have a lot to
do, since nothing is soled, and to leave there, since a lot is soled.
Old ed. 5, 1219, § 76.

Fortuna, quem nimium fovet, stultum facit = Whom. fortune well afflicts,
it makes a fool of. 10, 1683, § 126.

Fortuna vitrea est, cum splendet, frangitur - Fortune is of glass; it
shines well, but breaks easily. Binds. coll. I, 422.

Frons occipitis prior est = The forehead is closer than the back of the
head. 2, 1241, §48.

Fronte capillata, post haec occasio calva = One should seize the
opportunity by the scruff of the neck, because behind it is bare. 22,
1642.

*Γυναίκα &άπτειν κρεϊσσόν έστιν η γαμειν -* [It]{.underline}

> it is better to bury a woman than a free one. Old ed. 4, 2726, § 5.

Hoc scio pro certo, quod, si cum stercore certo, vinco vel vincor,
semper ego maculor = Whoever touches pitch, befudels himself. 18, 1255.
Old ed. 14, 1374.

Homo proponit, et Deus disponiter **-** Man thinks, and God directs. 22,
1243.

Honores mutant mores nunquam in meliores = Through high positions of
honor, people easily become tyrants. 22, 1221.

Ignoti nulla cupido = What one does not know, one does not desire. 13,
52, § 3.

In magnis sat est voluisse = In great things it is enough to have the
will. 22, 1535.

In magno magni capiuntur flumine pisces - In big waters you catch big
fish; or: Great lords can make a poor journeyman rich. 22, 1650.

In malis promissis non expedit servare fidem, and:

In malis promissis rescinde fidem = Godless promises should not be kept.
Old ed. 17, 146, §39.

Incidit in Scyllam, dum vult vitare Charybdim = Some want to escape the
rain and even fall into the water. 18, 1938.

Indulgentiae dedicationis distribuuntur sero = Indulgences are
distributed late in the evening at church consecrations. ^1^) Old
edition 3, 1755, § 127.

1\) i.e. at the church festivals there are beatings in the evening.

Infelix esto, qui meliora facit, quam potest = God give an evil year to
him who makes a thing better than he can; or: The executioner lead the
way 2c. 1, 2. Erl. opp. exeg. I, 4.

Ingenium est omnium hominum a labore proclive ad libidinem = Where
someone can avoid work, he does, and yet wants to enjoy it. 8, 448, §
416.

Innoxia tempestas fulgurum, quae pluvia mixta fuerit, formidabilis autem
et noxia, quae sicca et sola = A thunderstorm does not harm, in which
lightning and rain are mixed, but that is to be feared and harmful,
which comes without rain and alone. 8, 1535, § 61. Erl. Gal. III, 336.

Inventa lege inventa est fraus legis = After a law is given, one finds
out how to circumvent it. 22, 1646.

Ira furor brevis est = The anger is like a nonsense, which happens and
can be committed in a hui. 2, 340, § 231.

Italorum devotio et Germanorum jejunia fabam valent omnia **-** The
devotion of the Whales and the fasting of the Germans should both be
paid for with a bean. 12, 1278, § 2.

Jacula praevisa minus nocent = He who worries about the shot can be
careful. 13, 577, § 7.

Jucundae collationes vespertinae tristes faciunt matutinas = Merry
evening parties bring dreary mornings. Old edition 21, 632. De Wette 6,
271.

Labor ipsa voluptas = pleasure is also work. 22, 1325.

Laudet te os alienum = Let another\'s mouth praise you. 8, 136, § 26.

Lectio lecta placet, decies repetita placebit = What God speaks, one
cannot soon grasp and fathom; therefore one should read the Bible often.
22, 1069.

Legem patere, quam tuleris - You must judge yourself according to the
law you have made. 2, 1862, §39.

Lex occasio peccati = The law gives rise to sin. 20, 2092, § 153.

Lucrum in arca, damnum in conscientia = profit in the box, harm in the
conscience. 2, 205, § 217.

**1918Appendix . 1919**

Ludere qui nescit, campestribus abstinet armis - He who does not know
how to fight abstains from fighting in tournaments. 18, 1854.

Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis, Nec facile est aequa commoda
mente pati:

> They must be strong legs that should carry good days. Alte Ausg. 3,
> 2584, § 65.

Magistratus virum ostendit **-** regiment indicates what kind of man one
is. 7, 1374. Old ed. 3, 1443, § 13. 2036. 2327, § 4.

Magnisque negatum stare diu **-** What is great does not stand long. 13,
1229, § 20.

Mala mens, malus animus - Evil mind, evil heart. 22, 1039.

Male parta male dilabuntur **-** As won, so zerronnen. 2, 205, § 218.

Male partum male disperit - Uebel gewonnen, böslich zerronnen. 2, 205, §
218.

Male quaesit, male perdit **-** Uebel gewonnen 2c. 13, 2133, § 13.

Male quaesitum male disperit **-** Uebel won 2c. 11, 1300, § 34.

Male sarta gratia nequicquam coit **- A mended** friendship will not be
whole again after all. 13, 2228, §9.

Mali corvi, malum ovum **-** The apple does not fall far from the tree;
or: As the old sang, so chirped the young. Witt. (1551) 2, 436^b^ .

Malum facis deterius **-** Uebel wird Aergeres. Erl. Gal. I, 186. Old
ed. 8, 1810, § 176.

Malum, malum dicit omnis possessor - If one has a thing, one does not
respect it 2c. 22, 209.

Medice, cura teipsum- Physician, help yourself; or: Hans, take yourself
by the nose. Old ed. 5, 1213, § 63. Will. (1554) 7, 503 v.

Melius est praevenire quam praeveniri **- It is** not good to wait long;
it is better to come before others come. 22, 520.

Mendacem memorem esse oportet **- A liar** should have a good memory;
or: He who wants to lie, should not turn it so crooked, so that he can
also feather it. 19, 1913. Old edition 15, 1550, § 56.

Minuit praesentia famam, et vilescunt quotidiana - What is too mean is
despised. 8, 207.

Mitte vadere sicut vadit, quia vult vadere sicut vadit = Let go, as it
goes, it does not go otherwise, because it goes. Old ed. 3, 1180, § 33.
ibid. 5, 1246, § 126.

Mundus vult decipi = The world wants to be deceived. Witt. (1551) 2,
306.

Mutuum muli scabunt = One ass weeds the other; or: Gevatter über den
Zaun und herwieder. 18, 1479, § 78.

Ne sutor ultra crepidam = Cobbler, stick to your last. Old ed. 3, 2312,
§ 4. Erl. opp. exeg. XIII, 280.

Nec tecum vivere possum, nec sine te = **I** cannot live with you, but
also not without you. 22, 1157.

Nemo fit repente summus = No one becomes the highest at once. 22, 1535.

Nemo sua sorte contentus = No one is satisfied with his fate. 22, 1253.

Nervi atque artus sapientiae sunt, non temere credere = He who soon
believes is easily deceived. 22, 1646.

Nescia mens hominum fati sortisque futurae, Et servare modum rebus
sublata secundis:

Man does not know how he will fare in the future, and yet he cannot keep
a measure if he is well 2, 1729, § 212. Alte Ausg. 3, 2584, § 65.

Nihil citius senescit quam gratia = One forgets nothing so soon as good
deeds; or: Ingratitude is the reward of the world. 13, 80. 865, §10. Old
ed. 3, 1013.

Nihil tardius recordatur quam injuria, et nihil citius abolescit quam
beneficium = **Nothing** remains longer in the memory than a wrong, and
nothing is forgotten faster than a benefit. Old ed. 3, 1895, §94.

Nil amatum nisi cognitum = What you do not know, you cannot love. Old
edition 9, 1200.

Nitimur in vetitum, cupimusque semper negata = We love what is forbidden
and always wish for what has failed. 7, 1233.

Non est necesse pediculos in pellicium seminare, qui sponte sua
nascuntur = It is not necessary to put lice into the fur, because they
grow in it by themselves. 3, 1907, § 12.

**1920 Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1921**

Non me doctorem, sed te deluseris ipsum **-** You will not laugh at God,
but He will laugh at you. 8, 76. Erl. Gal. III, 94. 8, 1753.

Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri - To obtain is as
difficult as to acquire; or: He who cannot defend, will not long be able
to nourish. Old ed. 5, 1223, § 88.

Non minus est negligere scholarem, quam corrumpere virginem **- It is
not** less to neglect a pupil than to weaken a virgin. 10, 465, § 15.

Non patitur ludum fama, fides, oculus **-** discipline and honor, faith
and eye no joking suffers, one has all three soon corrupted. 2, 1722, §
197. Old edition 8, 1751, § 78.

Non te laudaris, nec te culpaveris, ipse **-** Do not praise yourself,
but do not scold yourself either. 8, 136, §26.

Novus rex, nova lex **-** With the landlord, the house changes; or: When
a regiment falls, so do the laws. 22, 1477. Old ed. 5, 1195, § 29.

Nox et amor vinumque nihil moderabile suadent - The night, the love, in
addition the wine to nothing good Rathgeber sein. 22, 1564.

Nulla calamitas sola - No misfortune alone. 22, 1746. Old ed. 3, 1452, §
30.

Nulla civitas sine mole, hoc est, sine mulieribus - There is no city
without a burden, that is, without women. Old ed. 4, 2726, § 5.

Nullum vitium perniciosius est ingratitudine, quod exsiccat fontem
bonitatis **- No** vice is more shameful than ingratitude, because it
dries up or empties the well of goodness or benevolence. 2, 1262, § 92.

Occasio facit furem **-** Opportunity makes thieves. 7, 747, § 13.

Oderint, dum metuant **- They** may monkeys, if they only fear; or: Gram
against Gram. 8, 1631. Old ed. 5, 1273, §177.

Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se Crimen habet, quanto major,
qui peccat, habetur:

> The greater the reputation of the one who stumbles, the sooner
> everyone looks at this case. Alte Ausg. 6, 2807, § 8.

Omnia convitia dixeris, si ingratum dixeris **-** If one scolds an
ungrateful person, one scolds him with it, as if he were otherwise also
afflicted with all vices. 2, 1262, § 92.

Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus **\-\--** The ox wanted
to be a horse, the horse wanted to plow like the ox. 22, 1253. Old ed.
3, 1408, §16.

Optimum condimentum fames **-** Hunger is the best cook. 1, 1390, § 51.

Oratio est character animi **-** Speech is a likeness of the heart; or:
What kind of a man he is, that is what he speaks. 7, 179, §91. 11, 159,
§15.

Ostendit nihil nisi opus figuli - He flaunts only pottery. 18, 1453.

Parturiunt montes, nascitur ridiculus mus **-** The mountains go
pregnant, and becomes a mouse. 18, 1279.

Patientia saepius laesa fit furor **-** Where one makes it too much for
one, he cannot be patient in the length. 2, 1314, § 55.

Pessimum esse magistrum sui ipsius **-** He is a bad teacher who does
not teach himself. 8, 1591, §75.

Pilulae et calumniae non comedendae, sed devorandae sunt - Pills and
calumnies must not be eaten, but swallowed. The more you chew it, the
more bitter it becomes. Lauterbach, p. 201.

Pluribus intentus, minor est ad singula sensus - He who thinks many
things thinks nothing, and does nothing good. 10, 1401, §16. 2, 1193,
§80.

Post tres saepe dies vilescit piscis et hospes **-** When one has eaten
fish for three days and had a guest for three days, one no longer
respects his. 2, 482, § 61.

Principiis obsta, sero medicina paratur **-** Wehren dem Uebel, wenn\'s
anfähet, denn wo es überhand nimmt, so kommt die Hülfe zu langsam. 22,
838. Old ed. 5, 1291, § 204.

Principium fervet, medium tepet, finis abhorret - In the beginning heat,
in the middle lukewarmness, at the end abhorrence. 7, 93, § 42.

Procrastinatio est properantiae contrarium vitium -If one waits too
long, that is just as evil as if one hurries too much. 22, 1643.

**[1922 Appendix. 1923]{.underline}**

Purus canonista est magnus asinista **- Des** päbstlichen Rechts
Juristen sind Eselsjuristen. Alte Ausg. 5, 1256, § 143. Idiä. 16, 2492,
§ 1.

Quaerenda pecunia primum, virtus post nummos - I must first strive for
money and goods, becoming pious will come afterwards. 2, 587, § 144.

Qualis quisque est, talia loquitur **-** What kind of man he is, that\'s
what he talks about. 11, 159, § 15.

Quem fortuna nimium fovet, stultum facit **-** Whom fortune holds too
well, it bewitches. 22, 1226. 2, 1218, §37.

Qui amant, sibi somnia fingunt **-** What is dear to one, there dreams
of him. 20, 803, § 96.

Qui cito dat, bis dat - He who gives soon, that is zwier geben. 12, 340
f., § 32.

Qui invitus facit, non facit **-** He who does a thing unwillingly does
not do it. 18, 1562, § 276.

Qui negligit occasionem, ab ipsa negligitur - Grab it because it\'s
time. 22, 1644.

Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit imperare - He who cannot see through his
fingers cannot rule. Old ed. 5, 1191, § 22. idiä. 3, 2036.

Qui non habet in nummis,

It does not help that he is pious,

Qui dat pecuniam summis,

> He must be doing badly what is crooked. 22, 1659.

Qui non vult perdere beneficia, ille moriatur ante beneficium **-** He
who does not want to lose his benefits must die before he performs them.
22, 1661.

Qui, quae vult, dicit, quae non vult audiet He who says everything that
he lusts for must in turn also hear in the end what he does not like to
hear. 2, 1042, § 61.

Qui semel malus, semper praesumitur malus **-** He who is once invented
a rogue remains suspicious in everything; or: He who is once evil is
thought to be always evil. 22, 900.

Qui tacet consentire videtur - He who is silent is presumed to give his
consent. 10, 711.

Quod differtur, non aufertur - Aufgeschoben ist nicht aufgehoben. 2,
377, § 45.

Quod justum est, juste exequaris **-** What is right, you must also
execute right. Alte Ausg. 3, 1877, § 58.

Quod licet ingratum est, quod non licet acrius urit **- What is**
permitted is quite unworthy, what is not proper is very lascivious to
us. 22, 1197.

Quod natura negat, nemo feliciter audet **-** What you cannot lift, let
lie. Old edition 5, 1218, § 74.

Quod non tollit Christus, tollit fiscus **-** What you deprive Christ
of, you shall have brought together brother Veiten, the Landsknechten.
20, 2177, § 50. 2, 1817. § 88.

Quod oculus vidit, cor non fallit **-** What the eye sees, the heart
believes. Alte Ausg. 3, 1931, § 68.

Quod sequitur fugio **-** What is forbidden I will do, what follows me I
will not have. . 7, 1233.

Quotidiana miracula Dei non facilitate, sed assiduitate vilescunt **-**
God\'s miracles, which happen daily, are held in low esteem, not because
they are so easy, but because they happen without interruption. 8, 1311,
§24.

Quotidie venationes exerceri possunt, sed non quotidie secundae
venationes sunt **-** One can hunt every day, but hunting does not
happen every day. 1, 54, § 125.

Regium est bene facere et male audire **-** Well, it\'s royal when we do
it well, and people talk badly about it. Old edition 5, 1261, § 151.

Saepe jaciendo jacitur Venus **-** Where one often throws, one must
finally hit Venus. 2, 1310, § 44.

Sanguinem sitisti, sanguinem bibe - You have thirsted for blood, so
drink blood. 22, 917.

Sero sapiunt Phryges **-** When the damage has been done, one only
becomes funny. 2, 866, §44.

Si fecisti, nega **-** If you have done it, deny. 2, 1524.

Si feminis carere possemus, magna careremus molestia **-** If we could
be without women, we would be rid of a great difficulty. Old ed. 4,
2726, § 5.

Si fueris Romae, Romano vivito more **-** If you live in Rome, keep to
Roman custom. 7, 243, §9.

**1924Collection of proverbs from Luther\'s writings. 1925**

Si mentiris, etiam quod verum dicis mentiris - If you deny, it is also a
lie, even if you tell the truth. Old edition, 16, 2494, § 5.

Si vis bene ambulare,

Non debes nimis alte volare,

Si nimis alte volas,

Tunc debes comburere pennas:

> If you want to walk well, you must not fly too high. If you fly too
> high, you must burn the feathers. 22, 676.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, sit pro ratione voluntas **-** So I will, so I
command; instead of a rational reason, my will shall apply. 19, 926, §
47.

Similitudo claudicat, nec semper currit quatuor pedibus - A similitude
limps and does not always walk on four legs. 18, 1866. erl. var. arg.
VΠ, 281**.**

Summum jus, summa injuria - Narrow right, wide wrong; or: Too sharp
becomes chippy. 10, 872, § 25.

Sus docet Minervam **-** The egg teaches the chicken, and the tile the
potter. 7, 129, § 23.

Spartam quam nactus es, adorna **-** Thue deinen Amt ein Genüge. Old
edition 9, 1113.

Tarda gratia non est gratia **-** Slow beneficence is no beneficence.
12, 341, § 32.

Tene medium - Hold measure. 22, 1266.

Tria rara, sed Deo cara: concordia fratrum, amor vicinorum et consensus
conjugum **-** Three things are rare, but pleasing to God: when brothers
are one, and neighbors love each other, and husband and wife are at ease
with each other. (Sir. 25, 2.) 1, 1353 f. Erl. exeg. opp. V, 53

Tu nihil invita facias tentesque Minerva **-** Leave pending that for
which God has not given you the gifts. Old ed. 5, 1218, § 74.

Ubi caput melancholicum, ibi diabolus habet paratum balneum **-** Where
there is a melancholic head, there the devil has his bath. 22, 813.

Ubi minor intellectus, ubi major fortuna **-** The more unwise, the
better fortune. Old ed. 4, 2685, § 117.

Ubi plurima verba, ibi frequenter egestas - The biggest talkers are
often the emptiest heads. 18, 1346.

Ubicunque serpens caput immiserit, eodem et caudam et totum corpus
facile inseret **-** If the devil has brought the head into the hole,
the serpent wipes with the tail soon after. 2, 884, § 80.

Ultra posse viri non vult Deus ulla requiri **-** God wills that no one
should be forced beyond his ability. 1, 2.

Una hirundo non facit ver **-** One swallow does not make a summer. 1,
54, § 125.

Urit mature, quod vult urtica manere **- It** soon burns what wants to
become a nettle. Old edition 3, 1061, § 25.

Uxor malum necessarium **-** A woman is an evil thing that cannot be
dispensed with. Old edition 4, 2726, § 5.

Uxore pudica nihil est in hominibus expetibilius - Among men there is
nothing more lovely than a chaste wife. 19, 1504. Erl. opp. var. arg.
VI, 241**.**

Venter caret auribus **-** The belly has no ears. 22, 1144. 2, 591, §
152.

Vera justitia habet compassionem, falsa autem est duplex iniquitas -
Right piety is compassionate, but hypocritical piety is a twofold
unmercifulness. 13, 745, §20.

Verbaque provisam rem non invita sequentur - He who has a thing in mind
can easily speak of it. 22, 694.

Vim vi repellere licet - One may control force with force. 10, 546, § 4.

Virtus est placuisse bonis - Honor and virtue have fallen to the pious.
22, 603.

Volenti non fit injuria-There is no injustice to him who consents. 22,
1163. 8, 1321, § 7.

Vulgus amicitias utilitate probat **-** The rabble praises friendship
only according to its usefulness. 10, 1683, § 126; or: The common rabble
holds friendship only with those people from whom it has benefit. Old
ed. 9, 999 and 1041.

Virtutis laus in actione consistit **-** Virtue consists not in good
thoughts but in good actions. Old ed. 9, 1221.

End of the eighth part.
